Effect of the temperature dependence of gas absorption in climate
feedback
Yi Huang1 and V. Ramaswamy2
Received 12 April 2006; revised 25 November 2006; accepted 13 December 2006; published 3 April 2007.
[1] In the context of climate feedback associated with temperature change, there exist two
potential mechanisms that affect the outgoing longwave radiation (OLR) and the
downward longwave radiation (DLR). One is the ‘‘Planck’’ effect that determines the
blackbody thermal emission at a considered temperature. The other is the ‘‘absorptivity’’
effect, in which a temperature change causes a change in gas absorptivities and thus
influences the longwave radiative transfer. By using the line-by-line computed radiative
Jacobians, which quantify the sensitivity of the radiative fluxes to a perturbation in the
atmospheric temperature, the absorptivity effect is separated from the Planck effect. The
absorptivity effect is further partitioned into components, with each one having a distinct
physical meaning. It is demonstrated that the absorptivity-induced changes in the
longwave radiation are individually significant even though the net effect is largely one of
cancellation. As a consequence, the Planck effect dominates the overall OLR and DLR
sensitivities to temperature change. The absorptivity effect tends to counteract the Planck
effect. This tendency is particularly significant for the DLR and is more prominent for a
warmer climate, with the result being a reduction in the surface warming.
Citation: Huang, Y., and V. Ramaswamy (2007), Effect of the temperature dependence of gas absorption in climate feedback,
J. Geophys. Res., 112, D07101, doi:10.1029/2006JD007398.
1. Introduction
[2] A change in the Earth’s surface temperature is neces-
sarily accompanied by a change in the vertical profile of the
atmospheric temperature [Manabe and Wetherald, 1967].
The change in atmospheric temperature further perturbs the
Earth’s radiative energy budget, generating a feedback onto
the initial surface temperature change. For convenience, we
will term this process as ‘‘temperature feedback,’’ which
constitutes one aspect of the climate feedback. The temper-
ature feedback has been shown to be one of the most
important mechanisms [Zhang et al., 1994; Stocker et al.,
2001] that damp the climate warming initially induced by
external radiative perturbations, e.g., the anthropogenic
increase of carbon dioxide. Atmospheric temperature
directly influences the thermal emission according to
Planck’s Law [Goody and Yung, 1989]. In addition, the
absorptivities of the various gaseous components in the
atmosphere, being temperature-dependent, influence
the transmission and emission of radiation energy following
Kirchhoff’s Law. The temperature dependence of gas absorp-
tion, arising from the dependence of line strength and line
width on temperature [Goody and Yung, 1989], has long been
recognized as a necessary component in radiative transfer
computations, especially in radiatively forced climate change
problems. However, the ‘‘gas absorptivity’’ effect on temper-
ature feedback has not yet been adequately highlighted and
distinguished from the ‘‘Planck’’ emission effect. On the one
hand, from earlier model-based climate sensitivity studies
[e.g., Augustsson and Ramanathan, 1977] it emerges that the
neglect of the temperature dependence of gas absorption
results in an overestimation of the climate sensitivity, al-
though reasons for this have not been explicitly given. On the
other hand, temperature feedback is often simply designated
as the ‘‘Planck effect’’ in the literature; this actually masks the
presence of the temperature-dependent gas absorptivity ef-
fect. So, it is of great theoretical interest to quantify the effect
due to the temperature dependency of gas absorptivities in the
context of climate feedback, to determine how it contributes
to the temperature feedback, and to compare it with the better-
defined Planck effect. Moreover, it is also of practical
concern to understand whether and how the temperature
feedback may change under a changing (e.g., a warmer)
climate due to this effect.
[3] Because of the substantial variation of temperature
and gas concentrations with height, and the differing tem-
perature dependence of water vapor continuum absorption
and lines, the investigation of the above questions requires
the use of a spectrally and vertically resolved model. Recent
works, such as Soden and Held [2006] and Huang et al.
[2007], have shown that the temperature and water vapor
feedbacks can be evaluated using radiative Jacobians. These
Jacobians represent the sensitivities of the radiative fluxes to
water vapor and temperature perturbations, as a function of
spectral interval and altitude. This paper extends these
JOURNAL OF GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH, VOL. 112, D07101, doi:10.1029/2006JD007398, 2007
Click
Here
for
Full
Article
1Program in Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences, Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey, USA.
2Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, NOAA, Princeton, New
Jersey, USA.
Copyright 2007 by the American Geophysical Union.
0148-0227/07/2006JD007398$09.00
D07101 1 of 7
previous studies to a diagnosis of the Planck and gas
absorptivity effects in the Jacobian framework. Our analysis
focuses on the Outgoing Longwave Radiation (OLR) at the
Top of the Atmosphere (TOA) and Downward Longwave
Radiation (DLR) at the surface under clear skies. We
employ the Line-by-line (LBL) radiative transfer model of
the Geophysical Fluid Dynamical Laboratory (GFDL) [Fels
and Schwarzkopf, 1981; Schwarzkopf and Ramaswamy,
1999] for the computations.
2. Method
2.1. Longwave Radiative Transfer Formulation
[4] Assuming the Earth’s atmosphere to be plane-parallel
and neglecting scattering, [Goody and Yung, 1989], the
monochromatic outgoing longwave radiance at TOA and
the downward longwave radiance at surface can be
expressed, in discrete form, as:
Iþn 0;mð Þ ¼ Bn Tsð Þ  Trn ts; 0;mð Þ
þ
XNþ1
i¼1
Bn Tið Þ  Trn ti; 0;mð Þ  Trn tiþ1; 0;mð Þ½  ð1Þ
In ts;mð Þ ¼
XNþ1
i¼1
Bn Tið Þ  Trn tiþ1; ts;mð Þ  Trn ti; ts;mð Þ½  ð2Þ
[5] Here, Bn(T) is the thermal emission at wave number n
and temperature T according to Planck’s Law (the subscript
s denotes surface); Trn(t, 0; m) is the transmission function
from the level where the optical depth is t to the TOAwhere
it is 0, and m is the cosine of the zenith angle. Trn(t, 0; m) =
et/m; t is the integral of the product of absorption coeffi-
cient and absorber path length from TOA to the altitude
level considered. The absorptivity, An, is equal to 1  Trn.
N is the number of discretized atmospheric layers, with the
first layer being at the top, and the Nth next to the surface.
[6] OLR is the outcome of the angular and spectral
integration of In
+(0, m); and DLR, the corresponding inte-
gration for In
(ts, m).
OLR ¼ 2p
Z 1
0
dm
Z n2
n1
mIþn 0;mð Þdn ð3Þ
DLR ¼ 2p
Z 0
1
dm
Z n2
n1
mIn ts;mð Þdn ð4Þ
v1 and v2 are the lower and upper limits of the longwave
spectral range; here, we use 0 and 2500 cm1, respectively.
In our LBL model, a four-point Gaussian quadrature
method [Fels and Schwarzkopf, 1981] is used to perform
the angular integration to obtain the OLR and DLR.
[7] The temperature dependence of the gas absorption
(emission) arises owing to the functional dependence of the
line strengths and line widths on temperature [Goody and
Yung, 1989]. The line strengths are related to the population
distributions of the molecular energy states, which in turn
depend on temperature. The broadening of the spectral lines
(line width), caused by either collisional (Lorentz) broad-
ening or Doppler broadening, is also a function of temper-
ature. The temperature dependence of line absorption varies
from line to line. On the other hand, water vapor continuum
absorption, though still not fully understood on a funda-
mental basis, is known to decrease with temperature accord-
ing to available but as yet limited measurements (at least in
the window region) [Comier et al., 2005]; it is, however,
reasonably well represented by an empirical formula [Clough
et al., 1989]. The exact mechanisms that cause these two
types of absorption to be temperature-dependent are differ-
ent and beyond the scope of this paper, though it is worth
pointing out that the empirical formulation of the continuum
absorption is inevitably a source of some uncertainty.
[8] As an example, the temperature dependence of gas
(water vapor only) absorptivity is demonstrated in Figure 1,
using the GFDL LBL model. The calculations are based
upon the HITRAN spectral line data [Rothman et al., 2003]
and CKD2.4 water vapor continuum absorption formulation
[Tobin et al., 1999]. Temperature and water vapor follow the
standard tropical profiles [McClatchey et al., 1972]. There
are 45 20-hPa thick layers between 1000 hPa and 100 hPa,
and 15 layers between 100 hPa and 10 hPa, with the layer
thickness decreasing exponentially with height. In this LBL
calculation, a +1 K temperature perturbation results in a
decrease of narrow band (1 cm1) layer absorptivity in the
atmospheric window and the centers of absorption bands,
but results in an absorptivity increase for those lines which
are off the band center.
2.2. Partitioning of the Planck and Gas Absorptivity
Effects
[9] The question of interest here is how the Planck and
absorptivity effects, respectively, contribute to the spectral
OLR (DLR) change when there is a change in the atmo-
spheric temperature. As in the work by Huang et al. [2007],
contributions from each of the two factors can be separated,
on the basis of a Taylor expansion. For example, a 1 K
increase of the temperature of a layer j will cause the
following terms to change: Bn(Tj), because of the Planck
effect; Tr(ts, 0; m), Tr(ti, 0; m) (i > j) in the case of OLR,
and Tr(ti, ts; m) (i < j) in the case of DLR, because of the
temperature-dependent absorptivity effect. By neglecting
the higher-order residual terms, the change of In
+/ can be
written as:
DIþn 0;mð Þ ¼ DBn Tj
   Trn tj; 0;m  Trn tjþ1; 0;m   ð5aÞ
þBn Tj
   DTrn tj; 0;m DTrn tjþ1; 0;m   ð5bÞ
þ
XN
i¼jþ1
Bn Tið Þ  DTrn ti; 0;mð Þ DTrn tiþ1; 0;mð Þ½  ð5cÞ
þBn Tsð Þ DTrn ts; 0;mð Þ ð5dÞ
DIn ts;mð Þ ¼ DBn Tj
   Trn tjþ1; ts;m  Trn tj; ts;m  
ð6aÞ
þBn Tj
   DTrn tjþ1; ts;m DTrn tj; ts;m   ð6bÞ
þ
X1
i¼j1
Bn Tið Þ  DTrn tiþ1; ts;mð Þ DTrn ti; ts;mð Þ½  ð6cÞ
D07101 HUANG AND RAMASWAMY: TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF GAS ABSORPTION
2 of 7
D07101
Here DX denotes the change in variable X. Term (5a)
corresponds to the change in the thermal emission by the
perturbed layer due to the Planck effect; the other three
terms all result from the temperature-dependent absorptivity
effect, but have different origins as follows: Term (5b) is the
change in the outgoing radiation resulting from the
perturbed layer; term (5c) results from the change in
transmission functions from the atmospheric layers below
the perturbed layer to TOA; and term (5d) results from the
change in transmission functions from the surface to TOA.
Analogously, in equation (6), the three terms correspond,
respectively, to the Planck effect on DLR (term (6a)), the
absorptivity effect on downward emission from the
perturbed layer (term (6b)), and the absorptivity effect on
downward emission from the layers above (term (6c)).
[10] A central purpose of this paper is to illustrate how the
contribution by each of the above terms is distributed with
respect to spectral frequency and altitude of temperature
perturbation. Using the GFDL LBL model, each of these
four terms is evaluated. Besides the features introduced in
section 2.1, this model takes temperature, water vapor and
ozone profiles from McClatchey et al. [1972], and well-
mixed greenhouse gas (CO2, CH4, N2O, CFC-11, CFC-12,
CFC-113 and HCFC-22) concentrations as appropriate to
the year 2000. The model used in the subsequent text has
25 vertical levels (The computation results are not affected
by this lower resolution [Huang et al., 2007]).
3. Results
3.1. OLR
[11] We define the spectral Jacobians of OLR as the
change in the outgoing irradiance flux in every 1 cm1
spectral interval resulting from a +1 K temperature pertur-
bation of a 50-mbar thick layer at a specific height in the
atmosphere. They are calculated using the standard tropical
profiles. These Jacobians are further decomposed in Figure 2
into four parts (Figures 2a–2d), illustrating the four terms
on the RHS of equation (5) in order. The sum of the four
terms (not shown), is almost identical to the total OLR
change when both Plank and absorptivity effects are consid-
ered simultaneously [Huang et al., 2007, Figure 2b], which
confirms the validity of the separation in equation (5).
[12] As illustrated in Figure 2a, the Planck effect gives
rise to an unambiguous increase of OLR, with the maximum
contribution in the CO2 15 micron (667 cm
1) band.
Figure 2a illustrates the origin of the strong Planck damping
effect in a warmer climate. It correlates very well with the
atmospheric contribution to OLR [cf. Clough et al., 1992,
Plate 4]). In the water vapor rotation and vibration-rotation
Figure 1. Layer absorptivity of water vapor in a tropical atmosphere: (a) layer absorptivity at each
1 cm1 spectral interval and (b) its change due to a +1 K temperature perturbation.
D07101 HUANG AND RAMASWAMY: TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF GAS ABSORPTION
3 of 7
D07101
bands, most of the outgoing radiation, as well as most of the
damping under a warming perturbation, arises from the
middle and upper troposphere; in the carbon dioxide
15 micron and the ozone 9.6 micron (1042 cm1) bands,
it is mostly from the stratosphere; and in the atmospheric
window region (	8–12 micron, i.e., 830–1250 cm1), it is
mostly from the lower troposphere.
[13] Figure 2b illustrates the contribution from the ab-
sorptivity effect term (5b), namely, the change of OLR due
to the change in the temperature-dependent emissivity
(absorptivity) of the perturbed layer only. Below
830 cm1 or above 1250 cm1, the layer emissivity increases
(Figure 1b), owing to the unsaturated weaker lines. This gives
rise to a larger thermal emission from the perturbed layer and
thus increases OLR. In the window region, on the contrary,
the continuum absorption coefficient decreases (Figure 1b)
and this results in less outgoing radiation.
[14] Figure 2c reflects term (5c), namely, the change in
the outgoing radiation emitted by the layers below the
perturbed layer. Figure 2c is almost the negative of
Figure 2b. In the window region, where transmission
increases because of the negative temperature dependence
of continuum absorption, more emission from the layers
below reaches TOA; outside of the window region, more
outgoing radiation is trapped.
[15] The change in the outgoing radiation from the
surface, Figure 2d, occurs only in the window region, and
mainly when the temperature in the lower troposphere is
perturbed. Because the absorption in the other spectral
regions is already saturated, the temperature-influenced
absorptivity change has no effect there.
[16] Figure 3 illustrates the integrated Jacobians, i.e., the
change of the integrated irradiance flux over the whole
longwave spectrum of OLR due to each of the four terms.
Comparing Figure 2a of this paper to Figure 2b of Huang et
al. [2007], or the Planck effect curve to the total OLR
change curve in Figure 3, it is apparent that the Planck
effect largely resembles the total OLR change. This is
because terms (5b)–(5c), though individually significant,
cancel, thus making the overall absorptivity influence small.
[17] It is noted that the OLR sensitivity to atmospheric
temperatures does differ from the Planck effect, overshoot-
ing slightly in the lower troposphere while undershooting
slightly in the upper and middle troposphere (Figure 3). To
understand these features physically, it is helpful to resort to
a conceptual picture. Let us consider the sum of terms (5c)
and (5d) to be the change of outgoing radiation from a
hypothetical layer. This layer has an optical path length to
TOA that is approximately the same as layer j, and has an
equivalent emitting temperature, Tj
0. If this temperature
was the same as Tj (e.g., an isothermal atmosphere), the
total absorptivity effect would be identically zero because
term (5b) cancels the sum of terms (5c) and (5d). However,
since the tropospheric thermal structure is such that the
temperature decreases with height, Tj
0 > Tj. Hence, in the
spectral regions where the temperature perturbation (+1 K)
Figure 2. Spectral Jacobians of OLR separated into four parts, corresponding to the four terms in the
right-hand side of equation (5), respectively: (a) Planck effect on the outgoing radiation from the
perturbed layer, (b) gas absorptivity effect on the outgoing radiation from the perturbed layer, (c) gas
absorptivity effect on the outgoing radiation from the layers below, and (d) gas absorptivity effect on the
outgoing radiation from the surface. A +1 K temperature perturbation, applied successively in 50 hPa
thick layers, is considered. The results are contoured in wave number-pressure space, with an interval of
1e-4 W m2/cm1.
D07101 HUANG AND RAMASWAMY: TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF GAS ABSORPTION
4 of 7
D07101
increases (decreases) the absorptivity of layer j, the absorp-
tivity effect contributes negatively (positively) to the OLR
change. It then becomes clear that the overshooting in the
lower troposphere is due to the continuum absorption in the
window region which decreases with temperature, while
the undershooting in the middle and upper troposphere is
due to those lines whose absorption strength increases with
temperature (see Figure 4).
[18] From Table 1, for a vertically uniform temperature
change of +1 K in the tropics, the spectrally integrated
OLR flux change is 3.40 W m2, to which the Planck effect
contributes 3.52 W m2 and the absorptivity effect
0.11 W m2. As illustrated in Figure 4, the overall
absorptivity effect consists of offsetting contributions from
different spectral regions. The spectral regions with a
negative contribution (owing to the lines with positive
temperature dependence) override the regions with a posi-
tive contribution (owing to the continuum absorption and
the rest of the lines which are negatively temperature-
dependent). As a result, the overall absorptivity effect is
negative, indicating an enhanced trapping.
[19] It is worth noting that the water vapor continuum
absorption is largely proportional to the square of water
vapor density (especially in the window region, because of
the self-broadening mechanism [Clough et al., 1989]). Thus
the contribution by the continuum absorption is more
sensitive to the water vapor concentration than the
absorption lines. Because of the increase of water vapor
concentration from midlatitudes to tropics (Table 1), the
contribution by the continuum absorption compensates for
the contribution by the lines to a larger extent at the tropical
latitudes. As a result, the overall negative gas absorptivity
effect becomes less compared to the Planck effect. This
suggests that, in a warmer climate, assuming a uniform
warming and consequent moistening of the atmosphere, the
overall atmospheric temperature feedback (the ‘‘total OLR
change’’ in Table 1) would be better approximated by the
Planck effect alone.
3.2. DLR
[20] Similar to the analysis for OLR, it is apparent from
Figure 5 that the Planck effect on DLR is offset by the
absorptivity effect (the sum of terms (6b) and (6c)); this is
mainly in the window region. Here, the absorptivity
decreases with an increase in temperature. At the frequen-
cies where line absorption dominates and is nearly saturated,
the DLR sensitivity mostly results from the Planck effect.
From Table 2, for the spectrally integrated DLR flux, if the
Figure 4. OLR flux (W m2/cm1) change due to +1 K
temperature perturbation. The result is vertically integrated
from the spectral Jacobians. The total OLR change is
separated into the contributions by the Planck and gas
absorptivity effects.
Figure 3. Integrated Jacobians (W m2) of OLR, i.e.,
spectral integral of the Jacobians in Figure 2. The total
outgoing irradiance flux change (solid curve) is separated
into four parts, as in equation (5).
Table 1. Column Sum of the Irradiance Jacobians of OLRa
Tropics MLS MLW
Total OLR change 3.40 3.04 2.11
Planck effect 3.52 3.19 2.25
Absorptivity effect 0.11 0.15 0.15
Absorptivity effect on outgoing
radiation from the surface
0.56 0.39 0.08
aUnit is W m2. Three standard atmospheres are considered: tropics,
midlatitude summer (MLS), and midlatitude winter (MLW). The values are
vertically integrated from the Jacobians illustrated in Figure 3 and represent
the OLR change when the temperature of the whole atmospheric column
changes uniformly by 1 K.
Figure 5. DLR (W m2/cm1) flux change due to +1 K
temperature perturbation, obtained from the spectral
Jacobians (not shown).
D07101 HUANG AND RAMASWAMY: TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF GAS ABSORPTION
5 of 7
D07101
whole tropical atmospheric column warms by 1 K, the total
absorptivity effect reduces the Planck effect (5.12 W m2)
by 0.59 W m2. In contrast, for the midlatitude winter
case, the absorptivity effect is positive. This is because, as
water vapor amount becomes less, the continuum absorp-
tion becomes negligible and the absorptivity effect arises
almost entirely from the spectral regions with lines only. In
going from tropics to higher latitudes, the temperature effect
on DLR changes from sub-Planckian to super-Planckian.
[21] It is interesting to note that the total absorptivity
effect tends to reduce both OLR and DLR (except in the
midlatitude winter case). This feature indicates the nongray
characteristic of the atmosphere. To demonstrate this point,
consider the atmosphere to be a hypothetical single bulk
layer. In a gray atmosphere, OLR = sTs
4  e(sTs4  sTa4) and
DLR = esTa
4, where e is the broadband emissivity of the
atmosphere; s is the Stephan-Boltzman constant; Ta is the
effective atmospheric temperature; and Ts, the surface
temperature. From these two equations, it is obvious that
@OLR
@e < 0 while
@DLR
@e > 0. Since, in fact, OLR and DLR
changes are both negative (Tables 1 and 2), the character-
istic feature is a consequence of the nongray atmosphere.
This nongray feature results in a radiation energy conver-
gence in the atmosphere; this would, in turn, reduce the total
cooling of the atmosphere, compared to the situation when
temperature dependence of the gas absorptivity is ignored.
For OLR, the spectral regions with positively temperature-
dependent absorption lines dominate, although this domi-
nance decreases as the water vapor amount increases.
However, for DLR, the negatively temperature-dependent
continuum absorption in the window region determines the
absorptivity effect in tropics and midlatitude summer where
the water vapor is more abundant than in midlatitude winter.
[22] Although the total absorptivity effect on OLR is
negative and is one of trapping, more radiation from the
surface is allowed to leave the climate system (Table 1).
This suggests that the temperature dependence of atmo-
spheric absorption serves to damp the warming of the
surface. On the other hand, the reduction of the downward
radiation energy from the atmosphere to the surface
(Table 2) helps to explain why the neglect of the temper-
ature dependence of atmospheric absorption tends to give
larger climate sensitivity, as shown by Augustsson and
Ramanathan [1977].
4. Conclusion and Discussion
[23] By using radiative Jacobians, the temperature feed-
back can be separated into two distinct effects. One is the
Planck effect which changes thermal emission according to
Planck’s Law. The other is the absorptivity effect which
involves a change in gas absorptivity resulting from the
temperature dependence.
[24] This study has quantitatively diagnosed the separate
contributions from the components that constitute the gas
absorptivity effect. It is demonstrated that these components
are individually significant even though they largely cancel
each other such that the Planck effect dominates the total
OLR and DLR sensitivities.
[25] There are two significant cancellations with regard to
the absorptivity effect. When a temperature change occurs
within an atmospheric layer, the temperature dependence of
gas absorption changes the emissivity of the perturbed layer.
It also changes the transmission functions for radiation
emanating from the layers below and the surface to the
TOA, as well as the transmission functions for radiation
emanating from the layers above to the surface. At a given
frequency, the change of thermal emission at the perturbed
layer is offset by the change in the transmission of the
emission from the other layers and the surface. Further,
because of the difference in the temperature dependence of
gas absorptivity in different spectral intervals, the effect of
the lines with positive temperature dependence is offset by
(1) the rest of the lines and (2) the continuum absorption,
both of whom have a negative temperature dependence.
[26] The OLR analyses reveal that, in the spectral regions
of positive temperature dependence (e.g., those absorption
lines off the band center), the absorptivity effect offsets the
Planck damping which constitutes most of the negative
temperature feedback. In the spectral regions of negative
temperature dependence (e.g., water vapor continuum
absorption), the temperature-dependent gas absorptivity
effect adds to the Planck damping. It is interesting and very
important to note that the negative temperature dependence
of water vapor continuum absorption has a contrasting
effect on DLR. When warming occurs at the surface and
consequently in the atmosphere, this mechanism enables
more emission from the surface to leave the atmosphere-
surface system and simultaneously reduces the downward
radiation from the atmosphere to the surface. This would
tend to lower the warming at the surface. Further, this
mechanism is strongly sensitive to the concentration of
lower tropospheric water vapor. With increased moisture
in a warmer climate, the negative temperature dependence
of the continuum absorption is likely to play a more
prominent role. It will make the Planck effect more efficient
in damping the warming of the atmosphere-surface system,
and will also reduce the radiation emitted to the surface
from a warmer atmosphere.
[27] The above results are inferred for clear sky condi-
tions. Cloudy skies would add more degrees of freedom to
the problem because they are relatively closer to black or
grey spectral bodies, owing to the absence of strong spectral
variation [Yamamoto et al., 1970]. Clouds may change the
relative importance of continuum absorption and lines with
respect to the temperature-dependent gas absorptivity effect.
For example, an optically thick (blackbody-like) low cloud
would limit the role of the water vapor continuum absorp-
tion by masking its temperature dependence, and thus make
OLR sensitivity to temperature less Planck-effect-dominated;
but DLR sensitivity more so. In contrast, an optically thin
high cloud, if its absorption is less temperature-dependent
than the lines, would limit the contributions from those lines
that play an important role in the middle and upper
Table 2. Column Sum of the Irradiance Jacobians of DLRa
Tropics MLS MLW
Total DLR change 4.52 4.13 3.08
Planck effect 5.12 4.55 3.01
Absorptivity effect 0.59 0.42 0.07
aValues are obtained as in Table 1.
D07101 HUANG AND RAMASWAMY: TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF GAS ABSORPTION
6 of 7
D07101
troposphere. This would make the OLR sensitivity more
determined by the Planck effect.
[28] Finally, the total temperature-dependent gas absorp-
tivity effect tends to result in a radiation energy convergence
that decreases the total cooling of the atmosphere. It is of
interest for future works to investigate how the atmospheric
cooling/heating profile is influenced by this effect.
[29] Acknowledgments. We thank Xianglei Huang and Dan
Schwarzkopf for valuable comments. We also thank three anonymous
reviewers who helped improve the quality of this paper.
References
Augustsson, T., and V. Ramanathan (1977), A radiative-convective model
study of the CO2 climate problem, J. Atmos. Sci., 34, 448–451.
Clough, S. A., F. X. Kneizys, and R. W. Davies (1989), Line shape and the
water vapor continuum, Atmos. Res., 23, 229–241.
Clough, S. A., M. J. Iacono, and J.-L. Moncet (1992), Line-by-line calcula-
tions of atmospheric fluxes and cooling rates: Application to water vapor,
J. Geophys. Res., 97, 15,761–15,785.
Comier, J., J. Hodges, and J. Drummond (2005), Infrared water vapor
continuum absorption at atmospheric temperatures, J. Chem. Phys.,
122(11), 114–309.
Fels, S. B., and M. D. Schwarzkopf (1981), An efficient, accurate algorithm
for calculating CO2 15 mm band cooling rates, J. Geophys. Res., 86(C2),
1205–1232.
Goody, R., and Y. Yung (1989), Radiation calculation in a clear atmosphere,
in Atmospheric Radiation: Theoretical Basis, 2nd ed., pp. 216–287,
Oxford Univ. Press, New York.
Huang, Y., V. Ramaswamy, and B. Soden (2007), An investigation of the
sensitivity of the clear-sky outgoing longwave radiation to atmospheric
temperature and water vapor, J. Geophys. Res., 112, D05104, doi:10.1029/
2005JD006906.
Manabe, S., and R. Wetherald (1967), Thermal equilibrium of the atmo-
sphere with a give distribution of relative humidity, J. Atmos. Sci., 3,
241–259.
McClatchey, R. A., et al. (1972), Optical properties of the atmosphere,
Environ. Res. Pap., 411, Air Force Cambridge Res. Lab., Hanscom Air
Force Base, Mass.
Rothman, L. S., et al. (2003), The HITRAN molecular spectrospcopic
database: Edition of 2000 including updates through 2001, J. Quant.
Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 82, 5–44.
Schwarzkopf, M. D., and V. Ramaswamy (1999), Radiative effects of CH4,
N2O, halocarbons and the foreign-broadened H2O continuum: A GCM
experiment, J. Geophys. Res., 104(D8), 9467–9488.
Soden, B., and I. Held (2006), An assessment of climate feedbacks in
coupled ocean-atmosphere models, J. Clim., 19(14), 3354–3360.
Stocker, T. F., et al. (2001), Physical climate processes and feedbacks, in
Climate Change 2001: The Scientific Basis, pp. 417–470, Cambridge
Univ. Press, New York.
Tobin, D. C., et al. (1999), Downwelling spectral radiance observations at
the SHEBA ice station: Water vapor continuum measurements from 17 to
26 micron, J. Geophys. Res., 104, 2081–2092.
Yamamoto, G., et al. (1970), Radiative transfer in water clouds in the
infrared region, J. Atmos. Sci., 27, 282–292.
Zhang, M. H., R. D. Cess, J. J. Hack, and J. T. Kiehl (1994), Diagnostic
study of climate feedback processes in atmospheric GCMs, J. Geophys.
Res., 99, 5525–5537.

Y. Huang, Program in Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences, Princeton
University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA. (yi.huang@noaa.gov)
V. Ramaswamy, Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, NOAA,
Princeton, NJ 08540, USA.
D07101 HUANG AND RAMASWAMY: TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF GAS ABSORPTION
7 of 7
D07101
