Investigating Protein Structure Change in the Zona
Pellucida with a Microrobotic System
Yu Sun
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Email: sun@iris.mavt.ethz.ch
Michael A. Greminger
University of Minnesota
Minnesota, U.S.A.
Email: grem@me.umn.edu
Bradley J. Nelson
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Email: nelson@iris.mavt.ethz.ch
Abstract— This paper presents a microrobotic system that inte-
grates microscope vision and microforce feedback for character-
izing biomembrane mechanical properties. Robust visual tracking
of deformable biomembrane contours using physics-based models
is described. A multi-axis MEMS-based force sensor is used
to determine applied forces on biomembranes and develop a
novel biomembrane mechanical model. By visually extracting
biomembrane deformations during loading, geometry changes
can be used to estimate applied forces using a biomembrane
mechanical model and the determined elastic modulus. Forces
on a biomembrane can be visually observed and controlled,
thus creating a framework for vision and force assimilated cell
manipulation. The experimental results quantitatively describe
a stiffness increase seen in the mouse zona pellucida (ZP) after
fertilization. Understanding this stiffness increase, referred to as
“zona hardening,” helps provide an understanding of ZP protein
structure development, i.e., an increase in the number of cross
links of protein ZP1 between ZP2-ZP3 units that is conjectured
to be responsible for zona hardening. Furthermore, the system,
technique, and model presented in this paper can be applied to
investigating mechanical properties of other biomembranes and
other cell types, which has the potential to facilitate many biolog-
ical studies, such as cell injury and recovery where biomembrane
mechanical property changes need to be monitored.
I. INTRODUCTION
Biomembranes isolate biological cells from their immediate
surroundings and can play a key role in modulating the
transport of substances between the cell and its environment.
Investigations into the functions and behaviors of various
cells often require that their corresponding biomembranes are
characterized. The most common biomembranes are composed
of lipids and proteins, such as plasma membranes. Mem-
brane lipids are organized in a bilayer that has two closely
opposed sheets. Embedded in and associated with the lipid
portion of the membrane are proteins. There are other types
of biomembranes that have compositions different than lipid
bilayer membranes. The zona pellucida (ZP) is an extracellular
biomembrane enveloping an oocyte. It is composed of three
sulfated glycoproteins, called ZP-1, ZP-2 and ZP-3 that are
synthesized by the oocyte [1].
In this paper, an understanding of the protein structure
in zona pellucida (ZP) is pursued through ZP mechanical
property characterization using a microrobotic system inte-
grating vision and force feedback. Upon fertilization, the ZP
surrounding the oocyte undergoes a “hardening” process in
order to prevent subsequent spermatozoon from penetrating.
To better understand the mechanical properties of ZP and the
mechanical property changes during zona hardening, biomem-
brane mechanical property characterization is conducted on
mouse oocytes and embryos.
A microrobotic system with biomembrane force sensing
capabilities is described in this paper. A deformable cell mem-
brane contour tracking algorithm using physics-based models
is presented. Using the visual tracking information, vision-
based biomembrane force estimation strategy is investigated.
Robust tracking of cell deformation is shown, and real-time
determination of applied force fields is demonstrated. The
experimental results quantitatively describe the mechanical
properties of mouse oocyte and embryo ZP. These results help
justify speculation that an increase in the number of cross
links of protein ZP1 between ZP2-ZP3 units is responsible
for the observed ZP stiffness increase observed during zona
hardening [2]. This cross-linking is shown schematically in
Figure 1.
Furthermore, the system, technique, and model presented in
this paper can be applied to mechanical property investigations
of other biomembranes and other cell types.
II. MICROROBOTIC SYSTEM FOR CHARACTERIZING
BIOMEMBRANE MECHANICAL PROPERTIES
The microrobotic system is composed of two 3-DOF mi-
crorobots for cell holding and manipulation, a capacitive
cellular force sensor mounted on the manipulation microrobot,
a vacuum unit, and a cell membrane contour visual tracking
unit, as shown in Figure 2. The microrobots have a travel of
2.54cm with a step resolution of 40nm in the xyz axes.
A. MEMS-based Multi-axis Capacitive Cellular Force Sensor
The MEMS-based two-axis cellular force sensor [3] shown
in Figure 3 is capable of resolving normal forces applied to
a cell as well as tangential forces generated by improperly
aligned cell probes. A high-yield microfabrication process was
developed to form the 3-D high aspect ratio structure by using
Deep Reactive Ion Etching (DRIE) on Silicon-On-Insulator
(SOI) wafers.
The constrained outer frame and the inner movable structure
are connected by four curved springs. A load applied on the
probe causes the inner structure to move, changing the gap
Fig. 1. Zona pellucida and its protein structure. (a) ZP membrane enveloping
a mouse embryo (b) Protein structure before fertilization (redrawn from [2]).
(c) After fertilization. The increase of ZP1 cross links is speculated to cause
zona hardening.
Fig. 2. Microrobotic system with vision and force feedback for biomembrane
mechanical property characterization.
between each pair of interdigitated comb capacitors. Con-
sequently, the total capacitance change resolves the applied
force. The interdigitated capacitors are orthogonally config-
ured to make the force sensor capable of resolving forces in
both the x and y directions. The cellular force sensors used in
the experiments are capable of resolving forces up to 25µN
with a resolution as low as 0.01µN .
Tip geometry effects the quantitative force measurement
results. A standard injection pipette (Cook K-MPIP-1000-5)
tip section with a tip diameter of 5µm is attached to the probe
of the cellular force sensors.
Fig. 3. A cellular force sensor with orthogonal comb drives detailed.
B. Visually Tracking Cell Deformation Using Physics-Based
Models
In order to establish the quantitative relationships between
applied forces and biomembrane geometry deformations so
that biomembrane mechanical properties can be determined,
a robust deformable visual tracking algorithm is required.
Gradient-based tracking algorithms such as Snakes [4] were
not able to provide robust tracking performance in the experi-
ments. One of the reasons is that the free-form algorithm has
the generality that allows it to be used with a wide variety
of object shapes. However, this generality also makes the
gradient-based algorithm susceptible to noise and local minima
since no assumptions are made about the object shape being
tracked or its material properties.
Fig. 4. Comparison between 2D boundary element and finite element meshes.
1) The Boundary Element Method: The boundary element
method (BEM) provides a particularly well formulated ap-
proach to physics-based modeling of object deformations
based on object contours. BEM, like the finite element method
(FEM), is a technique to model an elastic solid. BEM differs
from FEM in that only the contour of an object needs to be
meshed, as illustrated by the different meshing techniques in
Figure 4, making this method attractive for computer vision
problems and especially for tracking object deformations.
When tracking a 2D cross section of a biological cell,
it is apparent that the cell membrane deforms in a manner
that can be approximated assuming 2D plane stress elasticity,
despite the fact that biological cells are clearly not linearly
elastic solids and cannot be precisely modeled as such. This
assumption of linear elasticity provides robust constraints on
the visual tracking algorithm and ensures that the extracted
contour properly mimics the underlying physics of the cell
deformation. The 2D plane stress elasticity problem can be
expressed in terms of displacements u(x) by [5]
µ∇2uα + µ
(
1 + ν
1− ν
)
∂
∂xα
(
∂u1
∂x1
+
∂u2
∂x2
)
+ Fα = 0 (1)
where α = 1, 2. F (x) is the body force applied to the object,
such as gravity or a force due to acceleration. This equation is
known as Navier’s equation of plane stress and is defined over
a 2D domain R with a boundary ∂R. The shear modulus µ
and Poisson’s ratio ν completely define the material properties
of an isotropic linearly elastic object.
The boundary conditions for (1) can be expressed as a
prescribed traction vector {t} over the boundary ∂R where, in
2D, the traction vector has the units of force per length. This is
known as the Neumann problem. Solving the Neumann prob-
lem using the BEM method returns the nodal displacements
{u} which result from the applied tractions.
Once the nodal displacements {u} are found by solving
the Neumann problem, the displacement at any point on the
boundary can be found by using quadratic interpolation [6].
The displacement at any point in the interior of the object can
be found using Somigliana’s identity [7].
In order to track deformable objects, a deformable template
is defined that uses BEM to model displacements. The tem-
plate is registered to the image by applying a force field that
deforms the template to match the image. This force field is
found using an energy minimization approach.
2) BEM Visual Tracking: The deformable template is reg-
istered to a binary edge image using a least square error
measure. The template is represented by a list of 2D vertices ri
and the edge pixels in the current image are represented by the
list of 2D vertices wi. The registration algorithm minimizes
the distance squared between the transformed template vertices
r′i and the nearest image edge vertices wi, where the template
vertices are transformed by an elastic transformation and a
rigid body transformation.
The rigid body portion of the transformation of the template
vertices is simply an affine transformation given by
r′i = A(ri) (2)
where A is defined by
A(ri) = X +
[
cos θ − sin θ
sin θ cos θ
]
ri (3)
where θ is the angle of rotation and X is the translation vector.
The error function between the transformed template vertices
r′i and the image vertices wi can be written as
E(θ, X) =
M∑
j=1
∥∥r′j − wj∥∥2 (4)
where r′j is the position vector of the ith edge pixel of
the template transformed by (2); wj is the position vector
of the edge pixel in the image that is closest to the point
r′j ; and M is the number of edge pixels in the template.
This error function sums the square of the distance between
each template vertex and the nearest image edge pixel. Since
the transformed template vertices r′j are transformed by the
affine transform A, E will be a function of θ and X . By
minimizing E, the values of θ and X that best match in
the image in a least squares sense will be found. The error
function E is minimized by a gradient-based multi-variable
minimization technique called the Broydon-Fletcher-Goldfarb-
Shanno (BFGS) method [8].
Minimizing (4) will determine the rigid body motion of the
object. BEM will be used to model the non-rigid portion of the
objects motion. To do this, the template is deformed according
to the BEM model before performing the affine transformation.
The transformation becomes
r′i = A (ri + u(ri, {t})) (5)
where u(ri, {t}) is the displacement of the template edge pixel
ri due to the applied traction distribution {t} on the boundary
of the object. The displacement vector u(ri, {t}) is obtained
from the solution to the Neumann problem. The error function
(4) becomes
E(θ, X, {t}) =
M∑
i=1
‖r′i − wi‖
2 (6)
Since the error function (6) has an additional parameter
{t}, minimizing the error function will now give the traction
distribution {t} in addition to the position and orientation of
the object. This algorithm tracks the deformable object by
finding the traction distribution {t} that, when applied to the
template, causes the template to match the image.
Robust tracking of cell deformation has been achieved. The
results of the BEM template matching algorithm applied to
cell contour tracking are shown in Figure 5, where the traction
distribution applied to the template is shown on the right.
Fig. 5. Visual tracking of a deformed cell contour and the traction distribution
{t} applied to template used to track the contour.
Fig. 6. Force-distance measurement system configuration (not to scale).
Fig. 7. Force-displacement curve measurement. (a)(b) Mouse oocyte ZP. Ap-
plied force: 7.21µN . Indenter displacement: 42.2µm. (c)(d) Mouse embryo
ZP. Applied force: 12.7µN . Indenter displacement: 52.3µm.
C. Experimental Results
Mouse oocytes and embryos used in the experiments were
collected in accordance with standard established proce-
dures [9]. The system configuration under the microscope is
shown in Figure 6. The bent holding pipette tip, the cell, and
the force sensor probe are horizontally aligned.
Before the force sensor applied a uniaxial point load com-
pressing the biomembrane and measures normal forces, the
force sensor probe was aligned such that tangential forces were
minimized to ensure that only a normal force was applied to
the membrane.
Figure 7 shows the force and deformation measurement
process. As shown in Figure 8, forces increase nonlinearly as
deformation increases. For mouse oocytes, when deformation
reaches about 45µm, the zona pellucida (ZP) and the plasma
membrane are punctured, which results in the maximum forces
measured, i.e., the puncturing forces. The puncturing forces are
approximately 7.5µN . After the force sensor tip punctures the
membranes and travels into the cytoplasm, the force decreases
rapidly, almost to zero.
It can be seen that embryo membranes endure much larger
deformations than oocyte membranes before being punctured.
The required forces to puncture embryo membranes are almost
twice as large as the forces for oocyte membranes. These
measurement results quantitatively reveal the mechanical prop-
erty differences that result from mouse ZP hardening and
illustrate differences in manipulating cells of different types
and different stages of development. In order to understand
Fig. 8. Force-deformation curves of mouse oocyte and embryo membranes.
how cell deformation properties change, it is necessary to
relate visually observed cell deformations to measured forces.
This requires a biomembrane mechanical model.
III. BIOMEMBRANE MECHANICAL MODELING
Although the assumption of 2D plane stress elasticity was
useful for constraining the contour extraction algorithm for
measuring cell membrane deformation as described in Sec-
tion II-B, this assumption is poor for determining realistic
material parameters of the ZP, such as the modulus of elas-
ticity. Instead, a biomembrane mechanical model that more
accurately describes the actual loading and material conditions
is required.
The two popular biocapsule models are the contact me-
chanics models and the micropipette aspiration model. The
contact mechanics models including the Hertzian model [10]
and Sneddon model [11] treat a deformed object as a solid
body, however, encapsulated biocapsules are by no means solid
bodies. The micropipette aspiration model [12] assumes that
a sucking pressure is applied to deform a biomembrane while
uniaxial forces are applied on the mouse cell membranes in
our experiments. Thus, these existing models do not apply in
describing the mouse oocyte and embryo membrane loading
situations.
A. Biomembrane Point-Load Model
Due to the deficiencies of existing models, a new biomem-
brane point-load model is developed, which considers a
biomembrane as a thin film and assumes that the inner
cytoplasm provides a hydrostatic pressure on the membrane.
The model assumptions include: (a) The biomembrane encap-
sulates liquid (i.e., cytoplasm) that exerts a uniform hydrostatic
pressure on the biomembrane. (b) The cell volume does not
change. (c) The biomembrane has a negligible flexural rigidity,
so that deformation is caused by membrane stretching alone.
(d) The biomembrane is linearly elastic. (e) The cell is free of
initial membrane stress or residual stress. (f) The model starts
with a planar circular area with zero residual stress.
From experimental observations, an indented biomembrane
shape can be characterized with three geometric parameters
Fig. 9. Indentation of a cell membrane by a micropipette.
a, wd and R, as shown in Figure 9. A micropipette of radius
c exerts a force F on the membrane, creating a dimple with
radius a and depth wd and semi-circular curved surfaces with
radius R.
In deriving the model, first consider force equilibrium at
the local dimple. As shown in Figure 10, the internal pressure
produces a force pir2p counter balancing the applied force F ,
where p is the internal pressure. Another counter balancing
force, σd sin θ2pirh is due to the membrane stress σd. These
two forces together balance the applied force F . For small
angle approximations, dw/dr ≈ sin θ ≈ θ, where w is the
deformed dimple profile [13]. Thus, the force balance equation
at equilibrium is F = pir2p + σd2pirhdwdr , or
σdh
dw
dr
=
F
2pir
−
pr
2
(7)
where h is membrane thickness.
Fig. 10. Force balance and elastic strain analysis at the dimple.
Integrating (7) with a boundary condition of w = 0 at r = a
and approximating p = F/(pia2) yield the dimple profile
w = −
F
4piσdh
[
1−
( r
a
)2
+ ln
( r
a
)2]
(8)
which is valid in c ≤ r ≤ a.
The dimple depth from the maximum height of the de-
formed membrane, as shown in Figure 9, is given by
wd = w
∣∣
r=c
= −
F
4piσdh
[
1−
( c
a
)2
+ ln
( c
a
)2]
(9)
Within the dimple, each ring element on the membrane of
radius r and width dr is stretched by the external load to a
final width of dr/cos θ, as shown in Figure 10. If θ < 25◦
holds, the small strain approximation is valid. The largest θ
in the experiments is less than 22◦. The elastic strain on such
an element is, therefore, given by
εd =
dr/cos θ − dr
dr
≈
θ2
2
=
1
2
(
dw
dr
)2
(10)
Since elastic strain on a membrane is proportional to area
change [13], one can ignore the second order terms, and the
average strain on the membrane is
ε¯d =
1
2
a∫
c
1
2
(dw/dr)
2
rdr
a∫
c
rdr
(11)
Note that the denominator is simply the area of the annulus,
with c and a the inner and outer radii, respectively.
Linear elasticity requires [14][15]
σ¯d =
E
1− ν
ε¯d (12)
where E is the membrane elastic modulus and ν is the Poisson
ratio.
Combining (9) and (12) yields
F =
2piEhw3d
a2(1− ν)
[
3− 4ζ2 + ζ4 + 2 ln ζ2
(1− ζ2)(1− ζ2 + ln ζ2)3
]
(13)
where ζ = c/a.
B. Determination of Mouse ZP Elastic Modulus
The geometric parameters a and wd are extracted from the
deformable tracking algorithm. F is the measured force. The
Poisson ratio ν of biomembranes is typically assumed to be
0.5. The constant values used are 4.5µm in ZP thickness (h)
and 3µm in indenter radius (c). Using (13) of the biomembrane
point-load model, the Young’s modulus of mouse oocyte and
embryo ZP are calculated.
TABLE I
ELASTIC MODULUS OF MOUSE OOCYTE AND EMBRYO ZP.
statistics oocyte ZP modulus embryo ZP modulus
mean 17.9kPa 42.2kPa
standard deviation (1σ) 0.8kPa 2.1kPa
Table I summarizes the elastic modulus results, based on
34 data points from 3 mouse oocytes and 31 data points from
3 mouse embryos. Throughout the ZP loading process, the
modulus values are fairly constant.
IV. VISION-BASED BIOMEMBRANE FORCE ESTIMATION
When vision and force measurements are integrated, the
elastic modulus of a biomembrane can be determined from
the force and visual feedback. Conversely, if the biomembrane
elastic modulus is determined, applied forces can be estimated
from visual feedback alone, a technique referred to as vision-
based biomembrane force sensing.
Figure 11 shows the vision-based biomembrane force esti-
mation results on an oocyte ZP. The geometric parameters are
extracted using the deformable template matching algorithm
and the elastic modulus used in calculation is the mean value
17.9kPa shown in Table I. Consequently, applied forces are
estimated from (13). In Figure 11, the horizontal axis is the
measured force from the force sensor in the experiments.
The vision-based biomembrane force estimation uncertainty
is 0.389µN (1σ), assuming zero measurement uncertainty for
the measured force data on the horizontal axis.
Fig. 11. Vision-based force estimation versus measured forces.
V. DISCUSSIONS
Historically, ZP hardening has a two-fold meaning. One
refers to the increased chemical resistance of ZP to proteolytic
digestion, normally assessed with alpha-chymotrypsin [16].
The second implication is an increase of ZP stiffness, which
until now has been speculation without experimental proof.
The experimental results presented in this paper quantitate the
stiffness change during the ZP hardening process, which is a
first in molecular biology. The significance of this research,
however, goes beyond revealing the stiffness change.
The most widely accepted ZP structure model was proposed
by Wassarman [17]. In this model, shown in Figure 1, protein
ZP2 and ZP3 form filaments and are cross-linked by protein
ZP1. Though ZP stiffness increase during ZP hardening has
not been previously proved, it has been speculated that an
increase of the number of cross links of ZP1 between ZP2-
ZP3 units is responsible for a stiffness increase, if ZP stiffness
increases at all. The experimental results in this paper quantita-
tively describe mouse ZP stiffness increase and help justify the
previous speculation on ZP’s protein structure change during
ZP hardening, which provides an understanding of ZP protein
structure development.
Furthermore, the system, technique, and model presented
in this paper can be applied to investigating mechanical prop-
erties of other biomembranes and other cell types, which has
the potential to facilitate many biological studies. For example,
in cell injury and recovery studies, it is important to monitor
biomembrane mechanical properties to detect membrane dam-
age and to interpret such reported phenomenon as mechanical
resistance to cellular volume reduction during dehydration and
its relationship to injury.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
This paper presented a microrobotic system integrating
microscope vision and microforce feedback for characterizing
biomembrane mechanical properties. Robust visual tracking of
deformable biomembrane contour using physics-based models
was described. A multi-axis MEMS-based force sensor was
used to determine applied forces on biomembranes and de-
velop a novel biomembrane mechanical model. By visually
extracting geometry changes on a biomembrane, geometry
changes can be used to estimate applied forces using the
biomembrane mechanical model and the determined elastic
modulus. Forces on a biomembrane can be visually observed
and controlled, thus creating a framework for vision and
force assimilated cell manipulation. The experimental results
quantitatively describe mouse ZP stiffness increase during
zona hardening and provide an understanding of ZP protein
structure development, i.e., an increase in the number of cross
links of protein ZP1 between ZP2-ZP3 units that is conjectured
to be responsible for ZP stiffness increase. Furthermore, the
system, technique, and model presented in this paper can
be applied to investigating mechanical properties of other
biomembranes and other cell types, which has the potential
to facilitate many biological studies, such as cell injury and
recovery studies.
REFERENCES
[1] L.F. Liang, M. Familari, M.C. Moos, and J. Dean, “Coordinate ex-
pression of the three zona pellucida genes during mouse oogenesis,”
Development, Vol. 121, pp. 1947–1956, 1995.
[2] D.P.L. Green, “Three-dimensional structure of the zona pellucida,” J.
of Reproduction and Fertility, Vol. 2, pp. 147–156, 1997.
[3] Yu Sun, B.J. Nelson, D.P. Potasek, and E. Enikov, “A bulk micro-
fabricated multi-axis capacitive cellular force sensor using transverse
comb drives,” Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering, Vol.
12, No. 6, pp. 832–840, 2002.
[4] J. Kass, A. Witkin and D. Terzopoulos, “Snakes: active contour
models,” International Journal of Computer Vision, Vol. 1, No. 4, pp.
321–331, 1987.
[5] I. Sokolnikoff, Mathematical Theory of Elasticity, Krieger Publishing
Company, Malabar, Florida, 1983.
[6] G. Beer, Programming the Boundary Element Method, Wiley, 2001.
[7] F.J. Rizzo, “An integral equation approach to boundary value problems
of classical elastostatics,” Quarterly Applied Mathematics, Vol. 25, pp.
83–95, 1967.
[8] G. Vanderplaats, Numerical Optimization Techniques for Engineering
Design, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1984.
[9] B. Hogan, R. Beddington, F. Costantini, and E. Lacey, Manipulating
the Mouse Embryo: A Laboratory Manual, 2rd Edition, Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory Press, 1994.
[10] K.L. Johnson, Contact Mechanics, Cambridge University Press, 1987.
[11] D. Maugis, Contact, Adhesion and Rupture of Elastic Solids, Springer-
Verlag, 2000.
[12] E. Evans and R. Skalak, Mechanics and Thermodynamics of Biomem-
branes, CRC, 1980.
[13] K.T. Wan, V. Chan, and D.A. Dillard, “Constitutive equation for elastic
indentation of a thin-walled bio-mimetic microcapsule by an atomic
force microscope tip,” Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces, Vol. 27,
pp. 241–248, 2002.
[14] K.T. Wan and K.K. Liu, “Contact mechanics of a thin-walled capsule
adhered onto a rigid planar substrate,” Medical and Biological Engi-
neering and Computing, Vol. 39, pp. 605–608, 2001.
[15] C. Dietrich, M. Angelova, and B. Pouligny, “Adhesion of latex spheres
to giant phospholipid vesicles: Statics and Dynamics,”, J. Phys. II
France, Vol. 7, pp. 1651–1682, 1997.
[16] I. Demeestere, P. Barlow, and F. Leroy, “Hardening of zona pellucida
of mouse oocytes and embryos in vivo and in vitro,” Int. J. Fertil.
Womens Med., Vol. 42, No. 3, pp. 219–222, 1997.
[17] P.M. Wassarman, “Zona pellucida glycoproteins,” Annual Review of
Biochemistry, Vol. 57, pp. 415–442, 1988.
