Vision Research 46 (2006) 3381–3392
www.elsevier.com/locate/visresSlant perception, and its voluntary control, do not govern the slant 
aftereVect: Multiple slant signals adapt independently
Tomas Knapen, Raymond van Ee ¤
Helmholtz Institute, Utrecht University, Princetonplein 5, 3584CC Utrecht, The Netherlands
Received 13 December 2005; received in revised form 10 February 2006
Abstract
Although it is known that high-level spatial attention aVects adaptation for a variety of stimulus features (including binocular dispar-
ity), the inXuence of voluntary attentional control—and the associated awareness—on adaptation has remained unexplored. We devel-
oped an ambiguous surface slant adaptation stimulus with conXicting monocular and binocular slant signals that instigated two mutually
exclusive surface percepts with opposite slants. Using intermittent stimulus removal, subjects were able to voluntarily select one of the two
rivaling slant percepts for extended adaptation periods, enabling us to dissociate slant adaptation due to awareness from stimulus-
induced slant adaptation. We found that slant aftereVects (SAE) for monocular and binocular test patterns had opposite signs when
measured simultaneously. There was no signiWcant inXuence of voluntarily controlled perceptual state during adaptation on SAEs of
monocular or binocular signals. In addition, the magnitude of the binocular SAE did not correlate with the magnitude of perceived slant.
Using adaptation to one slant cue, and testing with the other cue, we demonstrated that multiple slant signals adapt independently. We
conclude that slant adaptation occurs before the level of slant awareness. Our Wndings place the site of stereoscopic slant adaptation after
disparity and eye posture are interpreted for slant [as demonstrated by Berends et al. (Berends, E. M., Liu, B., & Schor, C. M. (2005).
Stereo-slant adaptation is high level and does not involve disparity coding. Journal of Vision 5 (1), 71–80), using that disparity scales with
distance], but before other slant signals are integrated for the resulting awareness of the presented slant stimulus.
© 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Adaptation; Binocular vision; Slant perception; Bistability; Slant aftereVect
1. Introduction In bistable ambiguous perception a single unchangingAdaptation is the process through which nervous sys-
tems change their performance based upon recent input
history. AftereVects evoked by prolonged exposure to an
adaptation stimulus are ubiquitous among sensory modali-
ties and have traditionally been used to separate processing
streams. Here, we asked whether an observer’s perceptual
state aVects the generation of aftereVects. To investigate
such top-down inXuence we used ambiguous perception
and developed an adaptation stimulus that capitalizes on
voluntarily controlled perceptual awareness.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: r.vanee@phys.uu.nl (R. van Ee).0042-6989/$ - see front matter © 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.visres.2006.03.027stimulus, such as the Necker cube, instigates two mutu-
ally exclusive perceptual interpretations, which compete
for perceptual dominance. In the current study, we take
advantage of the capability of observers to exert volun-
tary mental control to select one of the two competing
alternative perceptual interpretations (review by Blake &
Logothetis, 2002, for recent comparison studies, see
Meng & Tong, 2004; van Ee, van Dam, & Brouwer, 2005).
The role of voluntarily controlled perceptual awareness
can be studied using bistable ambiguous perception
because it dissociates the observer’s perceptual state
from the stimulus. The inXuence of voluntarily controlled
perception on the generation of aftereVects has not yet
been explored but it is not unlikely to exist, as inXuences
of attention on aftereVects are well-documented for a
variety of stimulus features, among which motion
3382 T. Knapen, R. van Ee / Vision Research 46 (2006) 3381–3392(Chaudhuri, 1990; Culham, Verstraten, Ashida, & Cava-
nagh, 2000; Rezec, Krekelberg, & Dobkins, 2004), orien-
tation (Montaser-Kouhsari & Rajimehr, 2004) and
disparity (Rose, Bradshaw, & Hibbard, 2003). Generally,
diversion of attention from the adapting stimulus causes
a smaller aftereVect and a selective increase in attention
to a stimulus increases the strength of the aftereVect pro-
duced. For instance, attention to a stimulus has a multi-
plicative eVect on the gain of tuning curves of
orientation-selective neurons in V4 (McAdams & Maun-
sell, 1999; Reynolds & Chelazzi, 2004).
We focused on an aftereVect that has been widely exam-
ined: the slant aftereVect (SAE). Slant refers to the three-
dimensional rotation of a surface. Prolonged exposure to a
slanted surface causes subsequently viewed unslanted sur-
faces to be perceived as slanted in the opposite direction
(Köhler & Emery, 1947; Wenderoth, 1970) and occurs for
both monocular and binocular cues to slant (Balch, Milew-
ski, & Yonas, 1977; Bergman & Gibson, 1959). Adaptation
to slant is not dependent on the presence of both these cues;
either cue can produce SAEs when adapted to in isolation
(Bergman & Gibson, 1959; Ryan & Gillam, 1993). To study
the role of high-level inXuence on the SAE, we developed
an adaptation paradigm based upon an ambiguous slant
stimulus, referred to as slant rivalry. In slant rivalry two
distinct cues, monocular perspective and binocular dispar-
ity, specify conXicting slants which can be parametrically
varied (van Ee, van Dam, & Erkelens, 2002). An observer
experiencing slant rivalry alternately perceives a rectangu-
lar plane slanted in one direction (a perspective-dominated
percept) and a competing interpretation of a trapezoidal
plane slanted in the opposite direction (a disparity-domi-
nated percept). The two percepts in slant rivalry alternate in
a stochastic fashion similar to other bistable stimuli (van
Ee, 2005). Slant rivalry has longer perceptual durations and
higher susceptibility to voluntary control compared to
other stimuli (van Ee et al., 2005), features which facilitate
the examination of the inXuence of voluntarily controlled
perception of surface slant on adaptation. Moreover, a
recent SAE study, utilizing the fact that disparity-slant
scales with distance (an approach pioneered by Domini,
Adams, & Banks, 2001), demonstrated that the SAE corre-
lated mainly with high-level slant processing, as opposed to
low-level retinal disparities (Berends, Liu, & Schor, 2005).
This implies that voluntarily controlled slant perception
might play a signiWcant role in the generation of SAEs.
For one well-studied domain of bistable perception,
namely binocular rivalry (where the two retinae are pre-
sented with unfusable stimuli), several studies have investi-
gated the inXuence of perceptual suppression on aftereVects
(Blake, Yu, Lokey, & Norman, 1998; O’Shea & Crassini,
1981; Wade & Wenderoth, 1978; Wiesenfelder & Blake,
1990; Wiesenfelder & Blake, 1992; Wolfe, 1983). For exam-
ple, Wiesenfelder and Blake (1990) found that only com-
plex motion adaptation is inhibited by suppression,
whereas simpler translational motion adaptation remains
unaVected, pointing to a locus of rivalry suppressionbetween the successive motion processing stages. For slant
rivalry in particular, as multiple cues are involved, an inter-
esting question is where in the processing stream the bifur-
cation of information into the separate perceptual
representations occurs. One possibility is that the percep-
tual alternation occurs at the cue-level, entailing that at the
moment of an alternation one slant cue, say disparity,
becomes dominant and the other slant cue, perspective,
becomes cut oV (low-level switch). Another possibility is
that the perceptual alternation is a higher-level selection of
a certain slant, irrespective of the constituting cues.
In our experiments, subjects were instructed to hold
either one or the other slant percept under Wxed stimulus
conditions. We presented intermittent blank intervals
(Orbach, Ehrlich, & Vainstein, 1963), which were recently
developed into a psychophysical technique (Leopold,
Wilke, Maier, & Logothetis, 2002; Maier, Wilke, Logothe-
tis, & Leopold, 2003), to facilitate the dominance of one of
the two alternative percepts for extended periods, and mea-
sured simultaneous SAEs for both monocular and binocu-
lar cues separately using diVerent test stimuli. We used
brieXy Xashed test stimuli in a staircase procedure to avoid
the spurious motion cue confounds that occur when
employing the often-used technique of manual rotation
settings.
We found that the voluntary perceptual control during
adaptation had no eVect on the magnitude of the SAEs for
both cues, and that adaptation to both cues occurred inde-
pendently and simultaneously. As a further investigation
into the independence of the SAE for both depth cues we
determined the amount of cross-cue SAE in a second exper-
iment and found only small amounts of cross-cue adapta-
tion. In experiment 3, we investigated the inXuence of the
often-used manual rotation test method of measuring SAEs
for both monocular and binocular cues, showing that this
method is Xawed. Experiment 4 was conducted to clarify
the role of perceived slant magnitude on the SAE, with
results showing that perceived slant and SAE magnitude
are not correlated, meaning that it is not perceived slant
that governs the SAE.
2. Experiment 1
2.1. Methods
2.1.1. Apparatus
Subjects viewed stereoscopic images in a darkened room
on a LaCie monitor that subtended 40° £ 30° at a viewing
distance of 57 cm. The edges of the display were not visible
during the experiment. The display was driven by a Macin-
tosh G4 computer using custom OpenGL-based software.
Monitor refresh was 100 Hz and every pixel subtended
1.5 £ 1.5 min of arc. The stereograms were presented to the
two eyes by means of the standard red-green anaglyph tech-
nique. Luminances of red and green stereogram half-images
were adjusted to appear equally bright. Photometric mea-
surements showed that miniscule amounts (0.3%) of the
T. Knapen, R. van Ee / Vision Research 46 (2006) 3381–3392 3383green and the red light leaked through the custom-made
red and the green Wlter, respectively. To avoid informative
aliasing of tilted lines and dots, full-screen antialiasing was
applied. Gaze data were collected using an SMI Eyelink
data acquisition system at 250 Hz. Four subjects, three of
them naive as to the purpose of the experiment, partici-
pated.
2.1.2. Stimuli
2.1.2.1. Adaptation stimulus. The bistable adaptation stim-
ulus was a grid consisting of 8 vertical and 6 horizontal
lines, each with a width of 1.5 min of arc, arranged as
shown in Fig. 1. The adaptation stimulus was 5.5° wide,
and varied in height between 4.5° and 5.2° due to fore-
shortening. Perspective projection information speciWed
the slant of the plane about a vertical axis to be either 55°
or ¡55°. A horizontal size ratio between right and left eye
was applied in order to present a disparity-deWned slant of
¡55° or 55° (also about a vertical axis), amounting to a
110° slant conXict. This amount of conXict is well within
the range for which slant rivalry occurs (van Ee et al.,
2002). All adaptation stimuli were surrounded by a back-
ground of open squares subtending 12 min of arc each.
These background squares were randomly arranged in a
rectangular array with a density of 80% to avoid binocu-
lar mismatching (the wallpaper eVect). The aperture in the
background measured 14.6° £ 9.8°. A dot (4.5 min of arc)
was presented in the center of the display as a Wxation
point at all time during adaptation.2.1.2.2. Test stimuli. To test for adaptation to binocular
and monocular slant cues separately we used both binocu-
lar and monocular test stimuli. Test stimuli were presented
against an empty background to avoid a frontoparallel
reference.
2.1.2.3. Binocular test stimulus. The binocular test stimulus
was a horizontal line of 12 small dots whose positions were
randomly jittered, which was slanted by applying a dispar-
ity gradient. This stimulus contains a minimum of non-dis-
parity cues, to avoid contamination with monocular visual
input during test presentations. The stimulus subtended
4.3° in width and 0.7° in height, and its constituent dots
measured 1.5 min of arc.
2.1.2.4. Monocular test stimulus. Monocular test stimuli
were presented to either the left or the right eye. They con-
sisted of a grid of the same structure as that shown during
adaptation, scaled in width in order to subtend approxi-
mately the same visual angle.
2.1.3. Procedure
2.1.3.1. Adaptation. Using the periodic stimulus removal
paradigm (Orbach et al., 1963) developed by (Leopold
et al., 2002; Maier et al., 2003), subjects were able to hold
either one of the two possible percepts for extended periods
of time. During the adaptation phase of each trial, the stim-
ulus alternated in a regular 0.5 s oV 1.5 s on fashion. A dot
in the background on either the right or the left side of theFig. 1. Renderings of the anaglyphic stimuli used. (A) The slant rivalry adaptation stimulus used in experiment 1, containing both binocular and monocu-
lar slant signals. In this stereogram, both perspective and binocular disparity specify surface slant about the vertical axis. With red-over-left viewing, two
relatively stable percepts can be distinguished. In the Wrst percept, the grid recedes in depth with its right side further away (it is perceived as a slanted rect-
angle). In the other percept, the left side of the grid is further away (it is perceived as a trapezoid with the near-edge shorter than the far-edge). When the
red Wlter is over the right eye, perspective and disparity specify similar slants and the observer perceives a single stable slanted grid with its left side closer.
Demonstrations of slant rivalry can be found on http://www.phys.uu.nl/~vanee/. (B) The binocular test stimulus; an elongated patch of randomly jittered
sparse and small dots with minimal texture cues to slant. (C) The monocular test stimulus consisting of only perspective cues to slant when viewed with
one eye. The dimensions were variable, as the slant of the test stimulus was changed during the experiment. This was also the monocular adaptation stim-
ulus used in experiment 2, with dimensions equal to those of the bistable adaptation stimulus in A. (D) The binocular adaptation stimulus used in experi-
ment 2, consisting of 60 randomly and sparsely placed small dots with a minimum of monocular slant signals. (E) The experimental procedure. The Wrst
adaptation duration was 4 min, subsequent top-up adaptation durations lasted 6 s. These times are net viewing periods, discounting the periods when the
stimulus was not presented as a result of periodic stimulus removal during adaptation. Subjects were instructed to Wxate the center Wxation dot.
3384 T. Knapen, R. van Ee / Vision Research 46 (2006) 3381–3392slant stimulus indicated which side the subject was
instructed to hold in front. Subjects reported their percepts
continuously during the bistable adaptation phase. Percepts
were reported as left or right side towards the observer.
This avoided the need for subjects to know the diVerent
cues involved and discriminate between them. The dura-
tions of the percepts were used to calculate the dominance
time fractions. We used a top-up adaptation paradigm
(Graham & Rogers, 1982) in which the total duration of on
times was 4 min in the Wrst trial, and 6 s in each subsequent
trial. For two subjects, gaze data were collected during
adaptation in order to investigate if eye movements were
used to aid voluntary control of percept dominance. This
was done in separate sessions.
2.1.3.2. Test. The experimental procedure is shown in
Fig. 1. On each trial, the test stimulus was shown for 0.5 s,
after which time a question mark appeared in the center
of the screen. Subjects responded by pressing a key to
indicate whether the left or right side of the test stimulus
was slanted towards them, and a new trial commenced.
Slant perceived as frontoparallel was measured using 4
randomly interleaved one-up–one-down staircases, two
for monocular aftereVects (one for each eye) and two for
binocular aftereVects. Starting points for the staircases
were random between ¡12.5° and 12.5°, and the initial
stepsize was 5°. Staircases were terminated after 18 rever-
sals and the last 12 reversal values, of stepsize 0.3° slant
were averaged to yield the point of subjective equality
(PSE), or aftereVect. We conducted PSE measurements
prior to adaptation, in order to subtract the resultant val-
ues from the SAEs after adaptation. These null-values
increased the variability of our data when compared to
the averaging of data from symmetric conditions. There-
fore, all conditions were tested twice; left–right symmetri-
cal stimulus conWgurations were tested in separate
sessions and their absolute values averaged to rule out
any eVect of bias on the results. These pairs of measure-ments were conducted on the same day, with at least
30 min of rest separating the sessions.
2.2. Results
Before considering the SAE results, we Wrst review the
success of intermittent stimulus presentation as a means of
percept stabilization, and we consider SAE biases.
Fig. 2A shows the fractions of the total adaptation
period subjects reported seeing the two diVerent percepts.
These fractions illustrate the amount of control subjects
exerted over the slant rivalry alternations implying that
subjects were successful in holding a percept, thus ensuring
steady adaptation. Shown in Fig. 2B, the gaze data plotted
as the density of Wxation positions, demonstrate that no
speciWc eye movement patterns or excentric gaze positions
were used to aid voluntary control. In accordance with
prior results (van Dam & van Ee, 2005), the control over
perception was the result of central mechanisms.
Fig. 3 shows raw data for two subjects, selected to illus-
trate diVerent bias patterns. Bars represent an average of
two separate interleaved staircases for one cue. Each pair of
bars represents the data from a single session, one for ‘hold
disparity (D)’ and one for ‘hold perspective (P)’ control
exertion instructions. The graphs in the left column show
SAEs for adaptation slants P D 55° and D D ¡55°, while the
right column graphs show P D¡55° and D D 55° adapta-
tion data, as indicated in the legend above the graphs. Our
tests were used to null the SAE; therefore the SAE ought to
be in the same direction as the adapting slant. We deWne
biases as the average of data collected after adaptation to
positive slants and data collected after adaptation to nega-
tive slants. Subject JB shows a large consistent bias in favor
of right-towards slants for both disparity- and perspective-
based SAEs. Subject LD shows a bias close to zero. Biases
were also examined using pre-adaptation measurements,
and these conWrmed the biases found using the adaptation
data, which we used in our analysis. To examine the eVectsFig. 2. (A) The fractions of perceptual dominance during the Wrst adaptation period of a session, deWned as the total amount of time spent in a percept
divided by the total net viewing duration of the Wrst adaptation period, when subjects were instructed to hold either percept. These dominance fractions
illustrate the amount of voluntary control over perceptual state in slant rivalry when intermittent stimulus presentation is used. Bars represent mean dom-
inance fractions across four subjects, error bars indicate standard deviations. (B) Contour plots of one subject’s gaze position data for ‘hold disparity’ and
‘hold perspective’ instructions. Gaze density is plotted as a fraction of the total amount of gaze samples during an entire session. Angular precision of the
Fr
a
ct
io
n 
pe
rc
ep
tu
al
 d
om
in
an
ce
Hold PerspectiveHold Disparity
2‰0‰
} ½˚Hold PerspectiveHold Disparity
Percept Perspective Disparity Gaze density
A Bgaze data is 0.5°. The diVerent instructions do not cause a shift in Wxation position or gaze behavior.
T. Knapen, R. van Ee / Vision Research 46 (2006) 3381–3392 3385of perceptual control exertion instruction, biases were sub-
tracted from the data, and unbiased data were collapsed,
i.e., data collected after adaptation to slant values P D 55°
and D D ¡55° were combined with the negative values of
the data collected after adaptation to slant values P D ¡55°
and D D 55°. The resultant values are shown in Fig. 4A,
which illustrates for each subject the total SAE for both
perceptual control instructions measured with both the bin-
ocular and monocular test stimulus. Fig. 4B shows these
data averaged across subjects. The aftereVects tested with
the monocular test stimulus are much larger than those
tested with the binocular test stimulus, amounting to more
than 50% of the adapting slant, whereas for the binocular
test stimulus this is ca. 10%. It is evident from the SAEs in
Fig. 4A and B that adaptation to a bistable stimulus pro-
duces oppositely oriented SAEs for the two diVerent test
stimuli. The diVerence in aftereVects can be as large as 40°.
It is of interest to note here, that in pilot experiments we
included test stimuli in which both monocular perspective
and binocular disparity cues were congruent. The SAEs
Fig. 3. Raw data from frontoparallel settings of test stimuli for two sub-
jects after adaptation to a slant rivalry stimulus. These two subjects are
explicitly shown here to illustrate the occurrence of biases in the fronto-
parallel slant settings. The left graph for each subject shows data after
adaptation to positive perspective-deWned slant and negative disparity-
deWned slant, the right graphs show the data after adaptation to opposite
slants. Each pair of bars represents data obtained from a single session
devoted to one control exertion instruction. Abbreviations P and D stand
for the perceptual “hold” conditions of perspective and disparity, respec-
tively. Error bars indicate standard deviations across two staircase mea-
surements, and units on the ordinate are degrees of slant. Biases are
calculated as the average of each bar and its opposite adaptation counter-
part. Subject JB shows a right towards bias of 10° in both cues, whereas
subject LD shows no appreciable bias (1°). The biases were highly stable
across sessions for all subjects. To examine the eVects of perceived slant on
SAEs we removed the biases in subsequent plots.
Adaptation
Monocular Test
perspective = 55˚
disparity = -55˚
perspective = -55˚
disparity = 55˚
Binocular Test......
Hold
D
Hold
P
Hold
D
Hold
P
Hold
D
Hold
P
Hold
D
Hold
P
LD
SA
E 
in
 d
eg
re
e
s
JB
SA
E 
in
 d
eg
re
e
srecorded using these test stimuli were highly variable and
inconsistent within subjects. When debriefed, subjects
reported the experience of a percept of bistable slant when
actually viewing a congruent-slant test stimulus. During the
test periods in these experiments, the subjects could base
their judgment of slant on either cue, responding for one
SAE in one trial and for the other SAE in another. Clearly,
this response behavior produces divergent staircases and
inconsistent results.
DiVerences in SAE as a result of the instructions are
shown in Fig. 4C and D. For monocular tests, the ‘hold dis-
parity’ instruction SAE was subtracted from the ‘hold per-
spective’ instruction SAE, whereas for binocular tests the
‘hold perspective’ instruction SAE was subtracted from the
‘hold disparity’ instruction SAE. Thus, positive values indi-
cate that attentional state facilitates the development of
SAEs for a particular cue. For our monocular test, the
eVect of perceptual control exertion on the SAE is inconsis-
tent over subjects and the SAEs for the two instructions do
not diVer signiWcantly (post hoc Tukey, F (1,3) D 1.39,
p D 0.12). Although our binocular test shows positive values
for all subjects, these values are not signiWcant
(F (1, 3) D 2.60, p D 0.25). In sum, whether the subjects per-
ceived either the perspective-dominated or disparity-domi-
nated slant during adaptation to a 110° slant conXict
stimulus does not inXuence the SAEs recorded using both
monocular and binocular test stimuli.
3. Experiment 2
The results of experiment 1 show that SAEs for both
perspective and disparity cues are generated independently
of the dominantly perceived slant in slant rivalry. Previous
research (Balch et al., 1977; Poom & Borjesson, 1999), how-
ever, showed large cross-cue slant aftereVects that have
been taken to point to a considerable role of perceived slant
in the generation of SAEs. For instance, in one experiment
(Balch et al., 1977) used a monocularly viewed test stimulus
composed of a rotatable square grid pattern to measure
SAEs after either binocular or monocular adaptation to a
single line drawn on white paper slanted about a horizontal
axis. The single line was used to minimize the amount of
monocular information to slant in the adaptation stimulus.
They found an aftereVect of 2.7° after binocular adaptation,
whereas after monocular adaptation the aftereVect was
0.4°, showing a considerable SAE that crosses over from
binocular adaptation to monocular test stimulus. We con-
ducted a second experiment to examine slant adaptation
cross-over between cues.
Subjects adapted either to slant deWned by perspective
under monocular viewing, or to binocularly deWned slant in
a random dot pattern containing a minimum of texture
cues. To investigate whether the diVerent cues reinforce
each other’s adaptation when adapted to in concert, we also
included an adaptation condition in which subjects adapted
to a stimulus which contained both cues specifying the
same slant, a congruent slant adaptation condition.
3386 T. Knapen, R. van Ee / Vision Research 46 (2006) 3381–33923.1. Methods
Apparatus, test stimuli, subjects, stimulus/background
dimensions and procedure were identical to those used in
experiment 1. Only the adaptation stimuli diVered. All
adaptation stimuli are shown in Fig. 1. In random dot pat-
terns, texture information indicates the plane has zero slant.
This information may hamper adaptation to slant. To min-
imize the texture cue during adaptation we used a plane of
sparse, small random dots (Adams, Banks, & van Ee, 2001).
This binocular adaptation stimulus consisted of a random
dot pattern of 60 dots, with a height of 5.2° and width of
5.5°, equal to the size of the adaptation stimuli in the other
experiments. Dots subtended 1.5 min of arc. A horizontal
size ratio between right and left eye was applied in order to
present a disparity-deWned slant of 55° or ¡55°. The mon-
ocular adaptation stimulus was composed of the same grid
as was used for the adaptation to a bistable slant of experi-
ment 1. It was monocularly presented to the dominant eye.
The congruent adaptation stimulus was the same grid as
was used in experiment 1, yet with identical disparity-
deWned and perspective-deWned slant.
3.2. Results
AftereVects measured with the monocular test stimulus
are shown in Fig. 5A, SAEs measured binocularly are
shown in Fig. 5B. Adaptation to one cue generates an after-
eVect that is largest when measured using that cue,
although SAEs measured with a test stimulus containing
the other cue are signiWcant (perspective, p < 0.001, dispar-ity, p < 0.05). This means that there is cross-cue adaptation
to slant. This cross-cue SAE can be expressed as a fraction
of the SAE attained after adaptation to the stimulus used to
test the SAE (monocular adaptation, monocular test or
binocular adaptation, binocular test; Fig. 5C). Mean SAE
cross-over across subjects is 17% for disparity, and 22% for
perspective. These cross-cue SAEs might best be explained
by assuming that adaptation occurs at a high, cue indepen-
dent level.
However, SAEs after adaptation to one cue (when tested
with a test stimulus containing that cue) are not signiW-
cantly diVerent from both SAEs obtained after adaptation
to both congruently deWned slants and SAEs obtained in
experiment 1, for either binocular or monocular test stim-
uli. This means that for both cues there is no additive eVect
for adaptation to congruently deWned slant (the other cue is
adapted to the same slant) as compared to either adapta-
tion to an incongruent slant stimulus or single-cue adapta-
tion. Further comparison of these data with the
incongruent slant SAEs from experiment 1 revealed that
there is no signiWcant diminutive eVect of the other cue
being directed oppositely during adaptation. In addition,
no sign of weighted average combination of SAEs is pres-
ent in the data. It is interesting to observe that adaptation
to binocularly deWned slant causes larger binocularly
measured aftereVects than adaptation to congruent slant.
Cross-cue SAEs for the two cues used in our experiment
is evident only in those cases when the other cue is being
adapted in isolation. In cases where the cue being tested has
been adapted, there is no evidence for cross-cue SAEs.
Adaptation at a high cue-independent level, which accountsFig. 4. Results of experiment 1. (A) Slant aftereVects for binocular test stimuli (dark gray) and monocular test stimuli (light gray) after adaptation to con-
Xicting slants of §55°. The perceptual conditions are denoted by P and D for ‘hold perspective (monocular)’ and ‘hold disparity (binocular)’, respectively.
Bars represent means of collapsed data across four staircases with biases removed. Error bars denote standard deviations. (B) Data of A, averaged across
subjects. (C) Increase in binocularly tested SAE induced by selective attention to the disparity-dominated percept, for all four subjects. Values are the
diVerences between SAEs in the ‘hold disparity’ and ‘hold perspective’ instructions. (D) Increase in monocularly tested SAE induced by selective attention
to the perspective-dominated percept. Values are the diVerences between SAEs in the ‘hold perspective’ and ‘hold disparity’ instructions. (C and D) In all,
these diVerences that are smaller than the error bars in (A), demonstrate that perceptual instruction conditions alter the magnitude of neither binocularly
nor monocularly tested SAEs.
P DP D
JWB
P DP D
TK
P DP D
LD
P DP D
JB
Monocular Test Binocular Test......
Influence of instruction 
on binocular SAE
Influence of instruction 
on monocular SAE
Mean over Subjects
D
iff
e
re
n
ce
 in
 S
AE
 (d
eg
ree
s)
SA
E 
(de
gre
es
)
SA
E 
(de
gre
es
)
D
iff
e
re
n
ce
 in
 S
AE
 (d
eg
ree
s)
JBLD JWB TKP DP D
JBLD JWB TK
A
B C D
T. Knapen, R. van Ee / Vision Research 46 (2006) 3381–3392 3387for ca. 20% of the SAE found in within-cue adaptation and
test, is present only when the cue used as a test has not been
used in prior stimulation.
4. Experiment 3
From experiments 1 and 2, we conclude that slant cues
adapt independently, although we also found that cross-
cue slant adaptation, about 20% of the in-cue slant adap-
tation, is present. The previously found (Balch et al.,
1977; Poom & Borjesson, 1999) considerable cross-cue
SAEs that have generally been attributed to the percep-
tion of slant are in need of reconciliation with our data.
Here, we demonstrate that the cross-cue SAEs depend on
the use of a speciWc testing procedure used by these
researchers. They employed manual rotation of the test
plane by the subject or experimenter. The introduction of
motion cues that are information sources to surface slant
may inXuence the SAE measurements so that in fact,
other cues to slant than those that have been adapted are
being tested. This may lead to smaller SAEs, but more
importantly the use of this procedure may be responsible
for the alleged large dependency of SAEs on perceived
slant. To quantify the role of the testing procedure we
modiWed our test stimuli so that they could be rotated in
depth about a vertical axis by the subject by means of a
computer mouse.
4.1. Methods
Apparatus and stimulus/background dimensions were
identical to those used in experiments 1 and 2. Adaptation
stimuli were the grids, as used in experiment 1 and 2. Binoc-
ular and monocular test stimuli were a binocular row of
dots and a monocularly viewed grid, respectively. For this
experiment we added a congruent combination test stimu-
lus, which was the grid containing both cues specifying the
same slant.We mimicked the manual adjustment procedure from
the literature. Two subjects participated in the experi-
ment. Both had participated in experiments 1 and 2. Sub-
jects rotated the test stimuli in a to-and-fro rotating
fashion by use of a computer mouse. They were instructed
to set the test stimulus in a frontoparallel orientation.
There was no constraint on the duration of the test set-
ting. Each type of test stimulus was tested a total of 12
times, six for each adapting direction. Subjects were
instructed to Wxate the center Wxation dot. During the
adaptation phase of each trial, we did not use the periodic
stimulus removal paradigm (Leopold et al., 2002) used in
experiments 1 and 2 to aid perceptual stabilization, as this
had no eVect on the magnitude of SAEs. The net duration
of the Wrst adaptation period was identical to that in
experiments 1 and 2, however, as subjects were exposed to
the test stimulus for a longer amount of time, which could
lead to dissipation of the SAE, top-up adaptation
duration was extended to 30 s.
4.2. Results
Fig. 6 shows the data contrasted to data from experi-
ment 1 for two subjects. The diVerent signs for SAEs mea-
sured using disparity and perspective test stimuli found in
experiments 1 and 2 are evident in the manual rotation test
data also, conWrming the separate adaptation for both cues.
Disparity results are signiWcantly diVerent from perspective
measurements at the 1% level (post hoc Tukey test). The
SAEs collected using the congruent combination test stimu-
lus, that contains both cues to slant, are comparable to the
monocular perspective SAEs. Earlier research (Poom &
Borjesson, 1999), employing physical stimuli, used binocu-
larly viewed monocular test stimuli as binocular test stim-
uli. Thus, these stimuli are not purely binocular stimuli, as
they contain both cues, as do our combination test stimuli.
The use of physical stimuli in this manner has lead
researchers to the conclusion that there is large adaptationFig. 5. Results of experiment 2 in which we examined the cross-cue SAE. (A and B) Slant aftereVects with adaptation to the cue being tested, with adapta-
tion to the other cue, or both cues deWning congruent slant. White bars indicate aftereVects after monocular adaptation, light gray bars represent after-
eVects after binocular adaptation, black bars stand for SAEs after congruent adaptation, which elucidate that there is no additive eVect of the diVerent
cues’ simultaneous adaptation. All adaptation slants were §55°. Error bars denote standard deviations. (C) Amount of cross-cue SAE (tested with the
non-adapted cue) plotted as the fraction of the maximum SAE, i.e., when the adaptation stimulus contained only the cue being tested, calculated from the
data shown in (A and B). White and gray bars represent cross-cue SAE fractions for monocular and binocular test, respectively.
3388 T. Knapen, R. van Ee / Vision Research 46 (2006) 3381–3392cross-over between monocular and binocular channels
when in fact, binocular and monocular cues can show
oppositely oriented SAEs when separated using computer
generated stimuli.
In addition, the high level of variance in the data gath-
ered with the manual rotation test demonstrates the rota-
tion test stimulus’ lack of reliability when compared to the
short presentation staircase method.
5. Experiment 4
To ensure reliable slant rivalry, we were forced to use a
reference surround. However, the inXuence of this surround
on slant adaptation is unclear. We investigated how SAE
magnitude and perceived slant magnitude are inXuenced by
the surround.
5.1. Methods
5.1.1. SAE
Apparatus and stimulus/background dimensions were
identical to those used in experiment 2, with the following
exception: for eYciency no intermittent stimulus presentation
was used and adaptation periods were shortened to 3min, the
net adaptation time of experiment 2. The adaptation stimulus
was a random dot plane, slanted 55° using binocular dispar-
ity, presented either with or without the frontoparallel refer-
ence used in the previous experiments (see Fig. 1). Two
staircase measurements were conducted per session. These
staircases terminated after 12 reversals. Gaze measurement
equipment and procedures were identical to those of experi-
ment 1. Two subjects participated in this experiment.
Fig. 6. Results of experiment 3, showing the SAEs after adaptation to a
bistable stimulus for two subjects (diVerently colored bars) for the manual
adjustment procedure, compared to the staircase data from experiment 1.
All adaptation slants were §55°. Results are displayed at the same scale as
the results of experiment 1 in Fig. 4A. D and P stand for disparity and per-
spective deWned test stimuli, respectively, and C stands for combination
test stimuli in which both cues were present and deWned a congruent slant.
Error bars denote standard deviations. SAE cue segregation is far more
evident when the superXuous, unadapted motion cues that are present in
the manual rotation procedure are absent. More importantly, the manual
rotation test procedure also causes the combination test data to be biased
towards the monocular SAE. Also, intersubject variability decreases for
the staircase procedure.
D
D
P
P
C
Manual adjustment
procedure
Staircase procedureJB TK
30
20
10
-105.1.2. Slant estimation
Separate from the adaptation sessions, we measured per-
ceived slant. Subjects were shown a random dot plane, iden-
tical to the adaptation stimulus used for adaptation in this
experiment. Since perceived slant depends on the presenta-
tion duration (Van Ee & Erkelens, 1996), we probed slant
estimations at the moments that were used during the adap-
tation experiments. To mimick the slants perceived during a
slant adaptation experiment, stimulus presentation periods
were 3 min in the Wrst trial, and 6 s in all subsequent trials. A
session for this slant estimation experiment consisted of 20
repetitions per condition. After inspection of the stimulus,
subjects were asked to report the perceived slant of the
plane by use of a dial that could be set using a computer
mouse (Van Ee & Erkelens, 1996).1 Subjects performed 4 of
these sessions, 2 with background and 2 without, for slants
of §55°.
5.2. Results
Fig. 7 shows the SAEs and slant estimates in the left and
right column, respectively. Gaze measurements indicated
that mean gaze position during the two conditions did not
diVer more than 0.75°, and that there were no excentric gaze
shifts. Both subjects report greater SAEs when no reference
was present (p < 0.0001). The eVect for perceived slant is
reversed, i.e., subjects perceive greater slant when the stimu-
1 A sensible objection to this metrical slant-estimation method is that it
is hard to interpret the data because a slant angle that is estimated at 35° in
one trial might look like 40° in another trial. Previous work has demon-
strated, however, that subjects have a relatively constant internal reference
and that they do not regard this task as diYcult. This estimation method
has been used previously for real planes and when subjects wore distorting
lenses (Adams et al., 2001). In addition, a similar metrical depth estimation
method was successfully used for volumetric stimuli (van Ee & Anderson,
2001).
Fig. 7. Results of experiment 4, in which we investigated the role of the ref-
erence surround on perceived slant magnitude and SAE magnitude. Pre-
sented adaptation and estimation slants were §55°. Error bars denote §1
SEM. The left and right graphs depict SAEs and perceived slant, respec-
tively. For both slant estimation and SAE there is a signiWcant eVect of the
surround, however, these eVects are reversed for the magnitude of per-
ceived slant and the SAE. Although subjects perceive a greater slant when
the stimulus is surrounded by a reference surface, adaptation results in
SAEs of smaller magnitude. Evidently, binocular SAEs are not governed
by the perceived slant during adaptation.
JB TK
SAE
SA
E 
(de
gre
e
s)
JB TK
Perceived slant
pe
rc
ei
ve
d 
sla
nt
 (d
eg
re
e
s)
BackgroundNo background
5
4
3
2
1
60
50
40
30
20
10
T. Knapen, R. van Ee / Vision Research 46 (2006) 3381–3392 3389lus is surrounded by a reference plane (p < 10¡6). The sur-
round’s opposite inXuence on perceived slant and slant
adaptation magnitude conXicts with the hypothesis that it
is perceived slant that governs slant adaptation: although
subjects perceive more slant during adaptation when the
surround is included, the SAE is smaller.
6. Discussion
We examined whether slant perception, and its volun-
tary control, governs the SAE, leading to several main Wnd-
ings. First, there is no eVect of voluntarily controlled
perceptual state on the magnitude of the SAE for either of
the cues used to invoke slant rivalry. Second, perspective-
deWned slant and disparity-deWned slant adapt indepen-
dently to a large extent. Third, the widely used standard
method for examining slant aftereVects, i.e., the procedure
of manual rotation of a test stimulus, is Xawed. Fourth, the
magnitude of binocular SAEs does not correlate with
perceived slant. We will discuss each of these Wndings
separately, commencing with the issue on methodology.
6.1. Flawed manual adjustment procedure
The standard way of quantifying slant aftereVects is the
aforementioned manual adjustment procedure in which
the subject rotates the test stimulus, thereby introducing
spurious unadapted motion cues. (A notable exception
here is Berends et al. (2005), who used a diVerent method,
see below.) We demonstrated that the adjustment proce-
dure brings about reduced SAEs that are highly variable
(experiment 3), which compares well with the variability
and the size of the aftereVect for this procedure reported
in the literature. Furthermore, we showed that the combi-
nation of binocular and monocular cues in the test stimu-
lus results in a SAE that is biased towards the monocular
SAE when using the manual rotation method. This bias
could have led other studies to mistakenly conclude that
there is considerable cross-cue adaptation. It is remark-
able that the manual adjustment procedure has been
widely used as there were early hints that the method is
unreliable. Wenderoth (1970) reported a control experi-
ment using a staircase method Wnding large SAEs (that
were even parametrically dependent on the adapting
slant). This Wnding was not reproduced by Poom and Bor-
jesson (1999) using the adjustment procedure. Wenderoth
went as far as noting that the adjustment procedure is
unsatisfactory for studying SAEs.
Moreover, one out of a series of experiments by Poom
and Börjesson shows a clear decrease in the amount of SAE
cross-over between monocular and binocular slant cues
when using a 2AFC task, as opposed to the adjustment
procedure that they used in the rest of their paper. These
authors even proposed that “the motion in the test condi-
tions interfered with the adaptation eVect”, but they did not
reinterpret their other results obtained with the adjustment
procedure. Initially, the cross-cue adaptation had beentaken in the literature as evidence for either an inXuence of
texture cues or for slant adaptation. After Balch et al.
(1977) and Ryan and Gillam (1993) had provided evidence
that it is not texture of a surface patch that subjects adapt
to, cross-cue adaptation found with the adjustment proce-
dure had been alleged commonly as evidence for perceived
slant adaptation.
6.2. Cross-cue slant adaptation
We quantiWed the amount of SAE that can be mea-
sured by testing one slant cue when adapted to the other
slant cue (experiment 2). The magnitude of SAE crossover
was small (about 20%) compared to the SAE measured
for a cue that is adapted. We reasoned that adaptation to
a bistable slant rivalry stimulus could hamper the devel-
opment of a SAE for either cue because of the other cue’s
oppositely oriented slant information. One would then
predict to Wnd greater aftereVects when adapting to sin-
gle-cue or congruent-cue stimuli. We found, however, no
signiWcant diVerences in SAEs across single-cue, congru-
ent-cue, and conXicting-cue slant adaptation for either
cue. From this latter result, we conclude that adaptation
to the cues used in our stimuli occurs mainly indepen-
dently.
Balch et al. showed full SAE crossover between slant
cues employing line drawings and textured paper, which
was again taken as evidence for perceived slant adapta-
tion. A few years earlier, however, Epstein and Morgan-
Paap (1974) reported a SAE crossover of approximately
50% when subjects adapted to a trapezoidal shape and
set a binocularly shown luminous line. These latter
results are more in line with the 20% cross-over that we
found. A diVerence between our stimuli and that of the
precursors discussed here is that the stimuli used before
were based on physical apparatuses with physically
slanted planes as slant stimuli. When stimuli are drawn
on paper the shape of the drawn stimulus outline can be
contradicted or reinforced by the texture of the paper on
which the outline is drawn, giving rise to larger cross-cue
aftereVects.
6.3. Stable perception of slant rivalry stimuli
Subjects have a limited degree of voluntary control over
their perceptual state during slant rivalry and can increase
the preponderance of the desired interpretation to approxi-
mately 70% (van Ee et al., 2005). Using the intermittent
stimulus removal (Orbach et al., 1963) as a psychophysical
technique (Leopold et al., 2002; Maier et al., 2003), the
amount of control observers could successfully exert was
increased considerably, to approximately 90% in the pres-
ent study. We demonstrated that subjects were able to exert
this inXuence without resorting to the aid of speciWc eye
movement patterns or gaze positions, see Fig. 2. This is in
accordance with recent results which demonstrate that both
(micro-)saccades and blinks are necessary for neither the
3390 T. Knapen, R. van Ee / Vision Research 46 (2006) 3381–3392occurrence of (van Dam & van Ee, 2005) nor voluntary
control over (van Dam & van Ee, 2006) perceptual alterna-
tions in slant rivalry.
6.4. EVect of perceived slant on SAE
If slant adaptation occurs at a stage where slant infor-
mation is represented in a high-level, cue-independent
fashion, inXuence on the generation of SAEs through vol-
untary control would be more likely than when slant
adaptation occurs at a cue-dependent low stage. We dem-
onstrated (experiment 1) that perceptual state and selec-
tive attention to cues during adaptation do not inXuence
the magnitude of the SAE for both perspective and dis-
parity slant cues, suggesting that slant adaptation is a
low-level process. We are able to discount most of the
Wndings that were responsible for the idea of perceived
slant adaptation, as those were all based upon a Xawed
method (experiment 3).
A recent study (Berends et al., 2005) demonstrated that
adaptation to disparity-deWned slant occurs at relatively
high levels, i.e., after eye posture is incorporated into the
disparity processing stream. These researchers used the
aforementioned feature that perceived slant from a gradi-
ent of disparity depends critically on the viewing distance
(Domini et al., 2001). Here we took non-disparity cues into
account that also inXuence perceived slant. We also used
the frontal surround, which facilitates the generation of
slant rivalry, to investigate the hypothesis that perceived
slant governs the SAE. We demonstrated that the surround
inXuences perceived slant and SAE magnitude oppositely;
perceived slant increases by the introduction of a surround
whereas the SAE decreases (experiment 4). Thus, perceived
slant magnitude does not determine SAE magnitude. The
eVect of the surround on the generation of the SAE can be
seen in light of recent results by Taya, Sato, and Nakamizo
(2005) who reported that binocular SAEs are not retino-
topic, and that the magnitude of the SAE is dependent on
the size of the adapting stimulus. In our experiments, the
inclusion of the frontoparallel reference surround induces
non-retinotopic slant adaptation to the frontoparallel
plane, thus diminishing the SAE due to the center stimulus
for conditions in which the background was presented.
Also, the adaptation stimulus we used was far smaller than
used elsewhere in literature (Adams et al., 2001; Berends
et al., 2005; Taya et al., 2005), leading to a smaller binocular
SAE.
The SAE data of Berends et al. (2005) have sometimes
been interpreted as showing that it is perceived slant that
adapts. Our results, combined with those of Berends et al.
(2005), show that it is not perceived slant that adapts, and
position the site of disparity-slant adaptation after eye
posture incorporation, but before slant signals are inte-
grated for the awareness of slant: multiple slant signals
adapt independently. It remains to be seen whether simi-
lar reasoning applies to the results of Domini et al.
(2001).6.5. Physiology
We found that monocular perspective and binocular dis-
parity cues were simultaneously adapted in opposite direc-
tions after viewing a slant rivalry stimulus (Fig. 4). This
suggests the separation of the diVerent cues’ channels as dis-
tinct from a putative high-level cue independent slant chan-
nel. We reasoned that the switch between the two percepts
would occur before information reaches the cue-independent
slant channel, but after slants based on either cue alone have
been resolved. In slant rivalry the slant information based on
the two cues separately is relatively well elaborated before it
enters the process of slant rivalry. A division of stimulus-
related and percept-related channels is supported by recent
physiological Wndings. Welchman, Deubelius, Conrad, Bult-
hoV, and Kourtzi (2005) have used a stimulus akin to ours,
and found that fMRI signal in lower visual cortical areas
correlates well with the stimulus parameters, whereas higher
visual cortical areas such as lateral-occipital (LOC) and
medial temporal (MT+/V5) cortex show higher correlations
with perceived slant or depth structure. Brouwer, van Ee, and
Schwarzbach (2005) reported that during slant rivalry fMRI
activation correlating with alternations towards the dispar-
ity-dominated percept was found in a number of visual areas,
including dorsal visual areas V3A, V7, V4d-topo and visual
areas MT+ and LO. No activation was found for alterna-
tions towards the perspective-dominated percept. Two rela-
tively high areas have been targeted by neurophysiologists
using single-cell recordings in macaque. These areas are
located in parietal and temporal cortex, part of the dorsal
and ventral stream, respectively. The caudal intraparietal
area (CIP) was found to contain neurons that are selective
for slant from both monocular and binocular cues by Tsut-
sui, Jiang, Yara, Sakata, and Taira (2001), Tsutsui, Sakata,
Naganuma, and Taira (2002), Tsutsui, Taira, and Sakata
(2005). The same role was found to be played by neurons in
the inferior temporal (IT) cortex (Liu, Vogels, & Orban,
2004). In both these areas, activity correlates with the presen-
tation of slant independent from the cues that produce it. Of
these two areas, IT is likely more involved in the use of dis-
parity gradients (Janssen, Vogels, Liu, & Orban, 2001; Jans-
sen, Vogels, & Orban, 1999, 2000) and monocular depth cues
as a means to establish object selectivity. CIP, being part of
the dorsal stream, is more involved in the appreciation of
depth as a means to guide action and visual Weld segregation.
Interesting questions remain, for instance how these
areas interact, and how diVerent stimulus cues serve to
stimulate them diVerentially. Investigating these areas
under conditions of mentally selected slant (such as possi-
ble in the slant rivalry paradigm) might reveal answers to
these open questions.
7. Conclusions
Slant perception and its voluntary control did not gov-
ern the SAE for either monocular or binocular signals.
There was relatively small cross-cue SAE. We conclude that
T. Knapen, R. van Ee / Vision Research 46 (2006) 3381–3392 3391slant speciWed by single cues is elaborated at relatively low
and cue-dependent levels, and that perceptual switching
between the two possible slant rivalry percepts occurs
above these levels in the visual processing hierarchy.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Dr. M.S. Banks for thoughtful
discussion on the interpretation of the experiments and Dr.
M. van der Smagt for fruitful discussions on the design of
the experiments. The authors were supported by a grant
from the Netherlands Organization for ScientiWc Research
(NWO) assigned to RvE.
References
Adams, W. J., Banks, M. S., & van Ee, R. (2001). Adaptation to three-
dimensional distortions in human vision. Nature Neuroscience, 4(11),
1063–1064.
Balch, W., Milewski, A., & Yonas, A. (1977). Mechanisms underlying the
slant aftereVect. Perception and Psychophysics, 21(6), 581–585.
Berends, E. M., Liu, B., & Schor, C. M. (2005). Stereo-slant adaptation is
high level and does not involve disparity coding. Journal of Vision, 5(1),
71–80.
Bergman, R. G., & Gibson, J. J. (1959). The negative after-eVect of the per-
ception of a surface slanted in the third dimension. American Journal of
Psychology, 72, 364–374.
Blake, R., & Logothetis, N. K. (2002). Visual competition. Nature Reviews.
Neuroscience, 3(1), 13–21.
Blake, R., Yu, K., Lokey, M., & Norman, H. (1998). Binocular rivalry and
motion perception. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 10(1), 46–60.
Brouwer, G. J., van Ee, R., & Schwarzbach, J. (2005). Activation in visual
cortex correlates with the awareness of stereoscopic depth. Journal of
Neuroscience, 25(45), 10403–10413.
Chaudhuri, A. (1990). Modulation of the motion aftereVect by selective
attention. Nature, 344(6261), 60–62.
Culham, J. C., Verstraten, F. A., Ashida, H., & Cavanagh, P. (2000).
Independent aftereVects of attention and motion. Neuron, 28(2),
607–615.
Domini, F., Adams, W., & Banks, M. S. (2001). 3D after-eVects are due to
shape and not disparity adaptation. Vision Research, 41(21), 2733–
2739.
Epstein, W., & Morgan-Paap, C. L. (1974). AftereVect of inspection of a
perspectival stimulus for slant depth: a new normalization eVect.
Perception and Psychophysics, 16, 299–302.
Graham, M., & Rogers, B. (1982). Simultaneous and successive contrast
eVects in the perception of depth from motion-parallax and stereo-
scopic information. Perception, 11(3), 247–262.
Janssen, P., Vogels, R., Liu, Y., & Orban, G. A. (2001). Macaque inferior
temporal neurons are selective for three-dimensional boundaries and
surfaces. Journal of Neuroscience, 21(23), 9419–9429.
Janssen, P., Vogels, R., & Orban, G. A. (1999). Macaque inferior temporal
neurons are selective for disparity-deWned three-dimensional shapes.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences the United States of
America, 96(14), 8217–8222.
Janssen, P., Vogels, R., & Orban, G. A. (2000). Three-dimensional shape
coding in inferior temporal cortex. Neuron, 27(2), 385–397.
Köhler, W., & Emery, D. A. (1947). Figural after-eVects in the third dimen-
sion of visual space. American Journal of Psychology, 60, 159–201.
Leopold, D. A., Wilke, M., Maier, A., & Logothetis, N. K. (2002). Stable
perception of visually ambiguous patterns. Nature Neuroscience, 5(6),
605–609.
Liu, Y., Vogels, R., & Orban, G. A. (2004). Convergence of depth from tex-
ture and depth from disparity in macaque inferior temporal cortex.
Journal of Neuroscience, 24(15), 3795–3800.Maier, A., Wilke, M., Logothetis, N. K., & Leopold, D. A. (2003). Percep-
tion of temporally interleaved ambiguous patterns. Current Biology,
13(13), 1076–1085.
McAdams, C. J., & Maunsell, J. H. (1999). EVects of attention on orienta-
tion-tuning functions of single neurons in macaque cortical area V4.
Journal of Neuroscience, 19(1), 431–441.
Meng, M., & Tong, F. (2004). Can attention selectively bias bistable per-
ception? DiVerences between binocular rivalry and ambiguous Wgures.
Journal of Vision, 4(7), 539–551.
Montaser-Kouhsari, L., & Rajimehr, R. (2004). Attentional modulation of
adaptation to illusory lines. Journal of Vision, 4(6), 434–444.
O’Shea, R. P., & Crassini, B. (1981). Interocular transfer of the motion
after-eVect is not reduced by binocular rivalry. Vision Research, 21(6),
801–804.
Orbach, J., Ehrlich, D., & Vainstein, E. (1963). Reversibility of the necker
cube: III. EVects of interpolation on reversal rate of the cube presented
repetitively. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 17, 571–582.
Poom, L., & Borjesson, E. (1999). Perceptual depth synthesis in the
visual system as revealed by selective adaptation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology. Human Perception and Performance,
25(2), 504–517.
Reynolds, J. H., & Chelazzi, L. (2004). Attentional modulation of visual
processing. Annual Reviews of Neuroscience, 27, 611–647.
Rezec, A., Krekelberg, B., & Dobkins, K. R. (2004). Attention enhances
adaptability: evidence from motion adaptation experiments. Vision
Research, 44(26), 3035–3044.
Rose, D., Bradshaw, M. F., & Hibbard, P. B. (2003). Attention aVects the
stereoscopic depth aftereVect. Perception, 32(5), 635–640.
Ryan, C., & Gillam, B. (1993). A proximity-contingent stereoscopic depth
aftereVect: evidence for adaptation to disparity gradients. Perception,
22(4), 403–418.
Taya, S., Sato, M., & Nakamizo, S. (2005). Stereoscopic depth aftereVects
without retinal position correspondence between adaptation and test
stimuli. Vision Research, 45(14), 1857–1866.
Tsutsui, K., Jiang, M., Yara, K., Sakata, H., & Taira, M. (2001). Integra-
tion of perspective and disparity cues in surface-orientation-selec-
tive neurons of area CIP. Journal of Neurophysiology, 86(6), 2856–
2867.
Tsutsui, K., Sakata, H., Naganuma, T., & Taira, M. (2002). Neural corre-
lates for perception of 3D surface orientation from texture gradient.
Science(5592), 409–412.
Tsutsui, K., Taira, M., & Sakata, H. (2005). Neural mechanisms of three-
dimensional vision. Neuroscience Research, 51(3), 221–229.
van Dam, L. C., & van Ee, R. (2005). The role of (micro)saccades and
blinks in perceptual bi-stability from slant rivalry. Vision Research,
45(18), 2417–2435.
van Dam, L. C., & van Ee, R. (2006). The role of saccades in exerting vol-
untary control in perceptual and binocular rivalry. Vision Research,
46(6–7), 787–799.
van Ee, R. (2005). Dynamics of perceptual bi-stability for stereoscopic
slant rivalry and a comparison with grating, house-face, and Necker
cube rivalry. Vision Research, 45(1), 29–40.
van Ee, R., & Anderson, B. L. (2001). Motion direction, speed and orienta-
tion in binocular matching. Nature, 410(6829), 690–694.
Van Ee, R., & Erkelens, C. J. (1996). Temporal aspects of binocular slant
perception. Vision Research, 36(1), 43–51.
van Ee, R., van Dam, L. C., & Brouwer, G. J. (2005). Voluntary control
and the dynamics of perceptual bi-stability. Vision Research, 45(1),
41–55.
van Ee, R., van Dam, L. C., & Erkelens, C. J. (2002). Bi-stability in per-
ceived slant when binocular disparity and monocular perspective spec-
ify diVerent slants. Journal of Vision, 2(9), 597–607.
Wade, N. J., & Wenderoth, P. (1978). The inXuence of colour and contour
rivalry on the magnitude of the tilt after-eVect. Vision Research, 18(7),
827–835.
Welchman, A. E., Deubelius, A., Conrad, V., BulthoV, H. H., & Kourtzi, Z.
(2005). 3D shape perception from combined depth cues in human
visual cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 8(6), 820–827.
3392 T. Knapen, R. van Ee / Vision Research 46 (2006) 3381–3392Wenderoth, P. (1970). A visual spatial aftereVect of surface slant. American
Journal of Psychology, 83(4), 576–590.
Wiesenfelder, H., & Blake, R. (1990). The neural site of binocular rivalry
relative to the analysis of motion in the human visual system. Journal
of Neuroscience, 10(12), 3880–3888.Wiesenfelder, H., & Blake, R. (1992). Binocular rivalry suppression dis-
rupts recovery from motion adaptation. Vision Neuroscience, 9(2),
143–148.
Wolfe, J. M. (1983). Afterimages, binocular rivalry, and the temporal prop-
erties of dominance and suppression. Perception, 12(4), 439–445.
