CTGA: the database for genetic disorders in
Arab populations
Ghazi O. Tadmouri*, Mahmoud Taleb Al Ali, Sarah Al-Haj Ali and Najib Al Khaja
Centre for Arab Genomic Studies, PO Box 22252, Dubai, United Arab Emirates
Received July 4, 2005; Revised and Accepted September 17, 2005
ABSTRACT
The Arabs comprise a genetically heterogeneous
group that resulted from the admixture of different
populations throughout history. They share many
common characteristics responsible for a consider-
able proportion of perinatal and neonatal mortalities.
To this end, the Centre for Arab Genomic Studies
(CAGS) launched a pilot project to construct the
‘CatalogueofTransmissionGeneticsinArabs’(CTGA)
database for genetic disorders in Arabs. Information
in CTGA is drawn frompublished research andmined
hospital records. The database offers web-based
basic and advanced search approaches. In either
case, the final search result is a detailed HTML record
that includes text-, URL- and graphic-based fields. At
present, CTGA hosts entries for 692 phenotypes and
235 related genes described in Arab individuals. Of
these, 213 phenotypic descriptions and 22 related
genes were observed in the Arab population of the
UnitedArabEmirates (UAE). These results emphasize
the role of CTGA as an essential tool to promote sci-
entific research on genetic disorders in the region.
The priority of CTGA is to provide timely information
on the occurrence of genetic disorders in Arab indi-
viduals. It is anticipated that data fromArab countries
other than the UAE will be exhaustively searched and
incorporated in CTGA (http://www.cags.org.ae).
INTRODUCTION
The Arabs, comprising of 315 million individuals, are living in
regions encompassing Mesopotamia, Middle East, Arabian
Gulf, North Africa and parts of East and West Africa.
In addition, Arab diasporas, with an estimated size of 30 mill-
ion people, are encountered in all over the world. Although,
Arabs consist of heterogeneous groups and many isolates, they
share many common characteristics with important influence
on their genetic constitution. These include: high rates of
inbreeding or consanguineous marriage, elevated birth rates,
child bearing in older maternal age and lack of public health
measures directed at the control and prevention of congenital
and genetically determined disorders (1). All these factors
make genetic and congenital disorders responsible for a con-
siderable proportion of perinatal and neonatal mortalities in
Arab populations. In fact, congenital malformations are the
second leading cause of infant mortality in Bahrain, Kuwait,
Oman and Qatar and are the leading cause of infant mortality
(40.3%) in the United Arab Emirates [UAE; (2,3)].
Since the 1950s, Arab countries have made progress in
medical services leading to better life expectancies and access
to health care. Similarly, Arab scholars working in the field of
biomedical sciences are giving more attention to publish their
results at national or international levels (4). Concurrently,
several attempts to review different aspects of genetic diseases
in Arab populations were conducted (5–8). However, data
were rapidly outdated as new disorders were described in
Arabs. To this end, the Centre for Arab Genomic Studies
(CAGS) launched a pilot project to construct the ‘Catalogue
of Transmission Genetics in Arabs’ (CTGA) database for gen-
etic disorders in Arabs to educate the medical community and
raise public awareness in at-risk populations.
SOURCE OF INFORMATION
In accordance with its objective to alleviate human suffering
from genetic diseases in the Arab World, CAGS coordinated
the collection of data on genetic disorders in the UAE popu-
lation as a model system to be implemented in other Arab
countries in the future. Information in CTGA was drawn from
two main sources:
(i) Nationally and internationally published literature: Biblio-
graphic databases were screened for relevant articles on
genetic disorders in the UAE. Whenever possible, compre-
hensive manual scan of hardcopies of national peer-
reviewed journals was conducted.
(ii) Laboratory records: In major hospitals of the UAE,
patient records covering the last 10–15 years were studied
prospectively. These hospitals included laboratories for
molecular diagnostics, cytogenetics, biochemistry and
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +971 4 398 6 777; Fax: +971 4 398 0 999; Email: tadmouri@hotmail.com, cags@emirates.net.ae
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
D602–D606 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gkj015
others (1). Detailed information, including the mutation,
was recorded using a standardized method. Patient records
prove to be an invaluable source of information since they
indicated the presence of several inherited disorders for
which occurrence data had not been published before.
While data on genetic disorders in patients of various
nationalities were collected, only those obtained from UAE
nationals and other Arab patients appear in the CTGA data-
base. Furthermore, personal communication with local geneti-
cists provided further insight into the spectrum of inherited
disorders in the UAE. Succinctly, the magnitude of genetic
disorders and congenital abnormalities reported from the Arab
population of the UAE alone (at least 200) demonstrates the
efficacy of the algorithm adapted when compared to a review
on the subject (9).
(a)
(b)
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D603
THE CTGA DATABASE
The current version of CTGA is a textual database whose
structure depends on a web-based search that uses an indexing
system for rapid mining of information. As the retrieval
of information from the CTGA database is as important as
filling data in, we paid considerable attention to provide
the users with the option of performing complicated queries
to obtain specific results without sacrificing the simplicity.
At present, the CTGA database (http://www.cags.org.ae)
(c)
Figure 1. The online layouts of the CTGA database: (a) Search, (b) results and (c) details.
D604 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
can be queried using two modes of search: basic or advanced.
In basic search, there is a standard query box in which the
user may enter one or more keywords. By default, the CTGA
search engine permits the use of wildcards and automatically
processes multiple keywords with the ‘AND’ Boolean
operator. However, the power of querying at CTGA lies in
its advanced search features. At this point, the user can employ
a multitude of user-friendly search combinations according
to the name of disease, its classification, symptoms, related
gene loci, OMIM number, chromosome location, mode of
inheritance, geographic location and others. Proper use of
advanced search inevitably increases specificity and narrows
down results to a small number of relevant records (Figure 1).
In both types of search, the user issues a command that is
interpreted in the CTGA server, processed by the system’s
language, and results are sent to the user’s browser as a stand-
ard HTML document with no requirement for any additional
software. Query results are alphabetically listed in table form
and include the names and corresponding OMIM numbers of
genes and genetic disorders described in the Arab people.
By selecting a name in the table of results, the user is able
to access extensive details relating to a specific gene or genetic
disorder (Figure 1).
A detailed record includes text-, URL- and graphic-based
fields. The title and alternative names indicate the primary title
and alternative titles and symbols of the disorder or gene.
A graphical map demonstrates the geographical origin
of the individuals described in the entry. A disorder is cat-
egorized according to the World Health Organization Interna-
tional Classification of Disease (WHO-ICD) 10th revision.
OMIM number is a URL-based field that takes the user to
the corresponding file of the gene or disorder at the Online
Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database (10).
Information regarding Gene Map Locus is drawn primarily
from OMIM. Mode of Inheritance, Description and Molecular
Genetics are textual fields that contain summaries on the clin-
ical features and genetic pathology for the corresponding
entry. Epidemiology in the Arab World is the major part of
an entry since it includes a detailed review of research analyses
regarding the gene loci or clinical phenotypes in Arab indi-
viduals. References within an entry are linked to their corres-
ponding PubMed abstracts except for articles from national
peer-reviewed medical journals not indexed in PubMed. Fol-
lowing the references are two URL-based fields. Related
CTGA Records takes the user to any intra-CTGA entry(ies)
with a shared relationship(s) while Links anchors at external
resources with additional information. Authors who contribute
with additions or changes to the entry are given credit in the
Contributors field along with the date when the contribution
was submitted. Changes made by the editorial staff are docu-
mented in the Edit History field (Figure 1).
As of October 1 2005, CTGA had 692 phenotype entries
and 235 related gene entries with descriptions in Arab indi-
viduals. In the UAE, CTGA information includes about 213
phenotypic descriptions (including 14 in Arab non-UAE
nationals) and 22 related genes (including 3 in Arab non-
UAE nationals). Currently, authors at the Centre for Arab
Genomic Studies create about 25 entries and update an equi-
valent number each month. Although CTGA has a short life-
span on the public domain of the Internet, it averages at least
150 unique users per day. The peak of simultaneous users
accessing the database usually occurs between 03:00 and
12:00 GMT.
SIGNIFICANCE OF CTGA
A tool for decision-making in health-related domains
The geographical distributions of genetic disorders in CTGA
can either be restricted to small locales (Stuve–Wiedemann
syndrome), commonly widespread (beta-thalassemia), or
reflect a patchy distribution (alpha-thalassemia) although a
high prevalence is expected in the region (1). On the other
hand, the molecular/biochemical pathologies in25% of gen-
etic disorders described in Arabs have not been determined
yet, thus, these serve as excellent candidates for linkage ana-
lyses and genotype/phenotype studies (1). Obviously, the
interpretation of these data is an important tool for authorities
to decide on future health-related strategies and to propose
research directions on disorders for which information is still
scant.
A hub of locally produced scientific information on
genetic disorders
Current data on genetic disorders in CTGA reflect a bias in the
geographical distribution. At present, genetic disorders recor-
ded in Tunisia, Lebanon, Morocco and Saudi Arabia add up to
40% of all genetic disorders in Arab populations. The main
reason for this is the well-established custom of scientific
reporting at international level, while in other Arab countries
reports mostly appear in national publications or stay confined
to non-public laboratory records (11). Consequently, by pub-
lishing scientific information locally produced in peer-
reviewed journals and unpublished data collected from records
of laboratories from the Arab World, CTGA exposes valuable
local information that is not accessible to the large scientific
community.
A catalyst for establishing collaborations with
Arab scientific groups
The extended consanguineous family structure, commonly
present in Arab societies, is an important factor leading to
the propensity of severe congenital inherited diseases in
most Arab populations (1). Incidentally, genetic disorders in
Arabs tend to display peculiar distribution patterns not present
in many other world populations. A major model that explains
this concept is the vertical dissemination of a genetic mutation
in an Arab family, where mutation carriers mostly remain
concentrated within the extended family; thus, offering
great opportunities to depict the genetic nature of their disease
predisposition (1). In view of all the above, the wealth of
information that CTGA is accumulating is, in our opinion,
an indispensable tool for scientists to recognize Arab col-
leagues working on similar domains and decide on possible
collaborations or exchange of know-how.
An educational tool on genetic disorders in the region
Studies have clearly indicated that the correct dissemination of
knowledge is an important step towards the eradication of
genetic disorders in Arab populations (12). The CTGA
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D605
database plays such an educational role as it addresses both the
medical communities and at-risk populations.
FUTURE OF CTGA
The priority of CTGA is to provide timely information on the
occurrence of genetic disorders in the Arab populations. It is
anticipated that data from Arab countries other than the UAE
will soon be exhaustively searched and incorporated in CTGA.
A similar strategy to that applied in the UAE will be adapted
using published and unpublished information. In this regard,
CAGS is currently forming a council of Arab geneticists to
orchestrate data collection from their corresponding countries.
Besides, all geneticists working on genetic disorders in Arabs
are hailed to contribute to the growth of CTGA.
On the other hand, CAGS is planning to develop CTGA into
a data mart that collects information from different specialized
databases using relational data models of database manage-
ment systems (DBMS). These specialized databases may
include DNA sequence data, mutations, polymorphisms or
disorder-specific information. Certainly, such integration
will add new benefits and uses of CTGA, the credence of
which is simply defined by the feedback received from the
database users.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The Centre for Arab Genomic Studies is a division of H.H.
Sheikh Hamdan Bin Rashid Al Maktoum Award for Medical
Sciences. Funding is provided by Sheikh Hamdan Bin Rashid
Al Maktoum Award for Medical Sciences. We thank the
Executive Committee Members of CAGS and colleagues in
the various medical and academic centers who facilitated data
collection in theUAE.The authorswish to thankDrErolBaysal
for reviewing thematerial for this manuscript and for providing
insightful comments and suggestions. Funding to pay the
Open Access publication charges for this article was provided
by the Centre for Arab Genomic Studies.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Tadmouri,G.O.,AlAli,M.T. andAlKhaja,N. (2004)GeneticDisorders in
theArabWorld:UnitedArabEmirates. Centre forArabGenomicStudies,
Dubai, UAE.
2. Hamamy,H. and Alwan,A. (1994) Hereditary disorders in the Eastern
Mediterranean Region. Bull. World Health Organ., 72, 145–154.
3. Al Hosani,H. and Czeizel,A.E. (1996) Unique demographic situation in
the United Arab Emirates. Am. J. Med. Genet., 61, 1.
4. Tadmouri,G.O. and Bissar-Tadmouri,N. (2003) Biomedical publications
in an unstable region: the Arab world, 1988–2002. Lancet, 362, 1766.
5. El-Hazmi,M.A.F. andWarsy,A.S. (1996) Genetic disorders among Arab
populations. Saudi Med. J., 17, 108–123.
6. Alwan,A., Modell,B., Czeizel,A. and Hamamy,H. (1997) Community
Control of Genetic and Congenital Disorders. WHO EMRO Technical
Publications Series No. 24, Alexandria, Egypt.
7. Teebi,A.S. and Farag,T.I. (1997) Genetic Disorders Among Arab
Populations. Oxford University Press, UK.
8. Abel,E.L. (2003)ArabGeneticDisorders:ALayman’sGuide.McFarland
& Company, NC.
9. Al Talabani,J., Shubbar,A.I. and Mustafa,K.E. (1998) Major congenital
malformations in United Arab Emirates (UAE): need for genetic
counselling. Ann. Hum. Genet., 62, 411–418.
10. Hamosh,A., Scott,A.F., Amberger,J.S., Bocchini,C.A. and
McKusick,V.A. (2005) Online mendelian inheritance in man (OMIM),
a knowledgebase of human genes and genetic disorders. Nucleic Acids
Res., 33, D514–D517.
11. Tadmouri,G.O. (2004) Biomedical science journals in the Arab world.
Saudi Med. J., 25, 1331–1336.
12. Khlat,M., Halabi,S., Khudr,A. and Der Kaloustian,V.M. (1986)
Perception of consanguineous marriages and their genetic effects among
a sample of couples from Beirut. Am. J. Med. Genet., 25, 299–306.
D606 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
