OligoArray 2.0: design of oligonucleotide probes for
DNA microarrays using a thermodynamic approach
Jean-Marie Rouillard*, Michael Zuker1 and Erdogan Gulari
Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, H.H. Dow, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA and
1Department of Mathematical Sciences, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 110 8th Street, Troy, NY 12180, USA
Received March 12, 2003; Revised and Accepted April 22, 2003
ABSTRACT
There is a substantial interest in implementing
bioinformatics technologies that allow the design of
oligonucleotides to support the development of
microarrays made from short synthetic DNA frag-
ments spotted or in situ synthesized on slides.
Ideally, such oligonucleotides should be totally
speci®c to their respective targets to avoid any
cross-hybridization and should not form stable
secondary structures that may interfere with the
labeled probes during hybridization. We have
developed OligoArray 2.0, a program that designs
speci®c oligonucleotides at the genomic scale. It
uses a thermodynamic approach to predict second-
ary structures and to calculate the speci®city of
targets on chips for a unique probe in a mixture of
labeled probes. Furthermore, OligoArray 2.0 can
adjust the oligonucleotide length, according to user
input, to ®t a narrow Tm range compatible with
hybridization requirements. Combined with on chip
oligonucleotide synthesis, this program makes it
feasible to perform expression analysis on a geno-
mic scale for any organism for which the genome
sequence is known. This is without relying on cDNA
or oligonucleotide libraries. OligoArray 2.0 was
used to design 75 764 oligonucleotides representing
26 140 transcripts from Arabidopsis thaliana.
Among this set, we provide at least one speci®c
oligonucleotide for 93% of these transcripts.
INTRODUCTION
DNA microarrays enable parallel expression monitoring of
thousands of genes. For the production of microarrays, DNA
can either be synthesized on a solid support (1±3) or can be
deposited in a pre-synthesized form onto a suitable surface. In
this case the DNA can be in the form of PCR products (4) or
oligonucleotides (5,6). Recent work has shown that micro-
arrays of 60mer oligonucleotides can reach a sensitivity level
close to one copy of mRNA per human cell and that a single
oligonucleotide per gene is suf®cient to monitor gene
expression (2). These authors and others (7) have also studied
the speci®city limit of short oligonucleotides in terms of
sequence identity with mRNAs other than their target and
have shown greater than 66% identity can lead to cross-
hybridization. These results demonstrate that oligonucleotide
microarrays compare well with cDNA microarrays. When
short sequences are considered for hybridization targets, it is
important to avoid regions that can fold to form stable
secondary structures.
The emergence of new ¯exible technologies in microarray
fabrication that require only sequence data (2,3) and the
availability of an increasing number of sequenced
genomes (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Genomes/index.html)
have prompted us to develop a program to design speci®c
oligonucleotides for microarrays. In a previous work (8), we
have described OligoArray, now known as OligoArray 1.0, a
program that computes gene-speci®c and secondary structure-
free oligonucleotides for genome-scale oligonucleotide micro-
array construction. In this ®rst version, the oligonucleotide
speci®city was based on a comparison of sequence similarity
between the speci®c target and putative non-speci®c targets.
Here, we present OligoArray 2.0, an improved version where
the computation of the speci®city is based on the
thermodynamics of the hybridization.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Arabidopsis thaliana sequences
All described transcript sequences were extracted from the
A.thaliana chromosome sequences (GenBank accession nos
NC_003070, NC_003071, NC_003074, NC_003075 and
NC_003076; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) and saved in a
single ®le.
Design of an oligonucleotide set representing the whole
A.thaliana transcriptome
We have set the OligoArray 2.0 parameters as follows. The
oligonucleotide length range was set to 45±47 nt, the melting
temperature (Tm) range to 82±90°C and the GC content range
to 35±50% according to the low GC content of the A.thaliana
genome. The search was restricted to the last 1500 nt of the
input sequences. This limitation was chosen to minimize the
bias toward the 3¢ end generated by abortive reverse
transcription when probes are labeled using oligo(dT) to
anchor the reaction. The thresholds to reject oligonucleotides
that can fold to form stable secondary structures and to start to
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 734 764 0111; Fax: +1 734 763 5418; Email: jmrouill@umich.edu
Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 12 3057±3062
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkg426
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 31 No. 12 ã Oxford University Press 2003; all rights reserved
consider putative cross-hybridizations were both set to 65°C.
Furthermore, oligonucleotides containing either AAAAA,
TTTTT, GGGGG, CCCCC or longer homopolymers were
rejected.
RESULTS
Algorithm
Prior to running OligoArray 2.0, all transcribed sequences for
an organism are saved in a ®le in FASTA format. These
sequences can be mRNA sequences, CDSs or exon sequences,
depending on which part of the sequence the search will be
restricted to, but they should not be redundant. This ®le is used
as an input ®le for the design and to format the BLAST
database used by OligoArray 2.0 to compute oligonucleotide
speci®city. It is also possible to use only a subset of these
sequences for design.
For each entry in the input ®le, the sequence length is
measured. If this length is longer than the maximum distance
accepted between the 5¢ end of an oligonucleotide and the 3¢
end of the input sequence, the sequence is shrunk from its 5¢
part to get a ®nal length equal to this maximum distance. Then,
this sequence is masked for the presence of prohibited
sequences, such as stretches of the same nucleotide, that
may interfere with synthesis chemistry. All bases correspond-
ing to these prohibited sequences are replaced by `N' and, in
the case of longer stretches, this substitution is extended to the
end. Di- and tri-nucleotide repeats spanning more than 10 nt
are also automatically masked.
To ensure the speci®city of the oligonucleotide for its target,
our approach consists ®rst of detection of sequence similarity
between the target and other sequences. The masked sequence
is compared to all other sequences using the BLAST program
(9) specially tuned for this task as follows. The `DUST' ®lter
is inactivated using the ±F F option in order to consider all
sequences excepted the one previously masked. The ±S option
is set to 1 to restrict the search to the plus strand only, the one
that will produce labeled probes during reverse transcription.
The word size for the BLAST search is set to the smaller value
allowed (±W 7) to detect a maximum of sequence similarities.
The options controlling the output from BLAST are modi®ed
to reduce the number of one-line descriptions (±v 5) and to
increase the number of reported alignments (±b 10 000).
Before starting to process any sequence, OligoArray 2.0 will
compute the Expectation value necessary to report alignments
longer than 13 nt as a function of the length of the query
and the database (see the OligoArray 2.0 web site for
more information: http://berry.engin.umich.edu/oligoarray2).
Thus, for each sequence to be processed, this parameter (±e)
will be set regarding the length of the query to ensure the
reporting of short alignments. The BLAST output is parsed
and a matrix will keep a record of the possible similarity
between each position of the input sequence and other
sequences.
The input sequence is read backwards from the 3¢ end by
using a moving window length equal to the minimal length of
the oligonucleotide. This window sequence is ®rst examined
for the absence of prohibited sequences. Then, the percentage
of G and C is compared to the range chosen by the user. If one
of these two tests fails, the sequence window is moved
iteratively by 5 nt to the 5¢ end of the sequence. The next step
consists of verifying the Tm of the oligonucleotide. This Tm
is computed using the nearest neighbor (NN) model (10)
with Na+ and DNA concentrations set to 1 M and 1 mM,
respectively. If the Tm of the current oligonucleotide is outside
the selected range, the program will try to adjust the size of the
oligonucleotide to ®t both the Tm and size ranges. If there is no
successful combination, the sequence window will be moved
backward by 1 nt to test the next oligonucleotide. Once a
sequence ful®lls these criteria, it is tested for the absence of
secondary structure. The minimum free energies of all
possible secondary structures are computed by using the
MFOLD program (11) and thermodynamic parameters from
SantaLucia (10), a Na+ concentration of 1 M and the
temperature set by the user as a threshold. An oligonucleotide
will be rejected if it presents a structure with a negative free
energy at this temperature.
If all the previous tests are successfully passed, OligoArray
2.0 will compute the oligonucleotide speci®city. If they exist,
all similarities between the current oligonucleotide sequence
and other sequences are retrieved from the similarity matrix
and used to compute the thermodynamic values (Tm, free
energy, enthalpy and entropy) of all possible hybridizations
between the oligonucleotide sequence and the complementary
strand of similar sequences. This computation is done by using
the thermodynamic parameters from SantaLucia (10) included
in the MFOLD package. It can either process perfect matches
or mismatches between the two sequences. If there is no
possible cross-hybridization with a Tm above the speci®city
threshold set by the user, the oligonucleotide is considered to
be speci®c for its target and saved to the output ®le. If there is
possible cross-hybridization, this data is saved in memory for
further usage. If the number of speci®c oligonucleotides found
is lower than the number of oligonucleotides required by the
user or if none has been found, non-speci®c ones will be
considered. The oligonucleotides with a lower number of
putative cross-hybridizations will be reported ®rst. In order to
avoid any overlap between sequences and thus minimize
competition between two oligonucleotides from the same gene
during hybridization, OligoArray 2.0 can be tuned to have at
least a minimum speci®ed length separating two adjacent
oligonucleotides. By default, this length is set to half the mean
length of the oligonucleotide.
Implementation
OligoArray 2.0 is written in Java and was developed under
Linux Red Hat 7.2 (http://www.redhat.com/software/linux/)
using Java development kit 1.4 from Sun Microsystems
(http://java.sun.com/j2se/1.4/index.html). It relies on two
other programs, BLAST (9) (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/blast/
executables/) and MFOLD (11) (http://www.bioinfo.rpi.edu/
~zukerm/rna/mfold-3.1.html), to achieve speci®city comput-
ation and runs under Unix operating systems. The program is
started from the command prompt and can be tuned by using
19 options. An extensive description of these options can be
obtained with the ±h option or from the web site (see the
OligoArray 2.0 web site for more information). They control
input and output ®le names (±d, i, o, r and R options), the
maximum number of oligonucleotides to design per input
sequence (±n), the ranges of length (±l and ±L), of GC content
3058 Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 12
(±p and ±P) and of melting temperature (±t and ±T) of these
oligonucleotides, a threshold to reject oligonucleotide sequen-
ces that can fold to form stable secondary structures (±s), a
threshold to start to consider cross-hybridization (±x), the
number of sequences to process in parallel if more than one
processor is available (±N) and the minimum distance between
the 5¢ ends of two adjacent oligonucleotides (±g). It is also
possible to de®ne a list of prohibited sequences that should not
appear in the oligonucleotide sequence (±m). Such sequences
can be stretches of the same nucleotide or any other kind of
sequence, such as a restriction site pattern. Another option
allows the user to set the maximum distance (±D) that can be
accepted between the 5¢ end of the oligonucleotide and the 3¢
end of the input sequence. This last option is useful for a
user who wants to prepare labeled probes using oligo(dT)
priming and so design oligonucleotides close to mRNA
poly(A) tails.
OligoArray 2.0 generates three output ®les. One is a log ®le,
named OligoArray.log by default. It contains program status
and a step by step analysis of the design process. This ®le can
be used to understand why the design failed for a sequence or
which parameter leads to the rejection of most of the
oligonucleotides. The second ®le, named rejected.fas, contains
all sequences for which OligoArray 2.0 was not able to design
any oligonucleotides. These sequences are saved in a FastA
format and are ready to be processed using more permissive
parameters if necessary. The oligonucleotide data are saved in
a third ®le named oligo.txt by default. Data are in a TAB
delimited format easy to parse or to import into spreadsheet
programs. For each oligonucleotide, the gene identi®er is
given ®rst, followed by the position of the 5¢ end of this
oligonucleotide on the input sequence. Then its length, the free
energy of the hybridization to its target at 37°C (kcal/mol), the
enthalpy (kcal/mol), entropy (cal/kmol) and Tm (°C) of the
duplex are reported. These thermodynamic data are followed
by a list of target(s) for this oligonucleotide. If there is only one
target, the oligonucleotide is considered to be speci®c and the
gene identi®er is reported alone. In other cases, the program
will report ®rst the identi®er of the sequence it comes from and
then a list of possible non-speci®c targets. For each cross-
hybridization, we also report the free energy, the enthalpy, the
entropy and the Tm of the hybridization between the current
oligonucleotide and the non-speci®c target. The free energy is
given for the temperature used as threshold for the speci®city
computation (±x option). The sequence of the oligonucleotide
will close the line. The program reports the same strand as the
one provided in the input ®le. So if the input ®le contains
mRNA sequences, the sequences reported in the output ®le are
the oligonucleotide sequences that should be on the microarray
if a hybridization is planned with labeled cDNA.
The computation time will obviously depend on the number
of sequences to be processed, the number of oligonucleotides
required per sequence and the number of sequences in
the BLAST database. To give an example, it takes from 4 to
12 h to design up to three 45mers per gene for most of
the bacterial genomes on 1.2 GHz dual Xeon processors.
For larger genomes, around 100 sequences can be processed
per hour. The program binaries, but not yet the source
codes, are available for non-pro®t use upon request from the
authors.
Relation between oligonucleotide length, GC
content and Tm
In the NN model, the Tm is computed using knowledge of the
nucleotide sequence. This model assumes that the stability of a
given base pair depends on the identity and orientation of
neighboring base pairs. Thus, it is necessary to consider
dimers of base pairs instead of a single base pair. Nevertheless,
if we consider the average free energies of dimers (10)
containing no GC pair (±0.82 6 0.22 kcal/mol), one GC pair
(±1.37 6 0.09 kcal/mol) or two GC pairs (±2.08 6 0.21 kcal/
mol), we can approximate that the stability of a duplex will
depend on the GC content of the sequence.
We have only considered the relationship between Tm and
GC content. For a given oligonucleotide length and GC
content, the melting temperatures will belong to a narrow
range of values depending on the exact sequence composition.
Since OligoArray 2.0 provides ®lters based on GC content, Tm
and oligonucleotide length, it is very important to not use
mutually exclusive parameters. In order to provide a tool to
help OligoArray 2.0 users to choose appropriate parameters,
we have investigated the relationship between the Tm and both
the GC content and length of the oligonucleotide. For each
oligonucleotide length comprising between 15 and 70 nt
(increasing steps of 5 bases), we have generated random
oligonucleotide sequences with a GC content in the 30±70%
range. As an example, for a 15mer we have generated 1000
sequences containing ®ve G or C (33% GC), 1000 sequences
containing six G or C, up to 10 G or C (66% GC). In the same
way, we have generated 29 000 70mer sequences with a
number of G or C between 21 and 49. The Tm of each sequence
was computed using the NN model for DNA and Na+
concentrations of 1 mM and 1 M, respectively. For each GC
content, Tm values were sorted. As represented in Figure 1A
for 15mer oligonucleotides, the Tm distribution is not linear at
the two extremities. We have observed the same behavior for
every oligonucleotide length and GC content. Since these low
and high values are poorly representative of the set, we have
chosen to ®lter out the 2.5% extreme temperatures in every set
of Tm. These thresholds are represented by the black vertical
line in Figure 1A.
Figure 1B represents the melting temperatures of 15mers as
a function of the number of GC present in the sequences. The
gray squares represent the two extremes of the 95% of the Tm
values remaining after the previously described ®lter was
applied. For each oligonucleotide length we have ®tted these
values to a linear regression curve, for lower and higher Tm
values separately as shown on the graph (r2 = 0.998 for each
curve). The equations allow us to compute a theoretical Tm for
each GC content between 20 and 80%, using an increment of
5%. We have plotted these theoretical Tm values as a function
of the GC content and the oligonucleotide length (Fig. 2). In
this way, we obtained two planes that de®ne the upper and
lower Tm that can be expected for a given oligonucleotide. The
distance between the planes is only a function of the
oligonucleotide length and does not vary with the GC content
(data not shown). Any value in the space between these two
planes is valid. We can use these data in a Java applet (see the
OligoArray 2.0 web site for more information) to predict a Tm
range as a function of the GC content and the oligonucleotide
length. For given GC content and length ranges, this tool will
Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 12 3059
report the narrowest and the widest expected Tm ranges. The
narrowest Tm range is de®ned by the upper expected Tm for
the lower content and length values and the lower expected
Tm for the larger content and length values. In the same way,
the widest Tm range is extended to the lower and higher
expected Tm.
Design of an oligonucleotide set representing the whole
A.thaliana transcriptome
To test the program, we used it to select oligonucleotides from
the genome of the plant A.thaliana (26 178 transcripts; see
Materials and Methods). Prior to running OligoArray 2.0, we
have determined that the mean GC content of the input
sequences is 42%, with a minimum and a maximum of 24 and
69%, respectively, and that 90% of these sequences have a GC
content between 38 and 49%. We have used these data to set
the OligoArray 2.0 parameters as described in Materials and
Methods.
We have successfully designed 75 764 oligonucleotides
representing 26 140 transcripts (2.9 oligonucleotides per input
sequence on average). Among these 75 764 oligonucleotides,
69 122 are considered to be fully speci®c for their targets
according to the design parameters and there is at least one
speci®c oligonucleotide for 24 502 transcripts (93% of all
input sequences). The design failed for 38 transcripts (0.15%
of all input sequences). By analyzing the OligoArray.log ®le,
we have determined that these failures were mostly due to
short sequences containing prohibited sequences and/or a GC
content >50%. These rejected sequences can be further
processed using less stringent ®lters. All these data are
available from the OligoArray 2.0 web site.
Figure 1. Distribution of melting temperature of 15mer oligonucleotides with various GC contents. For each GC content (from 5 to 10 G or C over 15 nt),
1000 random sequences have been generated and their Tm calculated and sorted. (A) For each GC content, the Tm distribution has been plotted. The two verti-
cal lines visualize the position of the 26th and 974th Tm values and de®ne the 2.5% of data excluded at each extremity of the curves (total 5%). (B) The Tm
values from the same data set have been plotted as a function of the GC content of the oligonucleotide (number of GC over 15 nt). The gray squares represent
the 26th and 974th Tm values from the distribution.
3060 Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 12
DISCUSSION
Although the algorithm used by OligoArray 2.0 is similar in
some points to the previously described version of OligoArray
(8), it shows major improvements. The oligonucleotide
speci®city is now computed by considering the sequence
itself and the thermodynamic properties of its hybridization to
targets. We expect, based on theoretical grounds, that this
should be much more accurate than when this computation
was only based on percentage and length of sequence
similarities. This can particularly take into account short
and highly GC-rich sequences leading to stable cross-
hybridization at temperatures commonly used during hybrid-
ization and that may have improperly been selected by
OligoArray 1.0. Another improvement concerns the oligo-
nucleotide length. To achieve a better uniformity during
hybridization, it is more important to have a narrow Tm
distribution rather than a uniform oligonucleotide length. The
new algorithm presented here gives more ¯exibility to adjust
the sequence length by one or a few nucleotides to ®t the
narrowest Tm range.
We use the NN model to calculate the Tm of DNA duplexes
using thermodynamic parameters obtained from DNA in
solution. In microarray experiments, one strand of DNA is
linked to the surface of the support. Such an interaction may
modify the thermodynamics of the hybridization as previously
suggested from hybridization experiments performed on
microarrays of gel pads (12) and may lead to some error in
Tm prediction. We are currently investigating the in¯uence of
microarray supports on the thermodynamics of the hybridiz-
ation to determine if a correction need be applied to the NN
model to predict hybridization Tm on chips.
The NN method is well adapted to compute the Tm of short
sequences, but may lead to an overestimate of the Tm of
sequences longer than 50 nt. On such long sequences we can
expect some cross-hybridization involving only a shorter part
of the sequence that will have a more accurately predicted Tm
due to its shorter length. In the end, the difference in terms of
real Tm between a long and perfect hybrid and a short non-
perfect one may be lower than expected from predicted Tm and
will lead to a lower speci®city. Thus, we do not recommend
the use of OligoArray 2.0 to design oligonucleotides longer
than 50mer. This is not a major limitation. Indeed, Hughes
et al. have reported that the optimal length for an in situ
synthesized oligonucleotide on a chip is around 60 (2).
Furthermore, Shchepinov et al. have shown that a spacer of
length equivalent to 10mer±15mer is required to place the
sequence suf®ciently far from the microarray support to be
fully available during hybridization (13). Taken together,
these data suggest that of a 60mer oligonucleotide, no more
than 50 bases are really involved in hybridization. In this case,
the design can be restricted to a 45mer±50mer sequence than
can be further elongated with a spacer. Reducing the
oligonucleotide length will also enhance the oligonucleotide
speci®city by conferring a larger destabilizing effect on
mismatches between the target and non-speci®c probes.
One of the ®rst steps of sequence processing is to mask
prohibited sequences selected by users. Masking is done by
replacing unwanted bases by the same number of N. Then all
oligonucleotides containing at least one N will be ®ltered out.
One side-effect is that sequences containing some N before the
masking step will also be ®ltered out. This may not be
problematic since degenerate sequences are not desired for
speci®c design.
Since OligoArray 2.0 selects only oligonucleotides that
ful®ll the user's parameters, it may happen that the end of the
input sequence is reached before ®nding the expected number
of oligonucleotides. If some non-speci®c oligonucleotides
exist, they are reported, but in the case of a short input
sequence it may be impossible to design more than one or two
oligonucleotides respecting the minimum distance allowed
between two adjacent ones. In some cases, none is found and
the corresponding input sequence is saved in a ®le. By
searching for the identi®cation number of that sequence in the
log ®le and analyzing why each single tested oligonucleotide
was rejected, it is possible to determine what the major origin
of rejection was and then to run the software against this
sequence using more adapted parameters.
There is no ranking of the oligonucleotides during the
design, so the ®rst reported is the closer one to the 3¢ end of the
input sequence. Further improvements will focus on output
ranking correlated to experimental data. It is important to bear
in mind that when random oligonucleotides are considered for
anchoring reverse transcription, there is a better representation
of the mRNA 5¢ end. In this case, it will be better to pick
oligonucleotides relatively far from the poly(A) tail. On the
other hand, 3¢ located oligonucleotides will be preferred if
oligo(dT) priming is envisaged.
Preliminary data obtained from a set of 2500 oligonucle-
otides (45mer±47mer) designed with OligoArray 2.0 and
representing 500 Saccharomyces cerevisiae genes show that
we can successfully and reproducibly detect genes known to
be expressed under the experimental conditions used. We have
also obtained similar results with in vitro transcribed
polyadenylated RNA spiked in endogenous total RNA before
reverse transcription and probe labeling (Rouillard et al., in
preparation).
There are few other algorithms described to design
oligonucleotides for microarrays. ProbeSel (14) uses a suf®x
tree to search for sequence similarity to compute the
Figure 2. Minimum and maximum melting temperatures as a function of
the length and GC content of oligonucleotides. For each oligonucleotide
length between 15 and 70, with an increment of 5 nt, and for each GC con-
tent between 20 and 80% of GC, the minimum and maximum valid Tm
have been plotted. The upper plane de®nes the maximum Tm that can be
computed for a given length and GC content. The lower plane de®nes the
minimum Tm.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 12 3061
thermodynamic parameters of the alignments, but this
program lacks oligonucleotide self-folding computation.
ProbeSelect (15) uses a suf®x tree to search for sequence
similarity and the myersgrep program to search for matching
sequences with few mismatches. The possible secondary
structures formed by oligonucleotides are predicted by
searching for self-complementarity within the sequence.
ReloÂgio et al. propose a modi®ed version of Gene Skipper
(16). They exclude oligonucleotides showing only a perfect
sequence identity with non-speci®c targets and do not consider
possible mismatches. Wright and Church (17) propose an
algorithm based on a BLAST search to de®ne oligonucleotide
speci®city. They use a thermodynamic prediction of second-
ary structures based on RNA parameters. They also introduce
an interesting concept to de®ne oligonucleotide sequence
complexity based on the Lempel-Ziv (LZ) compression
algorithm. ArrayOligoSelector (18) uses a BLAST approach
to search for sequence similarity and will compute the
thermodynamic properties for only the most probable non-
speci®c hybridization. This program also uses the LZ
sequence complexity criteria. The last two programs are
restricted to the design of 70mer oligonucleotides. Another
strategy also focuses on the optimization of an oligonucleotide
set for parallel oligonucleotide synthesis on chips (19).
OligoArray 2.0 only allows the design of oligonucleotides
for use on microarrays for gene expression pro®ling. It can
manage neither polymorphism nor splicing variants, except by
considering each variant as a different input sequence. We are
currently implementing new software specially devoted to the
design of oligonucleotides for the detection of splicing
variants of the same gene and for the identi®cation of single
nucleotide polymorphisms. We are also implementing an
oligonucleotide database (Rouillard et al., in preparation) to
provide pre-designed sets of oligonucleotides for transcrip-
tome analysis for every sequenced genome available from
public databases.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Financial support of this research by the Michigan Life
Sciences Corridor funding grant no. MEDC-GR171 and
DARPA contract no. N39998-01-C-7071 (Xeotron Prime
Contractor) is gratefully acknowledged. M.Z. is supported, in
part, by a grant from NIH, no. GM54250.
REFERENCES
1. Lipshutz,R.J., Fodor,S.P., Gingeras,T.R. and Lockhart,D.J. (1999) High
density synthetic oligonucleotide arrays. Nature Genet., 21, 20±24.
2. Hughes,T.R., Mao,M., Jones,A.R., Burchard,J., Marton,M.J.,
Shannon,K.W., Lefkowitz,S.M., Ziman,M., Schelter,J.M., Meyer,M.R.
et al. (2001) Expression pro®ling using microarrays fabricated by an
ink-jet oligonucleotide synthesizer. Nat. Biotechnol., 19, 342±347.
3. Gao,X., LeProust,E., Zhang,H., Srivannavit,O., Gulari,E., Yu,P.,
Nishiguchi,C., Xiang,Q. and Zhou,X. (2001) A ¯exible light-directed
DNA chip synthesis gated by deprotection using solution photogenerated
acids. Nucleic Acids Res., 29, 4744±4750.
4. Schena,M., Shalon,D., Davis,R.W. and Brown,P.O. (1995) Quantitative
monitoring of gene expression patterns with a complementary DNA
microarray. Science, 270, 467±470.
5. Okamoto,T., Suzuki,T. and Yamamoto,N. (2000) Microarray fabrication
with covalent attachment of DNA using bubble jet technology.
Nat. Biotechnol., 18, 438±441.
6. Zammatteo,N., Jeanmart,L., Hamels,S., Courtois,S., Louette,P.,
Hevesi,L. and Remacle,J. (2000) Comparison between different
strategies of covalent attachment of DNA to glass surfaces to build DNA
microarrays. Anal. Biochem., 280, 143±150.
7. Kane,M.D., Jatkoe,T.A., Stumpf,C.R., Lu,J., Thomas,J.D. and
Madore,S.J. (2000) Assessment of the sensitivity and speci®city of
oligonucleotide (50mer) microarrays. Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 4552±4557.
8. Rouillard,J.M., Herbert,C.J. and Zuker,M. (2002) OligoArray: genome-
scale oligonucleotide design for microarrays. Bioinformatics, 18,
486±487.
9. Altschul,S.F., Madden,T.L., Schaffer,A.A., Zhang,J., Zhang,Z.,
Miller,W. and Lipman,D.J. (1997) Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a
new generation of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res.,
25, 3389±3402.
10. SantaLucia,J.,Jr (1998) A uni®ed view of polymer, dumbbell and
oligonucleotide DNA nearest-neighbor thermodynamics. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA, 95, 1460±1465.
11. Zuker,M., Mathews,D.H. and Turner,D.H. (1999) Algorithms and
Thermodynamics for RNA Secondary Structure Prediction: A Practical
Guide, NATO ASI Series. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, NL.
12. Fotin,A.V., Drobyshev,A.L., Proudnikov,D.Y., Perov,A.N. and
Mirzabekov,A.D. (1998) Parallel thermodynamic analysis of duplexes on
oligodeoxyribonucleotide microchips. Nucleic Acids Res., 26,
1515±1521.
13. Shchepinov,M.S., Case-Green,S.C. and Southern,E.M. (1997) Steric
factors in¯uencing hybridisation of nucleic acids to oligonucleotide
arrays. Nucleic Acids Res., 25, 1155±1161.
14. Kaderali,L. and Schliep,A. (2002) Selecting signature oligonucleotides
to identify organisms using DNA arrays. Bioinformatics, 18,
1340±1349.
15. Li,F. and Stormo,G.D. (2001) Selection of optimal DNA oligos for gene
expression arrays. Bioinformatics, 17, 1067±1076.
16. Relogio,A., Schwager,C., Richter,A., Ansorge,W. and Valcarcel,J.
(2002) Optimization of oligonucleotide-based DNA microarrays.
Nucleic Acids Res., 30, e51.
17. Wright,M.A. and Church,G.M. (2002) An open-source oligomicroarray
standard for human and mouse. Nat. Biotechnol., 20, 1082±1083.
18. Bozdech,Z., Zhu,J., Joachimiak,M.P., Cohen,F.E., Pulliam,B. and
DeRisi,J.L. (2003) Expression pro®ling of the schizont and trophozoite
stages of Plasmodium falciparum with a long-oligonucleotide
microarray. Genome Biol., 4, R9.
19. Tolonen,A.C., Albeanu,D.F., Corbett,J.F., Handley,H., Henson,C. and
Malik,P. (2002) Optimized in situ construction of oligomers on an array
surface. Nucleic Acids Res. 30, e107.
3062 Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 12
