NASCArrays: a repository for microarray data
generated by NASC's transcriptomics service
David J. Craigon, Nick James, John Okyere, Janet Higgins, Joan Jotham and Sean May*
The Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre, Division of Plant Sciences, University of Nottingham, Sutton Bonington
LE12 5RD, UK
Received August 22, 2003; Revised and Accepted October 27, 2003
ABSTRACT
NASC operates an Affymetrix `GeneChip' (micro-
array) service for the Arabidopsis thaliana com-
munity. All data produced by the service are
publicly available through our microarray data-
base `NASCArrays' published at http://affymetrix.
arabidopsis.info. The data are accessible through
text searching and a series of data mining tools. All
data are annotated with sample preparation details,
and the original Affymetrix data are available for
download. The database aims to be MIAME support-
ive and provide a coordinated resource for re-
searchers interested in the transcriptome of
Arabidopsis. Using this database, data produced
will be shared with other databases worldwide.
INTRODUCTION
NASC's Affymetrix service
Arabidopsis thaliana is a commonly used model organism for
the study of the biology of ¯owering plants (1). Since the
completion of the Arabidopsis genome in 2000 (2), various
tools have been made available to exploit the availability of
genome-wide sequence data, such as large-scale insertion
mutation collections, proteomics, SNP detection and micro-
arrays.
Microarrays allow the monitoring of the expression of many
genes in parallel (3). The availability of a completed genome
sequence for an organism allows microarrays to be con-
structed that contain features representing large numbers of
genesÐpotentially allowing the measurement of gene expres-
sion for every gene in a species on one slide.
The Affymetrix system of high-density oligonucleotide
arrays (`GeneChips') is one such microarray system (4,5).
Two GeneChips from Affymetrix are represented within our
database, a smaller and older GeneChip design which
represents ~8300 genes, and a second more recent `ATH1'
GeneChip design, which represents most of the Arabidopsis
genome as annotated by TIGR in their database in December
2001.
Since February 2002, the Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock
Centre (NASC) has operated a transcriptomics service for the
Arabidopsis community using the Affymetrix system. Users of
the service are entirely responsible for the growth of their
plants and preparation of the RNA extracts, which are then
sent to NASC. NASC then performs all further microarray
steps from labelling through to data preparation.
The NASCArrays database
Although the users of the transcriptomics service have the
option of a short (maximum 6 month) con®dentiality period
before data release, all data that are produced by the service
are made available to the public without condition.
NASCArrays, NASC's microarray database, is the primary
method of distributing the data the Affymetrix service
produces. It can be accessed by choosing Affymetrix Data
from our Affymetrix website http://affymetrix.arabidopsis.
info.
The Affymetrix equipment produces expression data for
every gene represented on the microarray. This data are fed
into the database, and are coordinated with user-supplied
annotation on how the original RNA samples were prepared.
The service insists that users supply annotation for each
sample. NASC aims to hold full MIAME (6)-supportive data
for its experiments, and as such good annotation from
individual users is vital. The database currently contains 40
experiments made up of ~400 GeneChips but the number is
increasing rapidly.
DATABASE FEATURES
Annotation pages and Search
The front page of the database contains a list of experiments
that are available in the database, the search tools and links to
the data mining tools. If you select any of the experiments
from the list the basic experiment page is shown.
On the top of the experiment page is an abstract for the
experiment, and contact details for the experimenter. Beneath
this is a list of the GeneChips (referred to as `slides') used in
the experiment. Each slide has information about how the
sample that was hybridized to the slide was prepared by the
user, and how the slide was handled when it was processed at
NASC.
There are currently two searches available from the front
page. The experiment search provides a keyword search of
experiments like a search engine. The slide search selects slides
that match criteria entered exactlyÐfor instance all slides that
were produced from samples treated in a certain way.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +44 115 9513237; Fax: +44 115 9513297; Email: sean@arabidopsis.info
Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue D575±D577
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkh133
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 32, Database issue ã Oxford University Press 2004; all rights reserved
Data available
At many points in the database, the output data from the
microarrays can be downloaded. NASC uses Affymetrix MAS
5.0 software for scanning and analysis of Affymetrix
microarrays. NASCArrays stores four data points for each
gene per GeneChip from this software: Signal, StatPairsUsed,
PresentCall and Detection P-value. These are reproduced with
some rudimentary annotation for the probes on the GeneChip
when users download data from the database.
Data can be downloaded for one or many slides at once.
Data are supplied as a comma separated values (CSV) ®le that
can be read by many spreadsheet programs. Data can be
downloaded over the web, or emailed to the user.
As an option, users can download data `for clustering'.
These are data specially formatted for EPCLUST (7). Using
this feature allows users to easily perform clustering analysis
using data from NASCArrays.
Data mining tools
In NASCArrays, a series of `Data mining tools' are available.
These allow researchers to use a `gene-centric' rather than
`array-centric' approach to ®nding data of interest. Many
researchers have `genes of interest'Ðthese tools allow
researchers to ®nd experiments that are related to their gene
of interest. The NASCArrays tools allow users to pick a gene
of interest using the probe set reference number as given by
Affymetrix, a gene symbol, an Arabidopsis Genome Initiative
(AGI) identi®er for a gene or a Complete Arabidopsis
Transcriptome MicroArray (CATMA) code.
Spot history
The spot history is a tool that is available in other microarray
databases (8). It shows the distribution of expression of a gene
of interest over all experiments in the database. Results are
displayed in the form of a histogram. Each bar in the
histogram can be selected, and the slides that made up that
range in the histogram will be shown. Researchers can thus
easily locate slides that have unusual values of expression for a
given gene. (Fig. 1 is a histogram from the spot history tool.
This histogram shows the distribution of gene expression for
At3g08580.)
Two-gene scatter plot
The two-gene scatter plot is a tool for rudimentary comparison
of the expression pro®le of two genes. It takes the form of a
scatter plot, with the expression values of each gene along the
two axes. Using this tool allows researchers to quickly see if
there are trends between the two genes. Any given point on the
plot can be selected, and the slide corresponding to that point
will be shown (Fig. 2).
Gene swinger
The `gene swinger' is a tool that allows researchers to sort all
experiments based on which experiments a gene of interest
shows most variability in. Upon choosing a gene of interest,
the tool calculates the standard error for that gene for each
experiment, and displays the experiments starting with the
highest variability ®rst. Experiments that are highly variable
with respect to a gene should be of interest to researchers
working on that gene.
Bulk gene download
If researchers have a series of genes they are interested in, they
can download the expression over all experiments for these
genes using Bulk gene download.
The selection
The selection is a feature analogous to the shopping cart on a
web shopping site. It allows users to choose an arbitrary
selection of slides and perform actions on them. For instance,
both the spot history and two-gene scatter plot can operate on
just the slides held in the selection. Data can be downloaded
for just the slides in the selectionÐfor instance a user could ®ll
the selection with slides based on a certain ecotype, and then
download all of these data as one ®le.
FURTHER DATA DISSEMINATION
AffyWatch
Some researchers want the original ®les that come from the
Affymetrix software. Other researchers want to have all of the
data for populating their own in-house databases. NASC
operates a subscription CD service called `AffyWatch'. This
enables users to receive all data produced by NASC's
Affymetrix service in CD format.
Other databases
As part of NASC's commitment to data sharing, data will also
be donated to other databases. Currently data are donated in
MAGE-ML (9) format to `ArrayExpress (10)', the European
Bioinformatics Institute's microarray database, where it
will be further distributed to GEO at the NCBI (11). In the
future, the data will also be shared with TAIR's microarray
facility (12).
Figure 1. A histogram from the spot history tool. This histogram shows the
distribution of gene expression for At3g08580.
D576 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue
REFERENCES
1. Meinke,D.W., Cherry,M., Dean,C., Rounsley,S.D. and Koornneef,M.
(1998) Arabidopsis thaliana: a model plant for genome analysis. Science,
282, 662±682.
2. Arabidopsis Genome Initiative (2000) Analysis of the genome sequence
of the ¯owering plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature, 408, 796±815.
3. Schena,M., Shalon,D., Davis,R.W. and Brown,P.O. (1995) Quantitative
monitoring of gene expression patterns with a cDNA microarray.
Science, 270, 467±470.
4. Lockhart,D.J., Dong.H., Byrne,M.C., Follettie,M.T., Gallo,M.V.,
Chee,M.S., Mittmann,M., Wang,C., Kobayashi,M., Horton,H. et al.
(1996) Expression monitoring by hybridization to high-density
oligonucleotide arrays. Nat. Biotechnol., 14, 1675±1680.
5. Lipshutz,R.J., Fodor,S.P.A., Gingeras,T.R. and Lockhart,D.J. (1999)
High density synthetic oligonucleotide arrays. Nature Genet., 21, 20±24.
6. Brazma,A., Hingamp,P., Quackenbush,J., Sherlock,G., Spellman,P.,
Stoeckert,C., Aach,J., Ansorge,W., Ball,C.A., Causton,H.C. et al. (2001)
Minimum information about a microarray experiment (MIAME)Ð
toward standards for microarray data. Nature Genet., 29, 365±371.
7. Vilo,J., Kapushesky,M., Kemmeren,P., Sarkans,U. and Brazma,A. (2003)
Expression Pro®ler. In Parmigiani,G., Garrett,E.S., Irizarry,R. and
Zeger,S.L. (eds), The Analysis of Gene Expression Data: Methods and
Software. Springer Verlag, New York, NY.
8. Gollub,J., Ball,C.A., Binkley,G., Demeter,J., Finkelstein,D.B.,
Herbert,J.M., Hernandez-Boussard,T., Jin,H., Kaloper,M., Matese,J.C.
et al. (2003) The Stanford Microarray Database: data access and quality
assessment tools. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 94±96.
9. Spellman,P.T., Millar,M., Stewart,J., Troup,C., Sarkans,U., Chervitz,S.,
Bernhart,D., Sherlock,G., Ball,C., Lepage,M. et al. (2002) Design and
implementation of microarray gene expression markup language
(MAGE-ML). Genome Biol., 3, RESEARCH0046.1±0046.9.
10. Brazma,A., Parkinson,H., Sarkans,U., Shojatalab,M., Vilo,J.,
Abeygunwardene,N., Holloway,E., Kapushesky,M., Kemmeren,P. et al.
(2003) ArrayExpressÐa public repository for microarray gene
expression data at the EBI. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 68±71.
11. Edgar,R., Domrachev,M. and Lash,A.E. (2002) Gene Expression
Omnibus: NCBI gene expression and hybridization array data repository.
Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 207±210.
12. Rhee,S.Y., Beavis,W., Beradini,T.Z., Chen,G., Dixon,D., Doyle,A.,
Garcia-Hernandez,M., Huala,E., Lander,G., Montoya,M. et al. (2003)
The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR): a model organism
database providing a centralized, curated gateway to Arabidopsis
biology, research materials and community. Nucleic Acids Res., 31,
224±228.
Figure 2. A sample scatter plot from the two-gene scatter plot.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue D577
