 10.1101/gr.757503Access the most recent version at doi:
 2003 13: 37-45; originally published online Dec 30, 2002; Genome Res.
  
Pavel Pevzner and Glenn Tesler 
  
 Human and Mouse Genomes
Genome Rearrangements in Mammalian Evolution: Lessons From
 
 
 data
Supplementary
 http://www.genome.org/cgi/content/full/13/1/37/DC1
 "Supplemental Research Data"
 References
 http://www.genome.org/cgi/content/full/13/1/37#otherarticles
Article cited in: 
  
 http://www.genome.org/cgi/content/full/13/1/37#References
This article cites 37 articles, 21 of which can be accessed free at: 
 service
Email alerting
 click heretop right corner of the article or 
Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box at the
 Notes   
 http://www.genome.org/subscriptions/
 go to: Genome ResearchTo subscribe to 
© 2003 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press 
 on November 8, 2006 www.genome.orgDownloaded from 
Genome Rearrangements in Mammalian Evolution:
Lessons From Human and Mouse Genomes
Pavel Pevzner1 and Glenn Tesler
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0114, USA
Although analysis of genome rearrangements was pioneered by Dobzhansky and Sturtevant 65 years ago, we
still know very little about the rearrangement events that produced the existing varieties of genomic
architectures. The genomic sequences of human and mouse provide evidence for a larger number of
rearrangements than previously thought and shed some light on previously unknown features of mammalian
evolution. In particular, they reveal that a large number of microrearrangements is required to explain the
differences in draft human and mouse sequences. Here we describe a new algorithm for constructing synteny
blocks, study arrangements of synteny blocks in human and mouse, derive a most parsimonious human–mouse
rearrangement scenario, and provide evidence that intrachromosomal rearrangements are more frequent than
interchromosomal rearrangements. Our analysis is based on the human–mouse breakpoint graph, which reveals
related breakpoints and allows one to find a most parsimonious scenario. Because these graphs provide
important insights into rearrangement scenarios, we introduce a new visualization tool that allows one to view
breakpoint graphs superimposed with genomic dot-plots.
[Supplemental material is available online at www.genome.org.]
Analysis of genome rearrangements in molecular evolution
was pioneered by Dobzhansky and Sturtevant (1938), who
published a milestone paper with an evolutionary tree pre-
senting a rearrangement scenario with 17 inversions for the
species Drosophila pseudoobscura and Drosophila miranda. Ev-
ery genome rearrangement study involves solving a combina-
torial puzzle to find a series of genome rearrangements to
transform one genome into another. Palmer and co-authors
(Palmer and Herbon 1988) pioneered studies of the shortest
(most parsimonious) rearrangement scenarios and applied
this approach to plant mtDNA and cpDNA. Since then, the
analysis of the most parsimonious scenarios has become the
dominant approach in genome rearrangement studies. For
unichromosomal genomes, it usually amounts to analysis of
inversions (also known as reversals), which are the most com-
mon rearrangement events. The problem of finding the mini-
mum number of reversals to transform one unichromosomal
genome into another is known as the “reversal distance prob-
lem.” For multichromosomal genomes, the most common re-
arrangements are reversals, translocations, fusions, and fis-
sions, and the number of such rearrangements in a most par-
simonious scenario is known as the “genomic distance”
between multichromosomal genomes.
Finding the reversal distance is a difficult combinatorial
problem. In the very first computational studies of genome
rearrangements, Watterson et al. (1982) and Nadeau and Tay-
lor (1984) introduced the notion of a breakpoint (disruption
of gene order) and noticed some correlations between the
reversal distance and the number of breakpoints (in fact, Stur-
tevant and Dobzhansky [1936] implicitly discussed these cor-
relations 65 years ago!). The shortcoming of early genome
rearrangement studies is that they considered breakpoints in-
dependently without revealing combinatorial dependencies
between related breakpoints. The simplest example of related
breakpoints are two breakpoints formed by a single reversal.
Kececioglu and Sankoff (1995) were the first to recognize the
importance of dependencies between breakpoints and to
come up with an approximation algorithm for the reversal
distance problem. The important result of Bafna and Pevzner
(1993, 1996) is the construction of the “breakpoint graph,”
which reveals related breakpoints and allows one to find the
most parsimonious scenarios.
Based on the concept of the breakpoint graph, Hannen-
halli and Pevzner (1995a) developed a polynomial algorithm
for the reversal distance problem, that is, for computing a
most parsimonious scenario to transform one unichromo-
somal genome into another. This approach was further ex-
tended to the genomic distance problem, that is, finding a
most parsimonious scenario for multichromosomal genomes
under inversions, translocations, fusions, and fissions of chro-
mosomes (Hannenhalli and Pevzner 1995a; Tesler 2002b).
However, these results, although useful, do not yet yield a
meaningful estimate of the number of the rearrangement
events on the evolutionary path from mouse to human. The
problem is that the genomic sequences provide evidence for
both microrearrangements (e.g., intrachromosomal rear-
rangements with a span <1 Mb) and macrorearrangements
(e.g., intrachromosomal rearrangements of larger span as well
as interchromosomal rearrangements). The existing rear-
rangement algorithms do not distinguish between these two
types of rearrangements. Because some microrearrangements
may be caused by fragment assembly errors, mixing microre-
arrangements and macrorearrangements within one rear-
rangement scenario may produce a distorted picture greatly
influenced by the sequencing errors in draft genomic se-
quences. Another difficulty is an unreliable assignment of or-
thologs (false orthologs), which may create an impression of
1Corresponding author.
E-MAIL ppevzner@cs.ucsd.edu
Article and publication are at http://www.genome.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/
gr.757503. Article published online before print in December 2002.
Article
13:37–45 ©2003 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ISSN 1088-9051/03 $5.00; www.genome.org Genome Research 37
www.genome.org
 on November 8, 2006 www.genome.orgDownloaded from 
a rearrangement that never happened (Tatusov et al. 1997).
The conserved gene order can also be disrupted by recent
duplications and insertions (Hardison et al. 1997).
To address these complications, we first describe a new
approach to synteny block generation that separates microre-
arrangements from macrorearrangements. It allows one to
study microrearrangements and macrorearrangements sepa-
rately and to arrive at a new estimate of the number of mac-
rorearrangements that cover ∼170 Myr (million years) of evo-
lutionary distance between human and mouse. We also esti-
mate the number of microrearrangements (but it remains to
be seen to what extent this estimate is influenced by the frag-
ment assembly errors) on the evolutionary path between
mouse and human.
RESULTS
Synteny Blocks
In a pioneering paper, Nadeau and Taylor (1984) introduced
the notion of “conserved segments” (i.e., segments with pre-
served gene orders without disruption by rearrangements)
and estimated that there are roughly 180 conserved segments
in human and mouse. Later, Copeland et al. (1993), DeBry
and Seldin (1996), Waterston et al. (2002), and Gregory et al.
(2002) confirmed these estimates. In the past decade, the
progress in understanding the evolutionary history of entire
genomes was mainly based on comparative genetic maps
(O’Brien et al. 1999). However, these estimates suffer from low
resolution of comparative maps in certain genomic areas. Pre-
sent genomic sequences provide evidence that the human
and mouse genomes are significantly more rearranged than
previously thought. Moreover, they indicate that a large pro-
portion of previously identified conserved segments are not
really conserved because there is evidence of multiple mi-
crorearrangements in many of them (Mural et al. 2002). These
microrearrangements were not visible in the comparative ge-
netic maps that were used for defining ≈180 conserved seg-
ments in the past. We study “synteny blocks” instead of con-
served segments. Intuitively, the synteny blocks are segments
that can be converted into conserved segments by microrear-
rangements (see the GRIMM-Synteny algorithm below for a
formal definition). The synteny blocks do not necessarily rep-
resent areas of continuous similarity between two genomes.
Instead, they usually consist of short regions of similarity that
may be interrupted by dissimilar regions and gaps. Most syn-
teny blocks are subject to microrearrangements within these
blocks.
We demonstrate that human and mouse genomes share
281 synteny blocks of size at least 1 Mb (shown in Fig. 1a) and
that at least 245 rearrangements of these blocks occurred since
the divergence of human and mouse. The positions of these
blocks in the human and mouse genomes are given in Supple-
mentary Materials (available online at http://www.genome.
org). The largest synteny block in the human genome is 79.6
Mb, and the average block size is 9.6 Mb. The largest synteny
block in the mouse genome is 64.8 Mb, and the average block
size is 8.5 Mb.
The overall size of syntenic blocks is ∼2707 Mb in human
and ∼2397 Mb in mouse. The breakpoint regions (i.e., inter-
vals between consecutive syntenic blocks) vary and may be as
large as 23.2 Mb in human and 6.7 Mb in mouse. The average
size of breakpoint regions is 668 kb in human and 458 kb in
mouse. The overall size of the breakpoint regions equals 172
Mb in human and 119 MB in mouse (although some of these
breakpoint regions may host shorter synteny blocks). There is
evidence of at least 3170 microrearrangements (reversals) that
happened within the synteny blocks (although many of them
may be artifacts of incorrect assemblies). This very high esti-
mate of the number of microrearrangements further confirms
the conjecture that microrearrangements are more common
than previously thought (Carver and Stubbs 1997; Puttagunta
et al. 2000; Thomas et al. 2000; Kumar et al. 2001). In fact, this
number does not even include the microrearrangements
within synteny blocks shorter than 1 Mb.
From Local Alignments to Synteny Blocks
Given two genomic sequences, how one can construct syn-
teny blocks? False ortholog assignments and microrearrange-
ments make it nontrivial to find the analogs of synteny blocks
(conserved gene clusters) even in shorter bacterial genomes
(Fujibuchi et al. 2000; Lathe et al. 2000; Wolf et al. 2001;
Rogozin et al. 2002). In addition, human–mouse sequence
similarities in noncoding regions (Koop and Hood 1994; Tho-
mas et al. 2000) may further complicate ortholog assignments
and make it difficult to apply the methods developed in bac-
terial genomics to construction of human–mouse synteny
blocks.
Sankoff and Blanchette (1997) were the first to come up
with an algorithm for synteny block generation. However,
their approach was mainly intended for comparative map-
ping data. Below we describe a different approach that is
geared toward genomic sequences. To construct the human–
mouse synteny blocks, we start with bidirectional best local
similarities (also called anchors) between human and mouse
genomic sequences (Tatusov et al. 1997; Mural et al. 2002).
Several software tools have recently become available to gen-
erate such anchors for entire mammalian genomes (Mayor et
al. 2000; Schwartz et al. 2000; Kent 2002; Ma et al. 2002). We
assume that a set of nonoverlapping anchors (local align-
ments between two genomes) is given and the goal is to con-
struct the synteny blocks based on these anchors. We study
the same versions of draft human and mouse sequences and
the same set of anchors that were used in Waterston et al.
(2002). This set of anchors was provided by Michael Kamal at
the Whitehead Institute and was generated by PatternHunter
(Ma et al. 2002). The set consists of 558,678 anchors with
alignment lengths ranging from 40–9647 nt (the mean is
340). We emphasize that these anchors do not necessarily
represent similarities within human and mouse genes but
may also represent similarities between noncoding regions.
This is a departure from the previous “gene order compari-
son” approach of genome rearrangement studies. It allows us
to bypass the difficult issues of gene annotation and ortholog
identification, which are not necessary for genome rearrange-
ment studies. This approach may miss similarities between
some genes at evolutionary distances where protein similarity
still exists but DNA similarity has faded away. However, this is
not a serious concern for the rather similar human and mouse
genomes. Moreover, our approach can be generalized to
handle both DNA and protein similarities in a unified frame-
work.
We assume that human and mouse chromosomes are
concatenated to form a single coordinate system. An anchor
that starts at position h in the human genome and at position
m in the mouse genome is described by its starting point (h,m)
in two dimensions (2D). We remark that in reality the an-
Pevzner and Tesler
38 Genome Research
www.genome.org
 on November 8, 2006 www.genome.orgDownloaded from 
chors are not points (h,m) but di-
agonals in 2D described by the co-
ordinates (h,m) of an alignment
start and the length of the align-
ment. Such a coordinate system is
shown in Figure 1a, with chromo-
somes dividing the plane into rect-
angles. We define the distance be-
tween two points (h1,m1) and
(h2,m2) from the same chromosome
pair (the same rectangle) as the
Manhattan distance |h2  h1| +
|m2  m1|. The distance between
points from different chromosome
pairs is defined as infinity. The dis-
tance between two anchors is de-
fined as the distance between their
closest ends.
Although the number of an-
chors may be very large (hundreds
of thousands), one still can apply
fast genome rearrangement algo-
rithms (Tesler 2002b) to find a most
parsimonious scenario to transform
the order of anchors in human into
an order of anchors in mouse. How-
ever, this scenario will likely be un-
realistic because many anchors may
correspond to false orthologs.
Therefore, a technique to filter out
false orthologs (even at the expense
of filtering some real orthologs) is
needed. False orthologs will often
look like isolated points (or “small
clusters”) in a genomic dot-plot,
whereas synteny blocks will be
formed from clusters consisting of a
larger number of points. Figure 2a
presents the genomic dot-plots for
anchors from the X chromosomes
(a blowup of the X–X rectangle
from Fig. 1a). A brief look at Figure
2a reveals 16 clusters (Fig. 2b). Fig-
ure 2c presents rectified clusters
that ignore the details of the inter-
nal anchor arrangements in the
clusters and represent every cluster
as a diagonal. These rectified clus-
ters are further combined into di-
agonals that correspond to 11 syn-
teny blocks (Fig. 2d). Although the
synteny blocks in Figure 2d differ in
size, the sizes of synteny blocks are
irrelevant for genome rearrange-
ment algorithms. Figure 2e is a sym-
bolic representation of synteny
blocks as units of the same size,
used in the construction of the
breakpoint graph.
The above description hides
many important details, and in
many cases the choice of synteny
blocks is less obvious. Below we de-
scribe the GRIMM-Synteny algo-
Figure 1 (a) Human and mouse synteny blocks. Every block corresponds to a rectangle, with a
diagonal showing whether the arrangements of anchors in human and mouse (within the synteny
block) are the same or reversed. (b) Combining anchors into clusters by the GRIMM-Synteny algorithm
at G = 100 kb. The edges in the anchor graph connect the closest ends of the anchors. The anchors are
color-coded by the resulting clusters. At G = 1 Mb, this forms a single cluster, which in turn forms a
synteny block (the lower right block in the human 18/mouse 17 rectangle in a).
Genome Rearrangements in Mammalian Evolution
Genome Research 39
www.genome.org
 on November 8, 2006 www.genome.orgDownloaded from 
rithm for synteny block generation from a collection of an-
chors. The algorithm uses the gap threshold G and minimum
cluster size C as parameters and works as follows:
GRIMM-Synteny Algorithm
1. Form an anchor graph whose vertex set is the set of an-
chors.
2. Connect vertices in the anchor graph by an edge if the
distance between them is smaller than the gap size G.
3. Determine the connected components of the anchor
graph. Each connected component is called a cluster.
4. Delete “small” clusters (shorter than the minimum cluster
size C in length).
5. Determine the cluster order and signs for each genome.
Figure 2 X-chromosome: from local similarities, to synteny blocks, to breakpoint graph, to rearrangement scenario. (a) Dot-plot of anchors.
Anchors are enlarged for visibility. (b) Clusters of anchors. (c) Rectified clusters. (d) Synteny blocks. (e) Synteny blocks (symbolic representation as
genome rearrangement units). (f) 2D breakpoint graph superimposed on synteny blocks. The projections of the 2D graph onto the human and
mouse axes form the conventional breakpoint graphs. (g) 2D breakpoint graph. The four cycles in the breakpoint graph are shown by different
colors. (h) A most parsimonious rearrangement scenario for human and mouse X-chromosomes.
Pevzner and Tesler
40 Genome Research
www.genome.org
 on November 8, 2006 www.genome.orgDownloaded from 
6. Output the strips in the resulting cluster order as synteny
blocks.
GRIMM-Synteny finds 319 clusters in the human genome
that are longer than 1 Mb. In addition to these clusters, we
identified a number of smaller clusters; for example, in the
human genome there are 36 clusters whose length varies from
0.5 Mb–1 Mb, 21 clusters whose length varies from 250 kb–
500 kb, and 774 clusters with lengths from 50 kb–250 kb.
However, smaller syntenic block assignments are less reliable
because they may be caused by false orthologs and sequenc-
ing errors.
Figure 1b presents examples of some highly rearranged
clusters from human Chromosome 18/mouse Chromosome
17 and the corresponding anchor graph. After constructing
the cluster graph and deleting small clusters (steps 1–4), one
has to determine the cluster order and signs (step 5). We de-
fine the span of a cluster in human (mouse) as the interval
between its minimum and maximum coordinates in human
(mouse). Similarly to Mural et al. (2002) and Gregory et al.
(2002), we found that the cluster spans in human often sig-
nificantly differ from cluster spans in mouse (the span may
include gaps and unaligned regions that contribute to these
differences). Note that although different clusters are not sup-
posed to overlap in 2D, they often overlap in 1D (i.e., their
span intervals may overlap in human or mouse). Therefore,
defining the cluster order for intermingled clusters should be
done with caution. We compute the center of mass of all
anchors forming the cluster and order clusters in human by
the coordinates of their centers of masses. We assign the clus-
ters numbers according to their order on the human genome.
This lets us read off a cluster order in the mouse genome in
terms of these labels.
Signs (orientations) of the resulting clusters are usually
well-defined but in some cases are not obvious. The algorithm
for sign assignments in GRIMM-Synteny and the theorem jus-
tifying this algorithm will be described elsewhere.
The number of clusters found depends on the value of
the gap threshold G. Figure 1b shows clusters in a region of
the genome for the gap threshold G = 100 kb. Increasing the
gap threshold will typically merge some clusters; in this case,
this region forms a single cluster at G = 1 Mb. The human and
mouse genomes include some gaps and regions without an-
chors that may be longer than G. Such regions break a single
synteny block into a few clusters. To combine such clusters
into a single synteny block, we define the notion of a strip. A
strip is a sequence of consecutive signed clusters i1, , in in the
first genome that either appears consecutively in the same
way or in the reverse order in, ,i1 in the other genome.
For example, for G = 1 Mb and C = 1 Mb, the number of clus-
ters in the human and mouse genomes is 319 whereas the
number of strips (synteny blocks) is 281. Most synteny blocks
correspond to a single cluster, but some synteny blocks con-
tain as many as 5 clusters.
On the X-chromosome, comparing Figures 2, a–b, most
discarded material is very small, but there is a region near the
red cluster, at human 84.6–88.6 Mb, mouse 94.3–99.7 Mb,
which forms three clusters. Each has length <C = 1 Mb in
human, so they are discarded. Increasing G or lowering C
sufficiently would retain these clusters and possibly merge
them with the red cluster. If they were the only addition, the
red block would be larger, but the synteny block order in
Figure 2e would not be affected, thus the rearrangement
analysis described below would remain the same. If distinct
blocks were added, it would affect the rearrangement analysis.
The chosen values of G and C result in a classification of the
anchor arrangements into microrearrangements, macrorear-
rangements, and noise. Rearrangements of anchors within a
synteny block are called microrearrangements. Rearrange-
ments of the order and orientation of synteny blocks are
called macrorearrangements.
From Synteny Blocks to the Breakpoint Graph
We illustrate the notion of the breakpoint graph using the
X-chromosome as an example. The signed permutation de-
scribing synteny block order on the X-chromosome in mouse
is4,5, 3, 11,2, 8,9, 10,6, 7,1. For our goals, we
shall use 1,7, 6,10, 9,8, 2,11,3, 5, 4 (a “flip” of the
entire chromosome). We may transform this permutation
into the “identity” permutation representing the human X-
chromosome, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, by 7 reversals (Fig.
2h) via the Hannenhalli–Pevzner algorithm (Hannenhalli and
Pevzner 1995b, 1999). This algorithm uses the breakpoint
graph (Fig. 2g) to construct a most parsimonious evolutionary
scenario (Fig. 2h) in polynomial time. We now show a new
way to construct the breakpoint graph.
Figure 3a presents the genomic dot-plot (with added
“start” and “end” elements) and the “human” path (shown
with solid edges) traversing the synteny blocks in human or-
der. The projection of this path on the human genome is
shown below the human axis. Similarly, Figure 3b presents
the same genomic dot-plot and the “mouse” path (shown
with dotted edges) traversing the synteny blocks in mouse
order. The two-dimensional breakpoint graph is obtained by
superimposing these solid and dotted paths (Fig. 3c) and fur-
ther deleting the synteny blocks (Fig. 3d). One can prove that
the breakpoint graph is a collection of alternating solid-
dotted cycles. Figure 3d consists of a cycle of length 2 (con-
taining the start vertex), two cycles of length 4, a cycle of
length 6, and a cycle of length 8. After constructing the cycles,
we usually color the edges so that each cycle has its own color
(Fig. 2g). At this point, we apply the Hannenhalli–Pevzner
algorithm to obtain a most parsimonious scenario. Note that
the breakpoint graphs in Figures 2 and 3 are different because
of the X-chromosome flip.
Hannenhalli and Pevzner (1995a) demonstrated that the
cycles and their interleaving structure are the “fossil records”
of rearrangement events and showed how to use them for
solving reversal distance and genomic distance problems. The
2D representation of breakpoint graphs shown in Figure 3 is
different from the representation used by Hannenhalli and
Pevzner (1995a; they used the 1D projections of this graph
shown along the axis in Fig. 3). We believe that the 2D break-
point graph is a better visualization than the 1D one, in ad-
dition to being independent of the choice of the axis. There-
fore, it provides better geometrical intuition for the Hannen-
halli–Pevzner theory.
Because every reversal creates at most two new break-
points, the reversal distance is at most half the number of the
breakpoints in the genome. If there is no breakpoint reuse,
then the reversal distance is exactly half the number of break-
points. Moreover, in this case the real evolutionary scenario is
a most parsimonious one, thus implying that the reversal dis-
tance equals the real distance in this case. However, the esti-
mate of reversal distance as half the number of breakpoints is
inaccurate because it assumes that the breakpoints are not
reused in evolution. In most genome rearrangement studies,
Genome Rearrangements in Mammalian Evolution
Genome Research 41
www.genome.org
 on November 8, 2006 www.genome.orgDownloaded from 
there are breakpoint reuses (at least at a certain level of syn-
teny block resolution), thus indicating that breakpoint reuse
is the rule rather than the exception. For example, Palmer and
Herbon (1988) describe an evolutionary scenario with one
breakpoint reuse for cabbage and turnip mtDNA, whereas
Bafna and Pevzner (1995) describe an evolutionary scenario
with four breakpoint reuses in the rearrangement scenario for
human and mouse X-chromosomes.
Given an evolutionary scenario, we call two breakpoints,
B1 and B2, siblings if they are endpoints of a reversal R from
this scenario. Two breakpoints are related if there is a series of
breakpoints B1,B2,  ,Bn such that every two consecutive
breakpoints in this series are siblings. In addition, reconstruct-
ing a most parsimonious scenario and identification of related
breakpoints are nontrivial tasks, even in the absence of break-
point reuse. The breakpoint graph reveals related breakpoints
and allows one to find the most parsimonious scenarios. In
the scenario shown in Figure 2h, the breakpoint at the start
(flat end) of block 4 is used twice. We emphasize that by
reusing breakpoints we do not mean multiple use of exactly
the same genomic position as an endpoint of rearrangements,
but rather the fact that between synteny blocks, there are
regions that host endpoints for multiple rearrangement
events.
Figure 3 Construction of the breakpoint graph from synteny blocks. (a) Solid path through human. (b) Dotted path through mouse. (c)
Superposition of paths. (d) Remove blocks to obtain cycles.
Pevzner and Tesler
42 Genome Research
www.genome.org
 on November 8, 2006 www.genome.orgDownloaded from 
In contrast to unichromosomal breakpoint graphs (con-
sisting of cycles), the multichromosomal breakpoint graph
consists of both cycles and paths (such paths correspond to
breaking the cycles at the chromosome endpoints). The
breakpoint graph for the entire human and mouse genomes is
very complicated (Fig. 4).
From the Breakpoint Graph to Rearrangement
Scenarios
A previous analysis of comparative maps of human and
mouse X-chromosomes revealed 8 syntenic blocks and postu-
lated a most parsimonious rearrangement scenario with 6 in-
versions (Bafna and Pevzner 1995). The genomic sequences
reveal 11 synteny blocks of 1 Mb and longer and provide
evidence for at least 7 inversions (Fig. 2h). Moreover, there are
177 microrearrangements within the X-chromosome that
were beyond the resolution of previous comparative mapping
studies (some of them may be artifacts of assembly errors).
Two out of 11 synteny blocks on the X-chromosome show
evidence of extensive microrearrangements.
These estimates are based on the Hannenhalli and Pevz-
ner (1995a) theorem that expresses the reversal distance be-
Figure 4 Multichromosomal breakpoint graph of the whole human and mouse genomes. The conventional chromosome order and orientation
are not suitable for such graphs; an optimal chromosome order and orientation were determined by the algorithm in Tesler (2002b). Three “null
chromosomes,” N1, N2, N3, were added to mouse to equalize the number of chromosomes in the two genomes.
Genome Rearrangements in Mammalian Evolution
Genome Research 43
www.genome.org
 on November 8, 2006 www.genome.orgDownloaded from 
tween two genomes as n + 1 c + h, where n is the number of
synteny blocks, c is the number of cycles in the breakpoint
graph, and h is another easily computable combinatorial pa-
rameter of the breakpoint graph. Because h equals zero for
many biological data sets, n + 1 c is usually a good approxi-
mation for reversal distance. For the X-chromosome as de-
picted in Figure 2g, we have n = 11, c = 4, h = 0, and we obtain
a reversal distance of 8. However, flipping the whole mouse
X-chromosome results in the breakpoint graph of Figure 3d,
with n = 11, c = 5, h = 0, and reversal distance 7. Flipping a
whole chromosome does not count as a rearrangement event,
thus the genomic distance on the X-chromosome between
human and mouse is 7.
A similar theorem (Hannenhalli and Pevzner 1995b,
1999; Tesler 2002b) holds for multichromosomal genomes,
and automatically takes into account whole chromosome
flips. We used a fast implementation of the Hannenhalli–
Pevzner algorithm (Tesler 2002a) to analyze the human–
mouse rearrangement scenario (available via the GRIMMWeb
server at http://www-cse.ucsd.edu/groups/bioinformatics/
GRIMM/index.html). Although the algorithm finds a most
parsimonious scenario, the real scenario is not necessarily a
most parsimonious one (Blanchette et al. 1996), and the order
of rearrangement events within a most parsimonious scenario
often remains uncertain. Availability of three or more mam-
malian genomes could remedy some of these limitations and
provide a means to infer the gene order in the mammalian
ancestor (Bourque and Pevzner 2002).
The GRIMM algorithm constructs a most parsimonious
evolutionary scenario between human and mouse genomes
with 245 rearrangements. With at least 245 rearrangements
between human and mouse and an estimated 83 Myr
(Huchon et al. 2002) of evolution from their common ances-
tor, we obtain an estimated rate of 1.5 chromosomal rear-
rangements per Myr, which is higher than the previous esti-
mate of 1.0 (Lander et al. 2001). However, this estimate
should not be viewed as typical for mammalian evolution
because rodents may have unusually rapid chromosome al-
terations. The comparative mapping data for cat and cowmay
soon shed further light on the comparative rates of rearrange-
ments in different branches of the mammalian evolutionary
tree.
The human–mouse breakpoint graph provides insights
into rearrangements that may have occurred in the course of
evolution. Some of these rearrangements are almost “obvi-
ous” (they correspond to short cycles in the breakpoint
graph), whereas others involve long series of interacting
breakpoints. Such complicated rearrangement events are de-
scribed by long cycles/paths in the breakpoint graph. The
longest path in the human–mouse breakpoint graph involves
26 breakpoints. The human–mouse breakpoint graph has 6
other long paths with more than 10 breakpoints.
The analysis of microrearrangements within the synteny
blocks demonstrates a large variation in the rate of microre-
arrangements (reversals) along the genomes. In particular, 41
out of 281 synteny blocks do not show any evidence of mi-
crorearrangements, whereas 10 synteny blocks are extremely
rearranged (40 or more rearrangements within a block). For
example, a long synteny block on human Chromosome 13/
mouse Chromosome 8 (nucleotides 101,902,085 to
113,413,125 on human Chromosome 13) consists of 65 re-
gions of local similarity whose order is perfectly conserved in
human and mouse. On the other hand, a long synteny block
on human Chromosome 18/mouse Chromosome 17 (posi-
tions 2,789,316 to 10,083,804 on human Chromosome 18)
consists of 143 regions of local similarity and has a large num-
ber of microrearrangement breakpoints, indicating that there
were at least 85 inversions within this block (Fig. 1b). The
length of this synteny block in mouse is smaller than in hu-
man (6.0 Mb vs. 7.3 Mb). Of course, some of the breakpoints
within this synteny block may be caused by assembly errors.
There is evidence of at least 3170microrearrangements within
all the synteny blocks, some of which may be due to assembly
errors.
Every breakpoint defines two synteny blocks A and B
that are adjacent in one genome but separated in the second
one. We distinguish between unichromosomal breakpoints (A
and B belong to the same chromosome in the second ge-
nome) and multichromosomal breakpoints (A and B are on
different chromosomes). Most breakpoints in the human and
mouse genomes are unichromosomal breakpoints, thus indi-
cating that most rearrangements that happened in the course
of human–mouse evolution are intrachromosomal inver-
sions. In particular, one can come up with a most parsimoni-
ous rearrangement scenario that includes 134 reversals in the
human and mouse genomes before any translocations/
fusions/fissions happen. After performing these reversals, the
number of synteny blocks is reduced from 281 to 144. The
breakpoint graph of these human and mouse “preancestors”
allows one to infer which pairs of chromosomes were in-
volved in multiple translocations/fusions/fissions. The long-
est cycle in this graph involves 8 breakpoints located on 8
different chromosomes in human. The resulting rearrange-
ment scenario from the mouse to human preancestor has 15
inversions, 93 translocations, and 3 fissions. The complete
scenario from mouse to human has 149 inversions, 93 trans-
locations, and 3 fissions. (There are other combinations of
245 steps consistent with the breakpoint graph; this is the one
we found with the most inversions.)
DISCUSSION
Molecular evolution studies are usually based on the analysis
of individual genes rather than entire genomes. However,
such widespread phenomena as horizontal gene transfer, dif-
ferential gene loss, and the like, often lead to situations in
which evolutionary trees for different genes tell different sto-
ries. An alternative approach is to infer the evolutionary his-
tory of entire genomes, rather than individual genes, based on
the analysis of gene orders. Although this approach is success-
ful in bacterial genomics (for a recent review, see Wolf et al.
2002), its applications in mammalian genomics are somewhat
limited owing to incompleteness of gene order data derived
from comparative maps. Human and mouse genomic se-
quences, for the first time, provide a possibility to accurately
estimate the extent of rearrangement events. However, the
“original synteny” problem (Nadeau and Sankoff 1997) re-
mains unsolved because at least three mammalian gene orders
are required to derive the ancestral mammalian karyotype.
The ongoing mammalian sequencing projects and recently
developed algorithms for reconstructing ancestral gene orders
(Bourque and Pevzner 2002) provide hope that the “original
synteny” problem will finally be resolved.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Ewan Birney, Guillaume Bourque, and Bill
Murphy for many helpful suggestions; and to Bernard Moret
for providing his group’s genome rearrangement programs.
Pevzner and Tesler
44 Genome Research
www.genome.org
 on November 8, 2006 www.genome.orgDownloaded from 
We are also indebted to Michael Kamal, Kerstin Linblad-Toh,
and Jade Vinson for their advice on synteny blocks and rear-
rangements in human and mouse genomes.
The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part
by payment of page charges. This article must therefore be
hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 USC
section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
REFERENCES
Bafna, V. and Pevzner, P.A. 1993. Genome rearrangements and
sorting by reversals. In Proceedings of the 34th Annual IEEE
Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pp. 148–157.
———. 1995. Sorting by reversals: Genome rearrangements in plant
organelles and evolutionary history of X chromosome. Mol. Biol.
Evol. 12: 239–246.
———. 1996. Genome rearrangements and sorting by reversals. SIAM
J. Comput. 25: 272–289.
Blanchette, M., Kunisawa, T., and Sankoff, D. 1996. Parametric
genome rearrangements. Gene 172: GC11–GC17.
Bourque, G. and Pevzner, P.A. 2002. Genome-scale evolution:
Reconstructing gene orders in the ancestral species. Genome Res.
12: 9748–9753.
Carver, E.A. and Stubbs, L. 1997. Zooming in on the human–mouse
comparative map: Genome conservation re-examined on a
high-resolution scale. Genome Res. 7: 1123–1137.
Copeland, N., Jenkins, N.A., Gilbert, D.J., Eppig, J.T., Maltais, L.J.,
Miller, J.C., Dietrich, W.F., Weaver, A., Lincoln, S.E., Steen, R.G.,
et al. 1993. A genetic linkage map of the mouse: Current
applications and future prospects. Science 262: 57–66.
DeBry, R.W. and Seldin, M.F. 1996. Human/mouse homology
relationships. Genomics 33: 337–351.
Dobzhansky, T. and Sturtevant, A.H. 1938. Inversions in the
chromosomes of Drosophila pseudoobscura. Genetics 23: 28–64.
Fujibuchi, W., Ogata, H., Matsuda, H., and Kanehisa, M. 2000.
Automatic detection of conserved gene clusters in multiple
genomes by graph comparison and p-quasi grouping. Nucleic
Acids Res. 28: 4029–4036.
Gregory, S.G., Sekhon, M., Schein, J., Zhao, S., Osoegawa, K., Scott,
C.E., Evans, R.S., Burridge, P.W., Cox, T.V., Fox, C.A., et al. 2002.
A physical map of the mouse genome. Nature 418: 743–750.
Hannenhalli, S. and Pevzner, P.A. 1995a. Transforming men into
mice (polynomial algorithm for genomic distance problem). In
Proceedings of the 36th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of
Computer Science, pp. 581–592. IEEE, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
———. 1995b. Transforming cabbage into turnip (polynomial
algorithm for sorting signed permutations by reversals). In
Proceedings of the 27th Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of
Computing, pp. 178–189.
———. 1999. Transforming cabbage into turnip (polynomial
algorithm for sorting signed permutations by reversals). J. ACM
46: 1–27.
Hardison, R.C., Oeltjen, J., and Miller, W. 1997. Long human–mouse
sequence alignments reveal novel regulatory elements: A reason
to sequence the mouse genome. Genome Res. 7: 959–966.
Huchon, D., Madsen, O., Sibbald, M.J., Ament, K., Stanhope, M.J.,
Catzeflis, F., de Jong, W.W., and Douzery, E.J. 2002. Rodent
phylogeny and a timescale for the evolution of glires: Evidence
from an extensive taxon sampling using three nuclear genes.
Mol. Biol. Evol. 19: 1053–1065.
Kececioglu, J. and Sankoff, D. 1995. Exact and approximation
algorithms for the inversion distance between two permutations.
Algorithmica 13: 180–210.
Kent, W.J. 2002. BLAT—The BLAST-like alignment tool. Genome Res.
12: 656–664.
Koop, B.F. and Hood, L. 1994. Striking sequence similarity over
almost 100 kilobases of human and mouse T-cell receptor DNA.
Nat. Genet. 7: 48–53.
Kumar, S., Gadagkar, S.R., Filipski, A., and Gu, X. 2001.
Determination of the number of conserved chromosomal
segments between species. Genetics 157: 1387–1395.
Lander, E.S., Linton, L.M., Birren, B., Nusbaum, C., Zody, M.C.,
Baldwin, J., Devon, K., Dewar, K., Doyle, M., FitzHugh, W., et al.
2001. Initial sequencing and analysis of the human genome.
Nature 409: 860–921.
Lathe, W.C., Snel, B., and Bork, P. 2000. Gene context conservation
of a higher order than operons. Trends Biochem Sci. 25: 474–479.
Ma, B., Tromp, J., and Li, M. 2002. PatternHunter: Faster and more
sensitive homology search. Bioinformatics 18: 440–445.
Mayor, C., Brudno, M., Schwartz, J.R., Poliakov, A., Rubin, E.M.,
Frazer, K.A., Pachter, L., and Dubchak, I. 2000. VISTA:
Visualizing global DNA sequence alignments of arbitrary length.
Bioinformatics 16: 1046–1047.
Mural, R.J., Adams, M.D., Myers, E.W., Smith, H.O., Miklos, G.L.,
Wides, R., Halpern, A., Li, P.W., Sutton, G.G., Nadeau, J., et al.
2002. A comparison of whole-genome shotgun-derived mouse
chromosome 16 and the human genome. Science
296: 1661–1671.
Nadeau, J.H. and Sankoff, D. 1997. Landmarks in the Rosetta Stone
of mammalian comparative maps. Nat. Genet. 15: 6–7.
Nadeau, J.H. and Taylor, B.A. 1984. Lengths of chromosomal
segments conserved since divergence of man and mouse. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. 81: 814–818.
O’Brien, S.J., Menotti-Raymond, M., Murphy, W.J., Nash, W.G.,
Wienberg, J., Stanyon, R., Copeland, N.J., Jenkins, N.A.,
Womack, J.E., and Graves, J.A. 1999. The promise of comparative
genomics in mammals. Science 286: 458–481.
Palmer, J.D. and Herbon, L.A. 1988. Plant mitochondrial DNA
evolves rapidly in structure, but slowly in sequence. J. Mol. Evol.
27: 87–97.
Puttagunta, R., Gordon, L.A., Meyer, G.E., Kapfhamer, D., Lamerdin,
J.E., Kantheti, P., Portman, K.M., Chung, W.K., Jenne, D.E.,
Olsen, A.S., et al. 2000. Comparative maps of human 19p13.3
and mouse chromosome 10 allow identification of sequences at
evolutionary breakpoints. Genome Res. 10: 1369–1380.
Rogozin, I.B., Makarova, K.S., Murvai, J., Czabarka, E., Wolf, Y.I.,
Tatusov, R.L., Szekely, L.A., and Koonin, E.V. 2002. Connected
gene neighborhoods in prokaryotic genomes. Nucleic Acids Res.
30: 2212–2223.
Sankoff, D. and Blanchette, M. 1997. The median problem for
breakpoints in comparative genomics. In Computing and
Combinatorics, Proceedings of COCOON ’97, Lecture notes in
computer science, pp. 251–263. Springer Verlag, New York.
Schwartz, S., Zhang, Z., Frazer, K.A., Smit, A., Riemer, C., Bouck, J.,
Gibbs, R., Hardison, R., and Miller, W. 2000. PipMaker—A Web
server for aligning two genomic DNA sequences. Genome Res.
10: 577–586.
Sturtevant, A.H. and Dobzhansky, T. 1936. Inversions in the third
chromosome of wild races of Drosophila pseudoobscura, and their
use in the study of the history of the species. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
22: 448–450.
Tatusov, R.L., Koonin, E.V., and Lipman, D.J. 1997. A genomic
perspective on protein families. Science 278: 631–637.
Tesler, G. 2002a. GRIMM: Genome rearrangements Web server.
Bioinformatics 18: 492–493.
———. 2002b. Efficient algorithms for multichromosomal genome
rearrangements. J. Comp. Sys. Sci. (in press).
Thomas, J.W., Summers, T.J., Lee-Lin, S.Q., Maduro, V.V., Idol, J.R.,
Mastrian, S.D., Ryan, J.F., Jamison, D.C., and Green, E.D. 2000.
Comparative genome mapping in the sequence-based era: Early
experience with human Chromosome 7. Genome Res.
10: 624–633.
Waterston, R.H., Lindblad-Toh, K., Birney, E., Rogers, J., Abril, J.F.,
Agarwal, P., Agarwala, R., Ainscough, R., Alexandersson, M., An,
P., et al. 2002. Initial sequencing and comparative analysis of the
mouse genome. Nature 420: 520–562.
Watterson, G.A., Ewens, W.J., Hall, T.E., and Morgan, A. 1982. The
chromosome inversion problem. J. Theor. Biol. 99: 1–7.
Wolf, Y.I., Rogozin, I.B., Kondrashov, A.S., and Koonin, E.V. 2001.
Genome alignment, evolution of prokaryotic genome
organization, and prediction of gene function using genomic
context. Genome Res. 11: 356–372.
Wolf, Y., Rogozin, I., Grishin, N., and Koonin, E. 2002. Genome
trees and the tree of life. Trends Genet. 18: 472.
WEB SITE REFERENCES
http://www-cse.ucsd.edu/groups/bioinformatics/GRIMM/index.html;
GRIMM Web server.
Received September 2, 2002; accepted in revised form November 4, 2002.
Genome Rearrangements in Mammalian Evolution
Genome Research 45
www.genome.org
 on November 8, 2006 www.genome.orgDownloaded from 
