Accuracy of structure-derived properties in simple
comparative models of protein structures
Suvobrata Chakravarty, Lei Wang and Roberto Sanchez*
Structural Biology Program, Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
New York, NY 10029, USA
Received October 29, 2004; Accepted December 13, 2004
ABSTRACT
The accuracy of comparative models of proteins is
addressed here. A set of 12 732 single-template
models of sequences of known high-resolution struc-
tures was built by an automated procedure. Accuracy
of several structure-derived properties, such as sur-
face area, residue accessibility, presence of pockets,
electrostatic potential and others, was determined as
a function of template:target sequence identity by
comparing models with their corresponding experi-
mental structures. As expected, the average accuracy
of structure-derived properties always increases with
higher template:target sequence identity, but the
exact shape of this relationship can differ from one
property to another. A comparison of structure-
derived properties measured from NMR and X-ray
structures of the same protein shows that for most
properties, the NMR/X-ray difference is of the same
order as the error in models based on40% template:
target sequence identity. The exact sequence identity
at which properties reach that accuracy varies bet-
ween 25 and 50%, depending on the property being
analyzed. A general characteristic of simple compar-
ative models is that their surface has increased area
as a consequence of being more rugged than that of
experimental structures. This suggests that including
solvent effects during model building or refinement
could significantly improve the accuracy of surface
properties in comparative models.
INTRODUCTION
An enormous progress in our ability to discover gene seq-
uences, both by genome sequencing projects and by more
traditional methods, presents an opportunity, and a challenge,
to understand the function of those genes individually, and
in the context of each other. Full understanding of the biological
role of these proteins requires knowledge of their three-
dimensional (3D) structure and biochemical function. The
3D structure of a protein generally provides more information
about its function than its sequence alone because patterns in
space are frequently more recognizable than patterns in
sequence (1). Different types of information can be derived
from protein structures, such as overall shape and volume;
the amino acid composition of the surface and its electrostatic
and hydrophobic properties; and the presence of pockets and
cavities, salt bridges, disulphide bridges, etc. Knowledge of
the 3D structure also allows us to look at the properties of
functionally relevant subsets of the structure like the binding/
active sites (2–4) as well as the exploration of molecular
interactions through docking calculations for protein–ligand
and protein–protein interactions. Structure-derived informa-
tion describes the similarities and differences among proteins,
and therefore is valuable in understanding how they function
(5). This type of analysis is critical when we try to understand
differences between homologs in different tissues or organ-
isms, or between polymorphisms of a particular gene (6).
Ideally, comparative studies of structure-derived information
should use a complete set of proteins for the particular question
being asked. For example, if one wants to understand differ-
ences in substrate specificity through the study of structural
differences in a family of enzymes, ideally one would need
structures for all members of the family. Similarly, if properties
of proteins from thermophiles and mesophiles are being
compared to identify the structural basis of thermal adaptation,
one would like to compare structures of as many pairs as
possible of orthologs from mesophiles and thermophiles (7).
Unfortunately, because the number of known protein sequences
is an order of magnitude larger than the number of known
protein structures, in most cases complete sets of experimental
structures are not available to answer such questions. In such a
situation, the use of predicted protein structures is necessary to
obtain the kind of structure-derived information described
above.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 212 659 8648; Fax: +1 212 849 2456; Email: roberto@sanchezlab.org
Present address:
Lei Wang, Structural Biology Program, J. G. Brown Cancer Center, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40202, USA
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use permissions, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org.
ª 2005, the authors
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 33 No. 1 ª Oxford University Press 2005; all rights reserved
244–259 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1
doi:10.1093/nar/gki162
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Comparative modeling uses experimentally determined
protein structures (templates) to predict the 3D conformation
of another protein with a similar amino acid sequence (target).
Currently, it is the most accurate approach to protein structure
prediction (8–10). Its applicability is limited by the require-
ment of a template structure, but in spite of this limitation it
is possible to model at least one domain in more than half of
the known protein sequences (11). Comparative modeling is
particularly well suited for the kind of studies described above,
where comparison of similar proteins is the focal point. Since
comparative modeling uses one or more experimental struc-
tures as templates to model a target protein of unknown struc-
ture, it is by definition a method that can be used to leverage
experimental information to extend structural information to
complete families of proteins. Even when a single template is
used in comparative modeling, the resulting models contain
more information about the target than the template used to
build them; this added-value justifies the use of comparative
models (12).
Although comparative models can be very accurate, in
general they contain errors and do not reach the level of
accuracy of high-resolution experimental structures. The over-
all accuracy of comparative models depends mainly on the
structural similarity between the target and the template, and
the accuracy of the alignment of the two sequences; both are a
function of template:target sequence similarity (1). Although it
is useful to know the overall accuracy of comparative models
[commonly measured by root mean square deviation (RMSD)
between model and the experimental structure], this measure
does not always correlate with, or is not always a good indi-
cator of the accuracy of a particular type of structure-derived
property (SDP). For example, the amino acid composition of
the surface of a protein can be reliably calculated from models,
but as the overall accuracy drops so does the reliability of
estimation of surface composition. The exact relationship
between overall accuracy (or a parameter of the model like
its sequence similarity with the template structure) and the
accuracy of the surface composition or any SDP, calculated
from it, is not known. This is particularly problematic if the
model is to be used to compare its SDPs with those from a
related, but different, protein because it would not be possible
to know if the observed differences are real or just a con-
sequence of errors in the model. Hence, the need arises to
address the accuracy of SDPs separately. This is particularly
important because the relevant accuracy of a model may differ
depending on the application. If comparative models are to be
used for structure-based drug design or protein–ligand dock-
ing, the accuracy of the pockets (binding site) and properties
such as electrostatic potential of the binding site are far more
relevant than the accuracy of any other region of the protein.
If comparative models are used to aid in the structure-based
prediction of sub-cellular localization (13), the accuracy of
surface composition is the most relevant feature. There is a
need to look at the accuracy of models from the perspective
of the application. Though seemingly trivial, systematic
large-scale analysis of comparative modeling to estimate
the average accuracy of various structural features has not
been carried out.
This work analyzes the accuracy of structure-derived prop-
erties of comparative models. Specifically we ask four ques-
tions. (i) What is the relationship between the template:target
sequence identity and the accuracy of SDPs in the model?
(ii) At what level of template:target sequence identity is the
accuracy of SDPs in models equal to the difference between
NMR and X-ray structures? (iii) Is there a difference in the
relationship between template:target sequence identity and
accuracy for different SDPs? (iv) What is the influence of
template:target alignment errors on the accuracy of SDPs in
models?
METHODS
Dataset
Chains of X-ray structures with resolution better than 2.5 s
were selected from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) (14).
A representative set of these chains was selected by an
all-against-all comparison of their sequences using BLAST
(15) and clustering into groups that had alignments with
95% sequence identity to each other and that covered at
least 85% of the chain sequence. The highest resolution mem-
ber of each group was retained. The representative chains were
structurally aligned with each other using program CE (16).
Only alignments with a CE Z-score higher than 4.5 and
covering at least 85% of one of the chains were retained
for model building. The aligned segments were accepted as
having the same fold. The aligned sequences were then sorted
based on protein size into three non-overlapping groups: small
(50–100 residues), medium (150–200 residues) and large
(>250 residues). The alignments were classified into 18
groups based on the sequence identity ranging from 10 to
100% with a bin size of 5%. Sequence identity was defined
as the ratio between the number of identical aligned residues
and the number of target residues in the template:target align-
ment. The number of alignments for groups with lower
sequence identity outnumbered those of groups with higher
sequence identity. Approximately, 200 alignments were
selected at random from the groups with lower sequence iden-
tity so that the contribution of each group or bin to the total set
of alignments is approximately equal. There are 1564, 911 and
856 unique chains of small, medium and large proteins,
respectively. The number of alignments for small, medium
and large proteins is respectively 4912, 4104 and 3716 in
our dataset.
Model building
The structure-based alignments produced by CE were used as
inputs to program MODELLER version 6v2 (17,18) to con-
struct a 3D model of the target sequence. The set of models
based on CE alignments is called STR. A second set of models
was based on ‘simple’ alignments generated by realigning the
sequences of the CE alignments using the ALIGN command of
MODELLER; these are called SEQ. SEQ alignments are
based exclusively on sequence information, as opposed to
the structure-based STR alignments. Models were constructed
from the respective alignments using the default ‘model’ rou-
tine in MODELLER (17,18). All alignments contained a single
template, and no loop modeling was performed. A total of
25 464 models were calculated for small, medium and large
proteins; half of them based on SEQ alignments and the other
half on STR alignments.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1 245
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
NMR/X-ray and X-ray/X-ray pairs
NMR structures were obtained from the PDB (14). NMR
structures showing 100% sequence identity [using BLAST
(15)] with high-resolution (<2.5 s) X-ray structures, as
well as a CE Z-score > 4.5 for every model of the NMR
ensemble were selected. For an NMR structure with more
than one corresponding X-ray structure, the one with highest
resolution and most similar ligand or hetero-atom composition
was chosen. This resulted in 48 pairs of structures with a size
range of 100–200 residues (close to the medium size), out of
these, 34 NMR structures are represented by 10 or more struc-
tural models. All the structural models of an NMR ensemble
are considered equivalent having the same probability of
representing the structure of the protein. To avoid differences
arising due to disorders in the N- and C-termini of the NMR
structure, the termini of each NMR/X-ray pair of structures
were removed in the following steps: (i) for an NMR structure
with N number of models, the model whose CE alignment
(Z-score> 4.5) with the corresponding X-ray structure had the
highest number of equivalent residues was chosen; (ii) only
the continuous stretch of residues in the CE alignment of the
selected model was retained; and (iii) all the remaining N  1
models as well as the corresponding X-ray structure were
truncated to look like the selected model in sequence. The
above-mentioned chain lengths refer to truncated polypep-
tides. The quality of NMR structures can be described by
the completeness of nuclear overhauser effects (NOEs)
(ratio between observed and expected NOEs) (19). This
value can be estimated from the fraction of residues in the
Ramachandran Core regions (19,20). On average, 69 – 12% of
residues in the NMR structures of this set fall into the core
regions, this would correspond to structures with 50% com-
pleteness of NOEs at 4 s cut-off, which is close to the average
observed for NMR structures solved after 1996 in the PDB
(19). The size of proteins in this set is slightly smaller than the
models in our Medium set (above); hence, for comparison of
properties that are size dependent, such as number of pockets
and salt-bridges per protein, the ‘NMR’ values are appropri-
ately scaled in Figures 7A and 8A.
Pairs of X-ray structures of a particular protein determined
either in different space groups or under different conditions
such as pH, or having different resolution (0–2.5 s) were used
for comparison to put an upper limit to the accuracy. These
X-ray/X-ray pairs were selected from alignments with 100%
sequence identity (covering at least 95% of the chain length) in
an all-against-all BLAST (15) comparison of sequences of
high-resolution X-ray structures. There are 1341 such pairs
of structures. No filtering was done to prevent comparison of
structures bound to different ligands or structures with and with-
out ligand. Although ligand-induced conformational changes
may contribute to observed differences between X-ray struc-
tures or NMR/X-ray pairs, a comparison of the deviations
between pairs of proteins with and without ligand showed
that there is no significant difference between the two groups.
Therefore, all examples were retained for this analysis.
Model accuracy
When measuring the accuracy of an SDP in a model, the
value of the property derived from it is compared with the
value obtained from its corresponding experimental structure
(target). For most properties, the accuracy is expressed as the
percentage of cases observed in the model that are also
observed in the target. Let fMg be the set that consists of
all predicted cases (such as salt-bridges) in a model and let
fEg be the corresponding set consisting of actual cases in the
experimental structure. Accuracy would then be
Accuracy ¼ fMg \ fEgfMg
For some properties [accessible surface area (ASA) and elec-
trostatic potential], this way of expressing accuracy is not
convenient. The accuracy definition for each of these proper-
ties is described in their corresponding sections.
Solvent accessible surface, solvent excluded surface,
exposure state and fractal dimension
Accessible surface area of a protein was computed using the
method of Lee and Richards (21) as implemented in the pro-
gram NACCESS (22) with a probe radius of 1.4 s. Access-
ibility of a residue X to a solvent probe is the ratio of the ASA
of X in the folded state of the protein to that in a Gly–X–Gly
tripeptide. Residues with solvent accessibility >40% (23) are
considered to be exposed, and residues with solvent access-
ibility <5% are considered buried. The remaining residues are
considered to have an intermediate level of exposure. For a
model with Nm E exposed residues, the accuracy of exposed
state assignment is defined as
fNm Eg \ fNe Eg
fNm Eg
where fNm Eg and fNe Eg are the sets of exposed residues in
the model and the experimental structure, respectively.
Solvent excluded surface area (SES) is computed using
program MSMS (24) and was used for computing fractal
dimension (FD). FD measures the rate of change of SES as
the probe size increases (25). By definition,
FD ¼ 1
n
Xn
i
Di and Di ¼ 2  d log SESð Þ
d log radð Þ
 
i
SES and rad are the i-th solvent excluded surface area and
probe radius, respectively (25) and n is 25 (see below). For
convenience Di was computed as
Di ¼ 2 
log
SESi
SESi  1
 
log
radi
radi  1
 
2
664
3
775
SESi and SESi1 are solvent excluded surface area for i-th and
(i  1)th probe radius, respectively. Probe radius ranged
between 1.0 and 3.5 s with an interval of 0.1 s, hence, n is
25. Smoothed atomic FD (SAFD) describes the roughness
around each atom by smoothing over its neighborhood (26).
By definition,
fi ¼ 2 
d log
P
j Aj
 
d log radð Þ
" #
and Si ¼ ri
ri þ rp
 2
where fi is the SAFD value for atom i, Aj is the contact area
(27) of atom j, and the sum is over all neighbor atoms j within
246 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
5 s of atom i. The contact area of atom i is obtained by
multiplying the scaling factor Si to the ASA of the atom,
where ri and rp are the radii of atom i and probe, respectively.
SAFD was computed in the same way as FD (see above), i.e. in
place of the SES of the whole protein, the sum of the contact
area of a few select atoms was used. SAFD was used to
measure the roughness of pockets.
Residue neighborhood and inter-residue distance
Two residues (with a sequence separation, K > 3) are con-
sidered to be interacting or neighbors if at least one inter-
residue atomic distance (D) is smaller than Do, where
Do = vWra + vWrb + 1 and vWra, vWrb are the van der
Waals radii (28) of atoms ‘a’ and ‘b’, respectively. For residue
i in the model, the list of its neighbors fNm ig is compared
with the list of neighbors fNe ig of the corresponding residue
in the experimental structure. The accuracy of the residue
neighborhood in a model with Nres residues is
XNres
i
fNm ig \ fNe ig
fNm ig :
An interacting pair of residues is considered either buried or
exposed only when both the partners are buried or exposed,
respectively. In all other cases, the interacting pair is consid-
ered to be of intermediate exposure. Neighborhood is a qual-
itative measure of distance between a pair of residues. Hence,
for inter-residue distance we resort to a more quantitative
measure. The inter-residue distance is computed from the
geometric centers of side-chain atoms. For residue i in the
model, the distances of the center of mass of n i residues
(Ai1, Ai2, . . . , Ain i) within a sphere of 6 s from its geometric
center is calculated. Let Ai1
0, Ai20, . . . , Ain i0 be the corre-
sponding n i residues in the experimental structure. Let D Ai1
be the distance between residues i and Ai1. Then DDi, the set of
all the differences jD Ai1  D Ai10 j , jD Ai2  D Ai20 j ,
. . . jD Ain i  D Ain i0 j for residue i, is used to obtain
the combined distribution of DD (combined from Nres residues
of a model). The fraction of DD< 2 s is used as a measure of
the accuracy of contact distances.
Pockets
Surface pocket analysis was carried out with program
PASS (29). PASS reports coordinates of grid points occupying
each pocket. Residues in contact with grid points (protein
atoms within 4.5 s of each grid point) were taken as boundary
atoms/residues. Pockets with 10 or more boundary residues
(large pockets) were considered for this analysis. A pocket in
the model was considered identical to one in the experimen-
tal structure if at least 60% of its boundary residues were
identical.
Packing density
Packing density of a residue is defined as
Packing density ¼ volumevdW
volumeVoronoi
where volumevdW and volumeVoronoi are the van der Waals and
Voronoi volume of residues, respectively (30). The van der
Waals volumes were taken from Creighton (31). For an infinite
set of arbitrary points/atoms in space, the Voronoi procedure
(32) divides up space with a unique volume assigned to each
point or atom. Residue Voronoi volumes were obtained from
the sum of the constituent atom-volumes. Only residues with
solvent accessibility = 0.0 were considered for packing calcu-
lations (33) as only volumes of interior atoms are possible to
calculate with the Voronoi construction. The program for
computing the Voronoi volume of interior atoms was obtained
from http://www.molmovdb.org/geometry (33).
Volume
Volume enclosed by the solvent accessible surface of a protein
was computed using the ProShape suite of programs (34) with
a probe radius of 1.4 s.
Salt-bridge
We considered an ionic interaction to be a salt-bridge when the
distance between the center of positive charge (Arg, Lys, His)
and the center of negative charge (Glu, Asp) as well as at least a
pair of oppositely charged atoms are within 4 s (35). The fol-
lowing atoms were considered for the salt-bridge calculations
NE, CZ, NH1, NH2 of Arg; NZ of Lys; HD1, NE2 of His; OD1,
OD2 of Asp; and OE1, OE2 of Glu. The distance between the
centers of positive and negative charge was varied from 4 to 8s
at an interval of 0.5s for models to check the efficiency of salt-
bridge detection in models. The accuracy was highest at 4 s.
Electrostatic potential
The electrostatic potential is calculated using the algorithms of
Nichollset al. (36) for solving the Poisson–Boltzmannequation,
as implemented in thecommandCalcPotofprogramMOLMOL
(37). Partial charges provided in the MOLMOL libraries are
used, dielectric constants 80 and 2 for solvent and protein,
respectively, and salt concentration of 150 mM. The output
of the calculation is a 3D grid containing the values of the elec-
trostatic potential at each grid point. The size of the grid is such
that no protein atom is closer than 10 s to the boundaries of the
grid. The comparison of electrostatic potential between two
proteins was carried out as described previously (12). Because
of the largercalculationtime,asubsetof1000modelsofmedium
size was used for these calculations. These models were divided
into nine template:target sequence identity bins. Also, the smal-
ler set of 30 X-ray/X-ray pairs of Jacobson et al. (38) was used.
RESULTS
The following structure-derived properties (SDPs) were ana-
lyzed for 12 732 single-template models: (i) overall accuracy,
(ii) inter-residue distance, (iii) exposure state of residues, (iv)
neighborhood of residues, (v) ASA, (vi) identification of sur-
face pockets, (vii) salt-bridges and (viii) electrostatic potential.
Models were built on single templates using two alternative
alignments: template:target pairwise sequence alignment
(SEQ models) and structure-based alignment (STR models)
of the experimental structure of target and template (see
Methods). An STR model illustrates the accuracy of a given
property in the absence of alignment errors. In other words,
comparison of accuracy of SDPs between SEQ models and
STR models provides an indication of the effect of alignment
errors. The accuracy of SDPs is discussed here as a function of
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1 247
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
sequence identity of the template:target alignment as it is the
most commonly referred variable in comparative modeling
(39). Because the significance of sequence identity as a measure
of similarity depends on the alignment length (40) models were
further divided into three classes based on sequence length (see
Methods). When measuring accuracy, the model is compared
with its corresponding experimental structure. High-resolution
X-ray structures were selected as the accuracy reference for the
following reasons: X-ray structures are generally accepted to
have higher information content than NMR-structures; a much
larger number of high-resolution X-ray structures than NMR
structures are available, thus allowing for a larger-scale com-
parison; and finally, most of the work done on assessment of
comparative models has been done using X-ray structures as
templates and targets, thus facilitating the comparison of our
results with those obtained in other studies. Comparisons of
SDP accuracy are carried out in three distinct modes: (i) com-
parison of SEQ models among Small, Medium and Large sets
(Protein Size Effect). (ii) Comparisonof SEQ versus STR model
(Alignment Error Effect). (iii) Comparison of SEQ model
versus NMR/X-ray pairs and X-ray/X-ray pairs (Experimental
Variation) (see Methods). Except for (i), in the other two modes
of comparison only medium-sized models were used.
Overall accuracy of models
Overall accuracy was measured by the coordinate RMSD of all
Ca atoms, and by the percentage of equivalent Ca atoms within
3.5sof each other in the optimal superposition of the model and
the target experimental structure. These are common measure-
ments that have been performed systematically for comparative
models (41,42). Figure 1A and B (RMSD and percentage of
equivalent Ca atoms, respectively) shows the change in overall
accuracy as a function of template:target sequence identity for
Small, Medium and Large models. As expected, the measures
show a trend of increasing accuracy (decreasing error) with
higher template:target sequence identity. The apparent higher
accuracy for the Small set is due to the size dependence of
measures such as RMSD; it is easier to achieve lower RMSD
with a smaller number of atoms. At 35% identity, the average
percentage of equivalent Ca atoms and the RMSD in the models
is similar to the average difference observed for the NMR/X-ray
comparison (dotted line). There is a sharp decrease in the accur-
acy below 35% sequence identity, as reported previously (1,41).
Two factors contribute to this; the divergence in the structural
similarity between homologous proteins (43,44) and the
increase in the template:target alignment errors. The compar-
ison of SEQ and STR models (Figure 1C) deconvolutes these
two contributions. At 40% sequence identity, the difference in
accuracy between SEQ and STR models starts to become visible
and it sharply increases below 35% sequence identity, showing
the effect of alignment error on the overall model accuracy. But
even in the absence of alignment errors (STR), the accuracy
drops sharply below 35% indicating that the target and template
structures start to diverge.
Inter-residue distance
One of the simplest measures that can be derived from a
protein structure is the distance between pairs of residues or
atoms. This measurement is common in determining the
presence of a potential disulfide bridge or salt-bridge. It is
also the basis for the development of statistical potentials
used in many aspects of computational structural biology
(45). The fraction of distances with DD < 2 s, where DD is
the deviation in the inter-residuedistance, isused asameasureof
the accuracy (see Methods). Although this measure can be used
toestimateoverallaccuracyofamodel, it isusedheretoillustrate
the difference in accuracy between exposed and buried residues.
The accuracy of the inter-residue distances decreases as the
Figure 1. Overall accuracy is shown as a function of template:target sequence
identity. (A) RMSD (all Ca) between SEQ models and their corresponding
experimental structures is compared among Small (SP), Medium (MP) and
Large (LP) proteins. The horizontal dotted line represents the RMSD (all Ca)
between NMR structures and their corresponding X-ray structures for medium-
sized proteins (MP). (B) Percentage of equivalent Ca atoms of SEQ models is
compared among SP, MP and LP. The dotted line corresponds to the NMR/
X-ray difference. (C) Comparison of percentage of equivalent Ca atoms
between models built on sequence-based (SEQ, closed circles) and
structure-based (STR, open circles) alignments for MP.
248 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
residue becomes more exposed (Figure 2A). The accuracy of the
solvent exposed residues reaches a plateau at 80% while that of
buried residues at 100%, this is probably owing to the less con-
strained environment of surface residues compared with that of
interior residues. This is further confirmed by the observation
that the deviation in the inter-residue distances between NMR
and X-ray structures is dependent on the exposure state of the
residues (Figure 2A, dotted lines). At 40% sequence identity,
inter-residue distances for exposed and buried residues reach
accuraciesequivalent to the difference between NMRand X-ray
structures. Below 40% identity, the errors due to misalignments
and the template:target structural divergence start to appear
(Figure 2B). The marked difference in the accuracy of exposed
and buried residues indicates that SDPs that depend on surface
residues may have markedly different accuracy from SDPs that
depend on buried residues at the same level of template:target
sequence identity.
Residue exposure state
Exposure state of a residue, i.e. if a residue is exposed, inter-
mediate or buried, is decided based on its solvent accessibility
(see Methods). Residues accessible to the solvent are generally
responsible for the interaction of a protein with other mole-
cules, thus determining its biochemical function. For this rea-
son, protein structures are frequently used to determine which
residues are exposed to the solvent and the information is used
in applications such as site-directed mutagenesis, sub-cellular
localization prediction and protein design. The accuracy of
exposure state for exposed residues, which represents the
probability that a residue that is exposed in the model is
also exposed on the experimental target structure, decreases
with protein size (Small >Medium > Large) and increases with
template:target sequence identity (Figure 3A and D). The
NMR/X-ray difference is comparable to the error in SEQ
models at 30% sequence identity (Figure 3A, dotted line).
The higher accuracy with decreasing protein size is probably
owing to the increase in the surface/volume ratio (i.e. a larger
proportion of exposed residues) as protein size decreases
(Figure 3A, inset). Thus, in a smaller protein, the probability
of randomly assigning an exposed state is higher. Another
indication of this effect is that the comparison of accuracy
for exposed and buried residues in Medium proteins
(Figure 3C), which shows that below 30% identity exposed
residues are assigned with higher accuracy than buried resi-
dues in spite of the higher conservation of buried residues. As
the quality of models decreases, the assignment of exposure
state becomes more random and accuracy approaches a value
similar to the fraction of residues in the corresponding expos-
ure state (e.g. in medium-sized models 40% exposed and
18% buried; see Figure 3A, inset). Exposure state accuracy
seems to be slightly more robust than overall accuracy with
respect to alignment error (Figure 3B). Only below 30%
sequence identity do the errors in the alignment have an impact
on the accuracy of exposure state.
Residue neighborhood
Information about neighborhood of a particular residue is
obtained from the contacts it makes with its neighbors. Informa-
tion about neighborhood of residues is routinely used in rational
design of mutants, biochemical labeling (attaching a fluoro-
phore or a spin label), incorporation of disulphide bridges
and in protein design. The list of neighbors of each residue
in the model was compared with those in the experimental
structure (see Methods). Neighborhood accuracy shows no
clear dependence on protein size (Figure 4A). At 30% sequence
identity, the neighborhood accuracy of SEQ models is compar-
able to the difference observed between NMR and X-ray struc-
tures (Figure 4A, dotted line) and drops rapidly at lower values.
Above 30% sequence identity, the alignment error is small
enough not to have effect on the accuracy (Figure 4B).
Below 30% identity, the effect of the alignment error becomes
apparent and the magnitude of the difference observed between
SEQ and STR models in this case (Figure 4B) is larger than that
observed for exposure state (Figure 3B). The accuracy of neigh-
borhood for exposed residues is clearly lower than that for
buried residues over the whole range of sequence identities
(Figure 3C), but the difference is not as large as that observed
for inter-residue distance (Figure 2A).
Accessible surface area
The value of the total ASA of the protein is frequently used
in the calculation of protein stability and binding (46) or
Figure 2. Inter-residue distance. Accuracy is defined as the fraction of residue
pairs with DD < 2 s (see text) and is shown as a function of template:target
sequence identity. (A) Accuracy of exposed (open circles) and buried (closed
circles) residues in SEQ models of medium-sized proteins (MP). The dotted
lines represent NMR/X-ray differences. (B) Comparison between models built
on sequence-based (SEQ, closed circles) and structure-based (STR, open
circles) alignments for MP.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1 249
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
oligomerization state (47,48). We use the average per-residue
ASA difference jDASAj /Nres (s2) = jASAE  ASAMj /Nres as
a measure of the error (Figure 5A and B); ASAM and ASAE are
the total surface area of a model and its corresponding experi-
mental structure, respectively; and Nres is the number of resi-
dues in the protein. Below 50% sequence identity, there is little
difference in per residue based area estimation across protein
size (Figure 5A). This indicates that the error in total ASA
estimates would linearly increase with protein size. Above
50% identity, the Small models show a larger jDASAj /
Nres than Medium and Large models. jDASAj /Nres is com-
parable to the difference between NMR and X-ray structures
when sequence identity reaches 40% (Figure 5A, dotted line).
The effect of misalignments on ASA accuracy is very small
compared to their effect on the accuracy of other properties
discussed so far (Figure 5B). At very low-sequence identity,
STR models have slightly larger error than SEQ models
(Figure 5B). This is contrary to what we have seen so far
where STR models are always more accurate than SEQ models
(Figures 1–4). This is probably a consequence of the number
and size of insertions and deletions present in the models at
this level of sequence similarity. Since no loop modeling or
any other type of refinement is being used, each insertion in the
model adopts a relatively random conformation which tends to
be extended, thus exaggerating the total ASA value. At very
low-sequence identity, the SEQ alignment in general presents
a smaller number of gaps than the STR alignment because of
the effect of the gap penalty function (data not shown).
Although the SEQ alignment is less accurate, the fact that
it contains fewer gaps at very low-sequence identity is an
advantage when estimating the total ASA for a protein.
To further characterize the error in ASA, the distribution of
the relative change in ASA, DASA/ASA = (ASAE  ASAM)/
ASAE, was plotted for models, templates and NMR structures
(Figure 5C). DASA/ASA for models is mostly in the negative
region (ranging between 20 and +5%) indicating that the
majority of models have larger surface area than their corres-
ponding experimental structure. The template, on the other
hand, shows symmetrical distribution around 0 ranging
roughly between 15 and +15%. This indicates that corrected
ASA can be computed from models as their DASA/ASA dis-
tribution is skewed (Figure 5C). In most cases, the ASA estim-
ate in the models should be decreased by the value indicated in
Figure 5A. This is relevant, for example, in applications
where ASA of models is used to calculate change in heat
capacity (DCp) of binding (49) and also in computation of
Figure 3. Residue exposure state. Exposure state indicates if a residue is exposed to the solvent or buried in the interior of the protein. The fraction of correctly
predicted exposed (A–C) and buried (C) residues of models is shown as a function of template:target sequence identity: (A) Comparison among SEQ models of Small
(SP), Medium (MP) and Large (LP) proteins. The dotted line indicates the NMR/X-ray difference. The inset shows percentage of exposed (e), intermediate (i) and
buried (b) residues in SP, MP and LP. (B) Comparison between models built on sequence-based (SEQ, closed circles) and structure-based (STR, open circles)
alignments in medium-sized proteins (MPs). (C) Comparison between exposed and buried residues of medium-sized SEQ models. (D) Surface of models
Streptomyces griseus protease B colored by exposure state of residues in the corresponding experimental structure (1sgp): buried (red), exposed (magenta)
and intermediate (blue). The sequence identities of the models are indicated below. The accuracy of the models is such that they would fall on the MP
curve in (A).
250 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
solvent–protein interaction energy from ASA (50). NMR
structures show a broad symmetric DASA/ASA distribution
centered around 5%, indicating a tendency to have increased
ASA with respect to X-ray structures. To investigate whether
the ASA increase in models and NMR structures is due to an
increase in the molecular volume, ASA enclosed volume (V )
was computed using ProShape (34) and the distribution of the
relative change in volume, DV/V = (VolumeE  VolumeM)/
VolumeE, was examined (Figure 5D). For models, the
distribution of DV/V shows a narrow near-symmetric distribu-
tion around 0 indicating that an increase in volume is not the
main cause of the increase in surface area. In contrast, NMR
structures do show an increase in volume with respect to the
corresponding X-ray structure. A possible explanation for
ASA increase in the models is that the surface of a model
is more rugged than that of a natural protein. We examined
surface roughness by computing FD (see Methods). FD meas-
ures the rate of change of SES as probe size increases (25).
For a rough surface, the rate of change would be faster than
that of a smooth surface, i.e. its FD is higher. FD of a modeled
protein is not only always larger than that of a natural protein,
but also shows a strong dependence on sequence identity
(Figure 6A). The value of FD obtained in our study is slightly
lower than that of Lewis and Rees (25), but close to that
calculated by Timchenko et al. (51) from a power law rela-
tionship between number of probe bodies covering the surface
and the probe radius. Because FD ranges between 2 and 3,
FD-2 (the lower limit) is used here as reference to measure any
relative change. The relative change in FD, DFD/(FD-2), of
models with respect to their corresponding experimental struc-
tures ranges between 80 and +40% (Figure 6B). The increase
in the FD of a model may be due to a larger number of surface
pockets or internal cavities with respect to the experimental
structures (Figure 6C). As the probe size increases surface
pockets and internal cavities become inaccessible to the
probe resulting in a large change of surface area accounting
for higher FD of the modeled protein (Figure 6C). These
results suggest that the quality of comparative models could
be improved by explicit refinement of the surface. Because
80% of the total area of proteins comes from side chains, the
observed increase in ASA and FD could be attributed to inac-
curate side-chain modeling. Refinement of surface residues by
side-chain modeling with SCWRL3 (52) did not result in any
improvement for surface features (data not shown). Even
though methods such as SCWRL3, which are based on
backbone-dependent rotamer libraries, are more accurate
than other methods for predicting c1 and c2 side-chain dihed-
ral angles (53), the observed surface artifacts may still persist
because of long side chains where incorrect assignment of
dihedral angles beyond c1 and c2 still results in incorrect
positioning of the bulk of the side-chain atoms. This suggests
that additional steps such as including solvent effects and
electrostatic interactions would probably be needed to
improve the accuracy of surface features. NMR structures
also show an increased FD with respect to the X-ray structure
with DFD/(FD-2) ranging between 60 and +50% (Figure 6A
and B). In NMR structure determination, there are fewer inter-
proton distance constraints for side chain atoms than for main
chain atoms, hence, side-chain conformations are less defined
than the backbone (44). The observed increase in FD is a
manifestation of this.
Surface pockets
Protein function, such as binding a ligand, is frequently
mediated by surface pockets. The accuracy of detection and
volume of surface pockets in models was measured. Prelim-
inary data showed that volumes of identical pockets of even
very close homologs show a large variation. For example, the
volume of the central lipid-binding cavity in the Fatty Acid
Figure 4. Residue neighborhood. Neighborhood of a residue is defined as the
list of residues in van der Waals contact with it. The fraction of correctly
predicted neighbors of buried (A–C) and exposed (C) residues of models is
shown as a function of template:target sequence identity. (A) Comparison
among SEQ models of SP, MP and LP. The dotted line indicates the NMR/
X-ray difference. (B) Comparison between models built on sequence-based
(SEQ, closed circles) and structure-based (STR, open circles) alignments for
medium-sized proteins (MP). (C) Comparison between exposed and buried
residues of SEQ models of MP.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1 251
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Binding Protein family showed large variation even between
very close homologs (data not shown). However, this differ-
ence is not due to changes in substrate specificity or due to
presence or absence of substrate, but due to widening or nar-
rowing of the mouth of the central pocket as a result of side-
chain orientation, indicating that the estimate of pocket
volumes is intrinsically noisy. Even the side chains of the
same protein can show large variation in conformation
when crystallized in different space groups due to differences
in crystal packing (38). Hence, for this study only the identi-
fication and location of pockets were dealt with and compar-
ison of pocket size was avoided. Program PASS (29) was used
for detection and identification of pockets (see Methods).
PASS reports coordinates of grid points representing putative
active site ligands. Residues in contact with these grids define
the pocket boundary. Identity of a pocket in a model with that
of an experimental structure is established by comparing
the list of boundary residues of the pockets (see Methods).
The pocket analysis was carried out only for the set of
medium-sized models. One-third of the pockets of medium-
sized models had 10 or more boundary residues and the
remaining two-thirds had fewer than 10 boundary residues.
We looked at large pockets (with 10 or more boundary resi-
dues) because the largest pocket of a protein is most often the
biological active site (54). The volumes of these pockets range
between 100 and 800 s3 (Figure 7A, inset). The number
of large pockets per protein is not only much higher in
models but also dependent on template:target sequence iden-
tity (Figure 7A). Alignment errors are not the cause of the
increased number of pockets since STR models are as accurate
as SEQ models in this case (Figure 7A). Hence, this effect is
probably due to the lack of treatment of insertions and incor-
rect modeling of non-conserved side chains. Side chains adopt
the conformation of the corresponding template residue in case
Figure 5. Surface and volume. ASA and volume of models are compared with the corresponding target experimental structures. Change in ASA per residue,
jASAEASAMj /Nres, as a function of template:target sequence identity: (A) Comparison among SEQ models of SP, MP and LP, the dotted line corresponds to the
NMR/X-ray difference; (B) Comparison between SEQ and STR models of MP. (C and D) Distribution of relative change in ASA (C) and volume (D) for model–target
comparison (black bars), template–target comparison (gray bars) and NMR/X-ray comparison (dotted line). Relative ASA change is (ASAE  ASAM)/ASAE.
Relative volume change is (VolumeE  VolumeM)/VolumeE.
252 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
of identical (or very similar) residues as is observed between
residues of homologous proteins (55,56), but otherwise adopt
conformations defined by MODELLER restraints on the c1–4
dihedral angles (18). This, together with lack of solvent treat-
ment on the side chains, seems to give rise to pocket artifacts.
The increase in the number of pockets adds to the ruggedness
of the protein surface contributing to the higher FD and ASA
observed in models (previous sections). SAFD (26) was meas-
ured for the PASS-pockets of models and X-ray structures. We
found that the SAFD of pockets in models is also larger than
that of pockets in X-ray structures and shows a strong
correlation with template:target sequence identity (data not
shown). This implies that the larger FD observed in models
is not only due to the larger number of pockets but also due to
the increased roughness of pockets themselves.
The accuracy of detection of a pocket is the ratio between
the number of identical pockets (see Methods) and the total
number of pockets in a model. Although alignment errors did
not have a clear effect on the number of pockets (Figure 7A), it
appears to have some effect on the number of identical pock-
ets, because STR models are slightly more accurate than SEQ
models in terms of the fraction of correct pockets (Figure 7B).
Figure 6. FD of models is compared with the corresponding target experimental structures: (A) FD of model surface as a function of template:target sequence
identity (closed circles), FD of template surface (gray circles) and FD of NMR structures (dotted line). (B) Distribution of the relative change in FD, (FDE  FDM)/
(FDE  2), for model–target comparison (black bars), template–target comparison (gray bars) and NMR/X-ray comparison (dotted line). (C) A schematic diagram
representing the rugged surface of the model (bottom) and a relatively smoother surface of the experimental structure (top). The dark circles represent the probes used
to trace the surface anda andb are surface pocket and internal cavity, respectively. Interior cavity and pockets become inaccessible as probe size increases, hence, the
rate of change of surface area with an increase in probe size will be higher for a rugged protein surface, accounting for the higher FD of models (see text). (D) The
surface (top) and backbone (bottom) of the X-ray structure (1sgp) and models of S.griseus protease B. Surface is colored by solvent accessibility using MOLMOL
(37). Pockets are indicated by arrows in the X-ray structure and the lowest sequence identity model. The sequence identity, DASA/ASA, FD and DV/V of the models
are indicated below.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1 253
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Packing density and cavity
Although on average the protein interior is well packed, there
are variations in efficiency of packing (27). Low-packing
density in general is due to the presence of cavities. On the
other hand even high-resolution structures have atomic clashes
(57). Here, the quality of packing in models is compared with
that in experimental structures. The packing density of buried
residues (see Methods) of the template (X-ray structure) shows
a narrow distribution with an average value of 0.75
(Figure 7C). It is to be noted that the number of buried residues
for medium-sized models ranged from 4 to 7 for low- and
high-sequence identity, respectively; whereas the correspond-
ing X-ray templates had more or less a constant number of
7 buried residues (Figure 7C, inset). Since it is easier to pack
fewer objects, packing a smaller number of buried residues
may give a false impression of tighter packing in models. In
fact, we observed that the packing density of the buried resi-
dues in models varies from 0.85 (low-sequence identity mod-
els) to 0.75 (high-sequence identity model) (data not shown).
To have a comparison based on equal number of residues, the
packing density of model residues corresponding to the buried
residues of the template was determined, irrespective of the
exposure state of those model residues. Since the model is
based on the template, a buried residue in the template will
generally correspond to a buried or a nearly buried residue in
the model (12). The distribution of packing density of models
is much broader compared to that of X-ray structures and
extended towards lower values (Figure 7C) indicating that
the overall packing of the model regions corresponding to
the hydrophobic core of template structures are loosely
packed, although some instances of over packed sites are
also observed. The loosely packed residues in models are
due to the presence of pockets and cavities. Low-packing
density may also contribute to the higher FD observed in
models (above, Figure 6C). The distribution of packing density
of models is comparable in shape to that of NMR structures,
with the NMR structures showing slightly higher packing
values on average (Figure 7C, dotted line). Using a different
method, an earlier packing analysis (58) on 70 proteins for
which both X-ray and NMR structure were available, had
showed that X-ray structures had packing values lying in a
narrow range, whereas the NMR structures showed a much
larger scatter in packing density values, consistent with the
present observation. The inaccuracy in packing density we
observe in models is similar to that seen in NMR structures.
Hence, interiors of models are qualitatively similar to NMR
structures, but the surface of models is more rugged.
Salt-bridges
As a practical extension of the inter-residue distance, the
accuracy with which the presence of salt-bridges can be deter-
mined from comparative models was analyzed. Salt-bridges
are close-range electrostatic interactions formed by pairs of
oppositely charged residues. Salt-bridges and ion pairs are
predominantly found at surface exposed sites (35,59). Because
the accuracy of inter-residue distance at exposed sites is lower
than at buried sites (Figure 2A), the accuracy of salt-bridge
identification is expected to be low. The number of salt-
bridges per model increases with template:target sequence
identity (Figure 8A). At very high-sequence identity most
Figure 7. Surface pockets. Accuracy of number and identification of surface
pockets is shown as a function of sequence identity. (A) Number of large
pockets (pockets with 10 or more boundary residues, see text) per protein is
compared among SEQ model (closed circles), STR model (open circles),
template (gray circles) and NMR structures (dotted line). The inset shows
the relationship between the number of boundary residues of a pocket and
the pocket volume. (B) Comparison of the accuracy of pocket detection
among SEQ models (closed circles), STR models (open circles) and NMR
structures (dotted line). The dashed line shows the difference between
independent X-ray structures of the same protein. (C) Distribution of
residue packing density: SEQ models (closed bars), templates (gray bars)
and NMR structures (dotted line). Inset figure shows the average number of
buried residues (accessibility = 0.0) of templates (gray circles) and models
(closed circles) of MP as a function of sequence identity.
254 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
side chains are conserved and adopt the conformation of the
equivalent template residue, thus maintaining the number
of salt-bridges, but below 70% sequence identity the average
number in models is lower than in their templates (Figure 8A).
To determine whether the loss of salt-bridges was due to the
absence of an electrostatic interaction term in the default
objective function used for model building (see Methods),
a new set of models was built after switching on the electro-
static term in the MODELLER objective function (18). In this
case, the number of salt-bridges increases by almost a constant
factor over the whole-sequence identity range (Figure 8A), even
surpassing the number observed for the experimental structure.
This suggests that the use of the electrostatic term is generating
manyfalse salt-bridges in the models. Theaccuracy measuredas
the fraction of identical salt-bridges in the two structures, is
quite low compared to other features discussed so far
(Figure 8B). The lower accuracy is not only due to surface
exposure but also due to the fact that salt-bridges involve inter-
action between long side chains (Arg, Lys, Glu) with more
torsional degrees of freedom (53). It is to be noted that even
for X-ray/X-ray pairs (see Methods), the accuracy is only 67%.
Above 25% sequence identity the accuracy is constant and is
unaffected by alignment error (Figure 8B). Even though the
number of salt-bridges increases when the electrostatic inter-
actions are turned on, the accuracy is even lower indicating that
incorrect ion-pairs have been forced to interact. The simple
treatment of electrostatics in MODELLER (18) is probably
not sufficient to form correct salt-bridges in the models. The
corresponding comparison for NMR/X-ray pairs shows a large
difference between estimates of salt-bridges in NMR and X-ray
structures (Figure 8B), this is in agreement with previously
published estimates based on smaller sets of structures (60).
The most frequent atoms among those showing a large differ-
ence in area between the corresponding NMR/X-ray pairs are
the terminal side-chain atoms of Arg, Lys, Glu, indicating that
many side-chain-mediated ionic interactions in an X-ray struc-
ture are absent in the corresponding NMR structure. Salt-
bridges in the model that are also present in the template are
defined as conserved. The proportion of the conserved salt-
bridges is higher than that of the accurately predicted ones
indicating that the template influences the side chains of the
target sequence to adopt conformation like itself favoring salt-
bridge formation even though these are not detected in the
experimental structure of the target (Figure 8B). This also
explains the dependence of the number of salt-bridges in the
model on their number in the template. In spite of this, the
number of salt-bridges in the models is slightly better correlated
with that in their experimental target structures rather than the
template (Figure 8C), thus being another example of added-
value in comparative models (12). An earlier large-scale gen-
ome analysis hadused models instead of alignments to show that
thermophilic proteins have more salt-bridges than mesophilic
homologs with an underlying assumption that models would be
more informative than alignments in this respect (7). This study
confirms the earlier assumption.
Electrostatic potential
Calculations of electrostatic potential in protein structures are
frequently used to identify regions of positive or negative
charge that may represent binding pockets or active sites
(61,62). We calculated the accuracy of the electrostatic poten-
tial by comparing the 3D grid resulting from the electrostatic
potential calculation of models with the grid obtained from the
experimental target structure (see Methods). The electrostatic
potential similarity is measured by the correlation of potential
values between equivalent positions in the pair of grids.
Figure 9A shows the correlation coefficient obtained when
comparing the electrostatic potential of SEQ models (closed
circles), STR models (open circles) and NMR structures
Figure 8. Salt-bridge. Accuracy of salt-bridge identification as a function of
template:target sequence identity is shown. (A) Number of salt-bridges per
protein for models calculated with (diamonds) and without (circles)
electrostatic interactions (see text). (B) Comparison of accuracy between
SEQ models (open circles), STR models (closed circles), SEQ models with
electrostatics interaction (open diamonds) and the number of conserved
template salt-bridges is shown (open triangles). (C) Linear correlation
coefficient between the number of salt-bridges in the target experimental
structure and SEQ models (closed circles) or templates (gray circles).
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1 255
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
(dotted line) with their corresponding X-ray structures. Only
medium-sized proteins were analyzed here. As expected,
the electrostatic potential accuracy drops with decreasing
template:target sequence identity, with alignment errors
starting to affect the accuracy below 50% sequence identity.
The NMR/X-ray pair difference is comparable to models
based on 30% sequence identity. Along with the confor-
mational variation among NMR ensembles, the larger volume
of NMR structures (Figure 5D) also affects the grid compar-
ison resulting in a poor correlation. X-ray/X-ray pair correla-
tion is 0.83. As an illustration the electrostatic potential
colored surface of the X-ray structure, NMR structure and
models of the mouse cell cycle inhibitor p19INK4d is shown in
Figure 9B.
DISCUSSION
Overall structural similarity, as measured by RMSD or number
of equivalent atoms (and combinations of these measures), has
been primarily and routinely used for comparing experimental
protein structures and in the assessment of comparative mod-
els (1,8–10,41). Most studies consider lowering RMSD as a
significant step towards quality improvement in structure pre-
diction. It is obvious that improving the overall accuracy of
models, no matter how it is measured, is useful. However,
since models are not perfect the question remains as to
what impact the errors have on structure-derived properties
of practical interest, such as exposure state or electrostatics. By
directly analyzing the accuracy of several structure-derived
Figure 9. Electrostatic potential. (A) Accuracy of electrostatic potential as a function of template:target sequence identity. The accuracy is measured by the rank
correlation coefficient between the values of the electrostatic potential of the target and models (SEQ, closed circles and STR, open circles). (B) Electrostatic potential
colored surfaces of the NMR structure (1ap7, top), X-ray structure (1blx, middle) and SEQ models (bottom) of cell cycle inhibitor p19INK4d. Surfaces of the 5th, 10th
and 20th models of the NMR structure file are shown. The sequence identities of the SEQ models are indicated in parentheses. (C) Surface colored by electrostatic
potential (top) and backbone (bottom) of the X-ray structure (1sgp) and models of S.griseus protease B. The figure was created using program MOLMOL (37).
256 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
properties of practical interest, as a function of template:target
similarity, we find that all properties do not behave in the same
way. In all cases the accuracy drops as a function of template:
target sequence similarity, mainly by the contribution of two
factors: (i) the relationship between the divergence of
sequence and structure in proteins (43) and (ii) the increasing
number of errors in the template:target alignment as the
sequence similarity decreases. However, the exact shape of
this relationship is not the same for different structure-derived
properties; and the impact of alignment errors and the protein
size dependence also varies from one property to another, thus
rendering the overall accuracy measure an ineffective tool to
predict the accuracy of specific structure-derived properties.
Comparison of the accuracy of structure-derived properties
of models with the difference observed between NMR and
X-ray structures for the same proteins shows that in the
25–40% sequence identity range accuracies of comparative
models reach the same value as NMR/X-ray differences.
The exact boundary depends on the particular feature being
measured, e.g. salt-bridge and pocket accuracy. This suggests
that depending on the feature being analyzed many compar-
ative models may provide information that is comparable in
accuracy to that derived from structures determined by NMR
spectroscopy. It is important to note that only the magnitude of
the difference is similar in these cases, but the nature of the
difference is not necessarily the same for comparative models
and NMR structures. Because X-ray structures were used as
the accuracy reference in this work, it may seem that the
average accuracy of models that use NMR structures as tem-
plates, even at high-sequence identity, would at most be as
high as the accuracy of models based on X-ray templates in the
30–40% sequence identity range. This would only be true if
the aim of comparative modeling was to produce protein struc-
ture models that are as close as possible to the high-resolution
X-ray structure of the protein in its crystalline environment.
However, the statement could also be reversed and if the aim
of comparative modeling is to produce models that represent
the solution structure of proteins as described by high-resolu-
tion NMR structures then X-ray structures would be the poorer
templates. In any modeling case, a decision has to be made as
to what environment the protein is being modeled in. This
decision should direct both our choice of template (NMR or
X-ray) and our interpretation of the model accuracy. This is
particularly relevant when analyzing surface-related proper-
ties that show larger differences between NMR and X-ray
structures and are more influenced by the environment in
which the structure is determined. In spite of these environ-
mental effects and the dynamic nature of protein surfaces, a
clear dependence on template:target sequence similarity was
observed for the accuracy of all surface-related properties.
This indicates that the conservation of surface features
between homologous proteins provides information about
the surface-related properties that is detectable even when
considering the above mentioned effects.
The models used here have not only been built using a single
program but also have not been refined further [e.g. loop
modeling (63) was not used]. In the absence of refinement,
comparative models follow their templates very closely and
their accuracy is mainly determined by the template:target
similarity and alignment accuracy. Under these conditions,
the differences between alternative model-building methods
are negligible (39,64). Hence, the set of models used here
represents the simplest type of comparative model, providing
a baseline against which more elaborate modeling procedures
can be compared. It is also representative of the types of models
produced by large-scale fully automated methods (1,65). It is
expected that the use of multiple templates, which allows
comparative modeling to select the best parts from different
structures to build the target model (64), would provide an
improvement in accuracy. Anecdotal evidence indicates that
this is the case (64), but no systematic study has been per-
formed. Refinement of models, in the form of loop modeling
(63), may also provide an improvement over the simple models
presented here. How much loop modeling affects the accuracy
of different structure-derived properties is not clear and is a
question that will be addressed elsewhere as the computational
cost of proper loop modeling is orders of magnitude larger than
that of building the simple models used here.
A general picture that emerges from our analysis is that the
surface of models is very different from the surface of natural
proteins in terms of the number of pockets it contains and its
general ruggedness, as measured by its FD. Because FD of the
models linearly increases with diminishing template:target
identity (Figure 6A), even cases with very few or no insertions
have elevated FD. This indicates that incorrectly modeled
loops are not the only reason, and probably not even the
main contributor, for increased FD. A more general refinement
of the surface of models is needed. Hence, one interesting
approach would be to perform molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations with explicit (or implicit) solvent and see whether
there is an improvement in the surface properties of models.
MD-based refinement of models is non-trivial and several
studies have been published (66,67). Unfortunately, these
studies have concentrated on evaluating the improvement of
the overall accuracy of models and not the potential improve-
ment of the model’s surface, which is where these simulations
could potentially have the greatest impact. It would therefore
be informative if future studies of model accuracy and refine-
ment included explicit measures of SDP accuracy, similar to
those described here.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Carlos Madrid for general assistance with hardware
and software; Dr Patrice Koehl for help with the ProShape suite
of programs; Bing Zhang, Dr Marc Ceruso and Dr Ming-Ming
Zhou for useful comments and carefully reading the manu-
script. This work was supported by Mount Sinai School of
Medicine start up funds and grant 1P01GM066531-01 from
NIH. Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges
for this article was provided by Mount Sinai School of
Medicine Startup Funds.
REFERENCES
1. Sanchez,R. and Sali,A. (1998) Large-scale protein structure modeling
of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae genome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA, 95, 13597–13602.
2. Xu,L.Z., Sanchez,R., Sali,A. and Heintz,N. (1996) Ligand specificity of
brain lipid-binding protein. J. Biol. Chem., 271, 24711–24719.
3. Aloy,P., Querol,E., Aviles,F.X. and Sternberg,M.J. (2001) Automated
structure-based prediction of functional sites in proteins: applications
to assessing the validity of inheriting protein function from homology in
genome annotation and to protein docking. J. Mol. Biol., 311, 395–408.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1 257
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
4. Wallace,A.C., Borkakoti,N. and Thornton,J.M. (1997) TESS: a
geometric hashing algorithm for deriving 3D coordinate templates
for searching structural databases. Application to enzyme active sites.
Protein Sci., 6, 2308–2323.
5. Liu,T., Rojas,A., Ye,Y. and Godzik,A. (2003) Homology modeling
provides insights into the binding mode of the PAAD/DAPIN/pyrin
domain, a fourth member of the CARD/DD/DED domain family
. Protein Sci., 12, 1872–1881.
6. Maggio,E.T. and Ramnarayan,K. (2001) Recent developments in
computational proteomics. Trends Biotechnol., 19, 266–272.
7. Chakravarty,S. and Varadarajan,R. (2002) Elucidation of factors
responsible for enhanced thermal stability of proteins: a structural
genomics based study. Biochemistry, 41, 8152–8161.
8. Tramontano,A. and Morea,V. (2003) Assessment of homology-based
predictions in CASP5. Proteins, 53, 352–368.
9. Fischer,D., Rychlewski,L., Dunbrack,R.L.Jr, Ortiz,A.R. and Elofsson,A.
(2003) CAFASP3: the third critical assessment of fully automated
structure prediction methods. Proteins, 53(Suppl. 6), 503–516.
10. Venclovas,C., Zemla,A., Fidelis,K. and Moult,J. (2003) Assessment of
progress over the CASP experiments. Proteins, 53(Suppl. 6), 585–595.
11. Sanchez,R. and Sali,A. (2000) Comparative protein structure modeling.
Introduction and practical examples with modeller. Methods Mol.
Biol., 143, 97–129.
12. Chakravarty,S. and Sanchez,R. (2004) Systematic analysis of
added-value in simple comparative models of protein structure. Structure
(Cambridge), 12, 1461–1470.
13. Andrade,M.A., O’Donoghue,S.I. and Rost,B. (1998) Adaptation of
protein surfaces to subcellular location. J. Mol. Biol., 276, 517–525.
14. Berman,H.M., Battistuz,T., Bhat,T.N., Bluhm,W.F., Bourne,P.E.,
Burkhardt,K., Feng,Z., Gilliland,G.L., Iype,L., Jain,S. et al. (2002) The
Protein Data Bank. Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr., 58, 899–907.
15. Altschul,S.F., Madden,T.L., Schaffer,A.A., Zhang,J., Zhang,Z.,
Miller,W. and Lipman,D.J. (1997) Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a
new generation of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res.,
25, 3389–3402.
16. Shindyalov,I.N. and Bourne,P.E. (1998) Protein structure alignment
by incremental combinatorial extension (CE) of the optimal path. Protein
Eng., 11, 739–747.
17. Eswar,N., John,B., Mirkovic,N., Fiser,A., Ilyin,V.A., Pieper,U.,
Stuart,A.C., Marti-Renom,M.A., Madhusudhan,M.S., Yerkovich,B. et
al. (2003) Tools for comparative protein structure modeling and analysis.
Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 3375–3380.
18. Sali,A. and Blundell,T.L. (1993) Comparative protein modelling by
satisfaction of spatial restraints. J. Mol. Biol., 234, 779–815.
19. Doreleijers,J.F., Raves,M.L., Rullmann,T. and Kaptein,R. (1999)
Completeness of NOEs in protein structure: a statistical analysis of NMR.
J. Biomol. NMR, 14, 123–132.
20. Laskowski,R.A., Rullmannn,J.A., MacArthur,M.W., Kaptein,R. and
Thornton,J.M. (1996) AQUA and PROCHECK-NMR: programs for
checking the quality of protein structures solved by NMR.
J. Biomol. NMR, 8, 477–486.
21. Lee,B. and Richards,F.M. (1971) The interpretation of protein structures:
estimation of static accessibility. J. Mol. Biol., 55, 379–400.
22. Hubbard,S.J. and Thornton,J.M. (1993) NACCESS: Computer Program.
ComputerProgram, Departmentof Biochemistryand Molecular Biology,
University College London.
23. Holbrook,S.R., Muskal,S.M. and Kim,S.H. (1990) Predicting surface
exposureof aminoacids from protein sequence.Protein Eng., 3, 659–665.
24. Sanner,M.F., Olson,A.J. and Spehner,J.C. (1996) Reduced surface: an
efficient way to compute molecular surfaces. Biopolymers, 38, 305–320.
25. Lewis,M. and Rees,D.C. (1985) Fractal surfaces of proteins. Science,
230, 1163–1165.
26. Pettit,F.K. and Bowie,J.U. (1999) Protein surface roughness and
small molecular binding sites. J. Mol. Biol., 285, 1377–1382.
27. Richards,F.M. (1977) Areas, volumes, packing and protein structure.
Annu. Rev. Biophys. Bioeng., 6, 151–176.
28. Chothia,C. (1976) The nature of the accessible and buried surfaces
in proteins. J. Mol. Biol., 105, 1–12.
29. Brady,G.P.Jr and Stouten,P.F. (2000) Fast prediction and visualization
of protein binding pockets with PASS. J. Comput. Aided Mol. Des.,
14, 383–401.
30. Richards,F.M. (1974) The interpretation of protein structures: total
volume, groupvolume distributions andpacking density. J. Mol. Biol., 82,
1–14.
31. Creighton,T. (1993) Proteins: Structures and Molecular Properties.
W. H. Freeman and Co., NY.
32. Voronoi,G. (1907) Nouveles applications des parameters continus a la
theorie des formes quadratiques. J. Reine Angewandte Mathematik,
133, 97–178.
33. Harpaz,Y., Gerstein,M. and Chothia,C. (1994) Volume changes
on protein folding. Structure, 2, 641–649.
34. Edelsbrunner,H. and Koehl,P. (2003) The weighted-volume derivative
of a space-filling diagram. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 100,
2203–2208.
35. Kumar,S. and Nussinov,R. (1999) Salt bridge stability in monomeric
proteins. J. Mol. Biol., 293, 1241–1255.
36. Nicholls,A., Sharp,K.A. and Honig,B. (1991) Protein folding and
association: insights from the interfacial and thermodynamic properties
of hydrocarbons. Proteins, 11, 281–296.
37. Koradi,R., Billeter,M. and Wuthrich,K. (1996) MOLMOL: a program for
display and analysis of macromolecular structures. J. Mol. Graph.,
14, 51–55.
38. Jacobson,M.P., Friesner,R.A., Xiang,Z. and Honig,B. (2002) On the
role of the crystal environment in determining protein side-chain
conformations. J. Mol. Biol., 320, 597–608.
39. Marti-Renom,M.A., Stuart,A.C., Fiser,A., Sanchez,R., Melo,F. and
Sali,A. (2000) Comparative protein structure modeling of genes and
genomes. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct., 29, 291–325.
40. Sander,C. and Schneider,R. (1991) Database of homology-derived
protein structures and the structural meaning of sequence alignment.
Proteins, 9, 56–68.
41. Eyrich,V.A., Marti-Renom,M.A., Przybylski,D., Madhusudhan,M.S.,
Fiser,A., Pazos,F., Valencia,A., Sali,A. and Rost,B. (2001) EVA:
continuous automatic evaluation of protein structure prediction
servers. Bioinformatics, 17, 1242–1243.
42. Marti-Renom,M.A., Madhusudhan,M.S., Fiser,A., Rost,B. and Sali,A.
(2002) Reliability of assessment of protein structure prediction
methods. Structure (Cambridge), 10, 435–440.
43. Chothia,C. and Lesk,A.M. (1986) The relation between the divergence
of sequence and structure in proteins. EMBO J., 5, 823–826.
44. Chung,S.Y. and Subbiah,S. (1999) Validation of NMR side-chain
conformations by packing calculations. Proteins, 35, 184–194.
45. Sippl,M.J. (1990) Calculation of conformational ensembles from
potentials of mean force. An approach to the knowledge-based prediction
of local structures in globular proteins. J. Mol. Biol., 213, 859–883.
46. Spolar,R.S. and Record,M.T.Jr (1994) Coupling of local folding to
site-specific binding of proteins to DNA. Science, 263, 777–784.
47. Ponstingl,H., Henrick,K. and Thornton,J.M. (2000) Discriminating
between homodimeric and monomeric proteins in the crystalline
state. Proteins, 41, 47–57.
48. Janin,J. (1997) Specific versus non-specific contacts in protein
crystals. Nature Struct. Biol., 4, 973–974.
49. Boniface,J.J., Reich,Z., Lyons,D.S. and Davis,M.M. (1999)
Thermodynamics of T cell receptor binding to peptide-MHC: evidence
for a general mechanism of molecular scanning. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA, 96, 11446–11451.
50. Eisenberg,D. and McLachlan,A.D. (1986) Solvation energy in protein
folding and binding. Nature, 319, 199–203.
51. Timchenko,A.A., Galzitskaya,O.V. and Serdyuk,I.N. (1997) Roughness
of the globular protein surface: analysis of high resolution X-ray data.
Proteins, 28, 194–201.
52. Canutescu,A.A., Shelenkov,A.A. and Dunbrack,R.L.Jr (2003) A
graph-theory algorithm for rapid protein side-chain prediction.
Protein Sci., 12, 2001–2014.
53. Bower,M.J., Cohen,F.E. and Dunbrack,R.L.Jr (1997) Prediction of
protein side-chain rotamers from a backbone-dependent rotamer
library: a new homology modeling tool. J. Mol. Biol., 267,
1268–1282.
54. Liang,J., Edelsbrunner,H. and Woodward,C. (1998) Anatomy of
protein pockets and cavities: measurement of binding site
geometry and implications for ligand design. Protein Sci., 7,
1884–1897.
55. Flores,T.P., Orengo,C.A., Moss,D.S. and Thornton,J.M. (1993)
Comparison of conformational characteristics in structurally
similar protein pairs. Protein Sci., 2, 1811–1826.
56. Sali,A. and Overington,J.P. (1994) Derivation of rules for comparative
protein modeling from a database of protein structure alignments.
Protein Sci., 3, 1582–1596.
258 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
57. Word,J.M., Lovell,S.C., LaBean,T.H., Taylor,H.C., Zalis,M.E.,
Presley,B.K., Richardson,J.S. and Richardson,D.C. (1999) Visualizing
and quantifying molecular goodness-of-fit: small-probe contact dots
with explicit hydrogen atoms. J. Mol. Biol., 285, 1711–1733.
58. Ratnaparkhi,G.S., Ramachandran,S., Udgaonkar,J.B. and
Varadarajan,R. (1998) Discrepancies between the NMR and X-ray
structures of uncomplexed barstar: analysis suggests that packing
densities of protein structures determined by NMR are unreliable.
Biochemistry, 37, 6958–6966.
59. Barlow,D.J. and Thornton,J.M. (1983) Ion-pairs in proteins. J. Mol.
Biol., 168, 867–885.
60. Kumar,S. and Nussinov,R. (2001) Fluctuations in ion pairs and their
stabilities in proteins. Proteins, 43, 433–454.
61. Honig,B. and Nicholls,A. (1995) Classical electrostatics in biology
and chemistry. Science, 268, 1144–1149.
62. Sali,A., Matsumoto,R., McNeil,H.P., Karplus,M. and Stevens,R.L.
(1993) Three-dimensional models of four mouse mast cell chymases.
Identification of proteoglycan binding regions and protease-specific
antigenic epitopes. J. Biol. Chem., 268, 9023–9034.
63. Fiser,A., Do,R.K. and Sali,A. (2000) Modeling of loops in protein
structures. Protein Sci., 9, 1753–1773.
64. Sanchez,R. and Sali,A. (1997) Evaluation of comparative protein
structure modeling by MODELLER-3. Proteins Suppl. 1,
50–58.
65. Peitsch,M.C., Schwede,T. and Guex,N. (2000) Automated protein
modelling–the proteome in 3D. Pharmacogenomics, 1, 257–266.
66. Fan,H. and Mark,A.E. (2004) Refinement of homology-based protein
structures by molecular dynamics simulation techniques. Protein Sci.,
13, 211–220.
67. Flohil,J.A., Vriend,G. and Berendsen,H.J. (2002) Completion
and refinement of 3-D homology models with restricted molecular
dynamics: application to targets 47, 58, and 111 in the CASP
modeling competition and posterior analysis. Proteins,
48, 593–604.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1 259
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
