CisMols Analyzer: identification of compositionally
similar cis-element clusters in ortholog conserved
regions of coordinately expressed genes
Anil G. Jegga, Ashima Gupta, Sivakumar Gowrisankar, Mrunal A. Deshmukh,
Steven Connolly, Kevin Finley and Bruce J. Aronow*
Division of Biomedical Informatics, Children’s Hospital Research Foundation, CCHMC, 3333 Burnet Avenue,
Cincinnati, OH-45229, USA
Received February 14, 2005; Revised March 29, 2005; Accepted April 20, 2005
ABSTRACT
Combinatorial interactions of sequence-specific
trans-acting factors with localized genomic cis-
element clusters are the principal mechanism for
regulating tissue-specific and developmental gene
expression. With the emergence of expanding num-
bers of genome-wide expression analyses, the iden-
tification of the cis-elements responsible for specific
patterns of transcriptional regulation represents a
critical area of investigation. Computational methods
for the identificationof functionalcis-regulatorymod-
ules are difficult to devise, principally because of the
short length and degenerate nature of individual cis-
element binding sites and the inherent complexity
that is generated by combinatorial interactionswithin
cis-clusters. Filtering candidate cis-element clusters
based on phylogenetic conservation is helpful for
an individual ortholog gene pair, but combining data
from cis-conservation and coordinate expression
across multiple genes is a more difficult problem. To
approach this, we have extended an ortholog gene-
pair database with additional analytical architecture
to allow for the analysis and identification of maximal
numbers of compositionally similar and phylogenet-
ically conserved cis-regulatory element clusters
from a list of user-selected genes. The system has
been successfully tested with a series of functionally
related and microarray profile-based co-expressed
ortholog pairs of promoters and genes using known
regulatory regions as training sets and co-expressed
genes in the olfactory and immunohematologic
systems as test sets. CisMols Analyzer is accessible
via a Web interface at http://cismols.cchmc.org/.
INTRODUCTION
The integration of genomic sequences with transcription factor
function and gene expression to decipher the gene regulatory
networks underlying various developmental processes is a
major challenge of the post-genomic era (1). Although the
view that regulatory regions manifest as clusters of trans-
cription factor binding sites (TFBSs) has been around for
some time, it was the review by Arnone and Davidson (2)
that clearly presented the case for emphasizing cis-clusters
in both experimental and computational analyses. In fact,
it is this paradigm shift that led to important advances in the
detection of combinatorial occurrence of cis-elements and
understanding transcriptional regulation (3). However, the
availability of a number of completely sequenced eukaryotic
genomes with an ever expanding volume of gene expression
profile data has made computationally based strategies for
deciphering genetic regulatory networks more viable. The
methods range from sophisticated Gibbs sampling-based
algorithms to more ‘brute force’ counting and analysis of
fixed-length oligonucleotide words (kmer or ktuple word
searching) (4,5). For a complete list of Internet resources
and tools available to predict transcription regulatory clusters,
refer to Ureta-Vidal et al. (6) and http://zlab.bu.edu/zlab/gene.
shtml. Computational methods have focused primarily on try-
ing to identify the co-occurrence of a set of TFBSs in a group
of genes co-expressed or functionally related, and most of
them have been restricted to the promoter or upstream regions.
However, the basic problem of identifying the true positives
from a list of combinatorial patterns remains. The problem
becomes even more complicated and the results are difficult
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 513 636 4865; Fax: +1 513 636 2056; Email: bruce.aronow@cchmc.org
The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors
 The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
W408–W411 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gki486
to interpret when the entire stretch of non-coding regions
comprising introns and upstream and downstream regions is
considered. Adopting a phylogenetic approach allows substan-
tial reduction in the number of false positives in the identi-
fication of regulatory regions of individual orthologous gene
pairs (7–12). Although the need for experimental validation
remains critical, at present, predicted cis-acting signature
element searches can greatly focus experimental targets for
validation studies.
The detection of a particular known cis-acting element in
all or many of the genes in a particular expression cluster does
not necessarily mean that the genes are regulated via that
element. The likelihood of this prediction is greater if each
of these shared clusters is also conserved in the corresponding
inter-species ortholog. CisMols Analyzer is built based on
these two hypotheses and is designed to identify significant
cis-regulatory elements from sets of co-expressed or related
groups of genes for elements that are also ortholog-conserved.
To do this, ortholog-conserved cis-clusters for each individual
gene pair are identified and stored in the database. Next, a gene
list is compiled based on various criteria such as coordinate
regulation and then the ortholog-conserved cis-clusters for
each of the genes in the list are compared to identify occur-
rence of common cis-clusters. Since the existence of gene
regulatory regions in intronic and downstream regions is
well proven, our method to identify these sites is not confined
to upstream regions alone, but is extended to intronic and 50
and 30 gene-flanking regions. We have successfully validated
our algorithm on several data sets comprising skeletal muscle-
specific genes, liver-specific genes, pancreas overexpressed
genes, olfactory genes (13) and immune system genes (14).
Genomic regions of orthologous genes are retrieved from
UCSC Golden Path, along with the exon annotations. Putative
regulatory regions are identified either by using our earlier
developed Trafac server (12) or by searching against the
potential regulatory regions stored in the GenomeTrafac data-
base (http://genometrafac.cchmc.org; Jegga et al., manuscript
submitted). The conserved cis-element dense regions for each
of the ortholog gene pairs are compared to identify the com-
mon binding sites in a group of genes. The web application is
available at http://cismols.cchmc.org. Researchers can auto-
matically (i) create gene groups and identify shared ortholog-
conserved putative regulatory regions and individual binding
sites, (ii) search genes for known cis-regulatory modules
and (iii) identify potential novel gene targets for known
cis-regulatory modules or novel clusters of individual
binding sites.
INPUT
Creating and submitting gene groups for analysis
CisMols Analyzer is designed to analyze a list of genes—
typically co-expressed or related genes—for cis-element
clusters that are shared by genes in the list. In contrast,
GenomeTrafac is a whole-genome repository of individual
genes with specified gene orthologs that have been analyzed,
in batch form over the entire genome, for phylogenetically
conserved cis-elements (Jegga et al., manuscript submitted).
Trafac is similarly single-gene oriented, but it allows for the
entry of human-curated ortholog gene pairs (12). CisMols
Analyzer operates on genes in either database by allowing
lists of these genes to be formed and then subjecting the
lists to shared cis-element analysis. It is possible to analyze
existing gene groups that have been assembled by the system
administrators and by other users. However, to create new
groups and perform a clustering analysis to detect modules
that contain shared cis-elements, a login account is needed.
Options are also provided to select the genomic regions for a
single gene or a group of genes that need to be searched for the
occurrence of common TFBSs. By default, CisMols Analyzer
searches for clusters in the genomic region comprising the
50- and 30-flanking 10 kb and also the intronic regions. After
submitting the genes for analysis, the user will be notified by
email of the availability of the results when the clustering is
finished.
Searching for cis-clusters
Users can customize the search criteria using Boolean logic to
restrict the search to known validated cis-regulatory modules
and/or a combination of individual binding sites. The min-
imum number of binding sites that must appear in each cluster,
or the minimum number of genes in which each cluster
must appear, can also be specified. The validated known
cis-regulatory modules are provided along with a PubMed
citation. Users also have the option of saving their search
parameters or queries.
OUTPUT
The output generated is a set of putative regulatory modules
occurring within an ortholog conserved region of two or more
genes. CisMolGram (Figure 1), a graphical representation of
ortholog-conserved cis-clusters shared by a group of genes,
depicts the location of clusters within gene regions. The
shared cis-clusters (two or more than two binding sites)
are represented as variously colored boxes on the gene.
Each of these shared clusters is linked to its respective ortho-
log conserved regions and can be visualized as Trafacgrams
or regulograms (described in the legend of Figure 1). The
Trafac and regulogram image pages have the option to down-
load the sequences (corresponding to that cluster window) in
fasta format. Links are also provided to the human and
mouse UCSC browser, in which the user can see a
CisMols-identified cluster in the context of other annotations.
Users can also download the UCSC browser-compatible GFF
files (currently GFF3) for each sequence from the regulogram
image page. These can be uploaded directly to UCSC Golden
Path, enabling visualization of the CisMols cluster region in
the context of all other features available as aligned annota-
tion tracks (known genes, predicted genes, ESTs, mRNAs,
CpG islands, assembly gaps and coverage, chromosomal
bands, other species homologies and more). The table view
or the legend (Figure 1D) displays a summary of the results.
It indicates the details of each cluster (the individual con-
stituent cis-elements and their total frequency) and the fre-
quency of the clusters occurring in each of the genes
compared and involved in cluster analysis. Users also have
the option for flipping to the ortholog view. The default base
sequence is the human gene, and it is mapped to the corres-
ponding mouse ortholog. However, the program can be used
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W409
for any ortholog gene pair after uploading their alignments
and binding sites to the Trafac database. Options are also
provided to modify the viewable regions to focus on cis-
clusters of interest. The CisMolGram can be saved or expor-
ted as images (SVG, TIFF, PDF, PNG or JPG format). The
search parameters can also be saved for future generation of
CisMolGrams.
SOFTWARE AND ACCESS
The CisMols Analyzer algorithm is implemented in Java. The
time taken to analyze a group of genes depends upon factors
such as number of genes in the group, gene lengths, percentage
conservation between the orthologous pair of genes, and
ortholog-conserved cis-element clusters. CisMols Analyzer
looks for conserved cis-element clusters within conserved
Figure 1. Detection and visualization of compositionally similar cis-regulatory modules shared by multiples genes. (A) CisMolGram provides a depiction of
cis-element modules that are shared across two or more genes and contain two or more binding sites. Each module is represented by variously colored boxes located
relative to the promoter of each gene in the analyzed group. Genes gathered from the GenomeTrafac database generally have their first exon locations at position
40 000. Most of the locations of cis-module clusters contain multiple modules. The locations of the clusters can be selected to be shown over either set of gene
orthologs. By clicking on a cluster module (circled), a link is given to view either (B) the density of conserved elements over the regions (regulogram) or (C)
the conserved cis-element arrangement at that location (Trafac image). The Regulogram shows the two sequences,mouse and human, represented as horizontal bars.
The red-colored segments on these bars are exons. The green-colored bars shown parallel to the genomic sequences represent the repeat regions. The regions of
sequence alignment are represented as differently colored quadrilaterals that relate one sequence to another. Within each shaded block, the percentage sequence
similarity and the number of TFBSs are represented as two separate line graphs in the lower half. The frequencies of individual binding sites occurring in each of
the sequences separately are shown as two running graphs in the top half of the pane. The percentage similarity is the average sequence conservation as determined
by the BlastZ algorithm and the shared cis-element hits are determined by an algorithm that uses a 200 bp moving window to look through the cis-elements present
within the conserved sequence block. Numbers are nucleotide positions. The regulogram can be clicked to zoom in or to view the TFBSs that are common to the two
sequences at the click-point coordinate. In the Trafac image, the two gray vertical bars are the two genes (human and mouse) compared. The numbers represent the
nucleotide positions with respect to the sequences used. The TFBSs occurring in both the genes are highlighted as variously colored bars drawn across the two genes.
(D) The table view or the CisMolGram legend displays a summary of the results. It indicates the details of each cluster (the constituent individual cis-elements and
their total frequency) and the frequency of the clusters occurring in each of the genes compared and involved in cluster analysis.
W410 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
regions [BlastZ-aligned genomic regions of >70% sequence
similarity (15)]. MatInspector (16) is used to identify the
potential binding sites in each of the genomic sequences.
The analysis parameters for identification of TFBSs were set
to 0.85 for the core similarity and optimal for the matrix
similarity. A typical analysis on the CisMols server—for,
say, 50 ortholog gene pairs with default parameter settings
of 10 kb upstream and downstream for each gene—takes
approximately 1 h. The current upper limit of processing
capability is about 242 ortholog gene pairs (a total sequence
length of 32 Mb, of which about 7 Mb are BlastZ-aligned
with >70% sequence similarity). We intend to work on
accommodating the analysis of larger sets in the future.
Currently we are also working on providing the statistical
significance and comparison between cis-clusters identified
for two discrete gene groups.
CONCLUSION
The identification of signature clusters for a specific group
of genes is still difficult. Most of the time, the cis-element
clusters responsible for tissue specificity tend to be scored
relatively low. For example, searching for ortholog-conserved
shared cis-clusters in a group of pancreas overexpressed genes
without any cis-element filter resulted in the identification of
non-specific clusters. However, when the search was per-
formed again restricting the results to only those clusters
that have at least one Pdx binding site, the resulting shared
clusters coincided with the validated regulatory regions of each
of the individual genes (data not shown). The top hits, or the
cis-element clusters shared by the most genes, tend to be more
general, and, although they are important for gene expression,
very little knowledge can be extracted from these about con-
ferring tissue specificity for a group of genes. Using a control or
a negative control does, however, improve understanding of
the importance of the shared clusters—for instance, comparing
the most shared cis-clusters in a group of genes with overex-
pression in the liver with genes overexpressed in the cerebel-
lum. Clearly, there is a paradox in the phylogenetic
footprinting approach. To allow the recognition of conserved
(regulatory) elements, there should be enough evolutionary
distance, but, at the same time, this evolutionary distance
makes it difficult to recognize TFBSs—the short conserved
elements. Nevertheless, the significance of a predicted shared
cis-regulatory module for a group of co-expressed genes or a
functionally related group of genes will be higher if the shared
clusters are additionally conserved in both gene orthologs.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by grants NCI UO1 CA84291-07
(Mouse Models of Human Cancer Consortium), NIH R24 DK
064403 (Digestive Diseases Research Development Center—
DDRDC), NIEHS ES-00-005 (Comparative Mouse Genome
Centers Consortium) and NIEHS P30-ES06096 (Center for
Environmental Genetics). Funding to pay the Open Access
publication charges for this article was provided by Cincinnati
Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Davidson,E.H., Rast,J.P., Oliveri,P., Ransick,A., Calestani,C., Yuh,C.H.,
Minokawa,T., Amore,G., Hinman,V., Arenas-Mena,C. et al. (2002)
A genomic regulatory network for development. Science, 295,
1669–1678.
2. Arnone,M.I. and Davidson,E.H. (1997) The hardwiring of development:
organization and function of genomic regulatory systems. Development,
124, 1851–1864.
3. Michelson,A.M. (2002) Deciphering genetic regulatory codes:
a challenge for functional genomics. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 99,
546–548.
4. Lawrence,C.E., Altschul,S.F., Boguski,M.S., Liu,J.S., Neuwald,A.F. and
Wootton,J.C. (1993) Detecting subtle sequence signals: a Gibbs
sampling strategy for multiple alignment. Science, 262,
208–214.
5. van Helden,J., Andre,B. and Collado-Vides,J. (1998) Extracting
regulatory sites from the upstream region of yeast genes by
computational analysis of oligonucleotide frequencies. J. Mol. Biol.,
281, 827–842.
6. Ureta-Vidal,A., Ettwiller,L. and Birney,E. (2003) Comparative
genomics: genome-wide analysis in metazoan eukaryotes. Nature Rev.
Genet., 4, 251–262.
7. Tagle,D.A., Koop,B.F., Goodman,M., Slightom,J.L., Hess,D.L. and
Jones,R.T. (1988) Embryonic epsilon and gamma globin genes of a
prosimian primate (Galago crassicaudatus). Nucleotide and amino acid
sequences, developmental regulation and phylogenetic footprints.
J. Mol. Biol., 203, 439–455.
8. Gumucio,D.L., Heilstedt-Williamson,H., Gray,T.A., Tarle,S.A.,
Shelton,D.A., Tagle,D.A., Slightom,J.L., Goodman,M. and Collins,F.S.
(1992) Phylogenetic footprinting reveals a nuclear protein which binds to
silencer sequences in the human gamma and epsilon globin genes.
Mol. Cell. Biol., 12, 4919–4929.
9. Hardison,R.C., Oeltjen,J. and Miller,W. (1997) Long human–mouse
sequence alignments reveal novel regulatory elements: a reason to
sequence the mouse genome. Genome Res., 7, 959–966.
10. Loots,G.G., Locksley,R.M., Blankespoor,C.M., Wang,Z.E., Miller,W.,
Rubin,E.M. and Frazer,K.A. (2000) Identification of a coordinate
regulator of interleukins 4, 13, and 5 by cross-species sequence
comparisons. Science, 288, 136–140.
11. Wasserman,W.W., Palumbo,M., Thompson,W., Fickett,J.W. and
Lawrence,C.E. (2000) Human–mouse genome comparisons to locate
regulatory sites. Nature Genet., 26, 225–228.
12. Jegga,A.G., Sherwood,S.P., Carman,J.W., Pinski,A.T., Phillips,J.L.,
Pestian,J.P. and Aronow,B.J. (2002) Detection and visualization
of compositionally similar cis-regulatory element clusters in
orthologous and coordinately controlled genes. Genome Res., 12,
1408–1417.
13. Genter,M.B., Van Veldhoven,P.P., Jegga,A.G., Sakthivel,B., Kong,S.,
Stanley,K., Witte,D.P., Ebert,C.L. and Aronow,B.J. (2003)
Microarray-baseddiscoveryof highly expressedolfactorymucosal genes:
potential roles in the various functions of the olfactory system.
Physiol. Genomics, 16, 67–81.
14. Hutton,J.J., Jegga,A.G., Kong,S., Gupta,A., Ebert,C., Williams,S.,
Katz,J.D. and Aronow,B.J. (2004) Microarray and comparative
genomics-based identification of genes and gene regulatory regions of the
mouse immune system. BMC Genomics, 5, 82.
15. Schwartz,S., Kent,W.J., Smit,A., Zhang,Z., Baertsch,R., Hardison,R.C.,
Haussler,D. and Miller,W. (2003) Human–mouse alignments with
BLASTZ. Genome Res., 13, 103–107.
16. Quandt,K., Frech,K., Karas,H., Wingender,E. and Werner,T. (1995)
MatInd and MatInspector: new fast and versatile tools for detection of
consensus matches in nucleotide sequence data. Nucleic Acids Res.,
23, 4878–4884.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W411
