The International Gene Trap Consortium Website:
a portal to all publicly available gene trap cell
lines in mouse
Alex S. Nord1,3, Patricia J. Chang1, Bruce R. Conklin2, Antony V. Cox3, Courtney A. Harper1,
5 GeoffreyG.Hicks4, ConradC.Huang1, Susan J. Johns1,MichikoKawamoto1, SongyanLiu4,
Elaine C. Meng1, John H. Morris1, Janet Rossant5, Patricia Ruiz6, William C. Skarnes3,
Philippe Soriano7, William L. Stanford8, Doug Stryke1, Harald von Melchner9,
Wolfgang Wurst10, Ken-ichi Yamamura11, Stephen G. Young12, Patricia C. Babbitt1 and
Thomas E. Ferrin1,*
10
1University of California, San Francisco, 600 16th Street, San Francisco, CA 94143-2240, USA, 2Gladstone Institute of
Cardiovascular Disease, University of California San Francisco Department of Medicine and Pharmacology, 1650
Owens Street, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA, 3Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SA,
UK, 4Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, 675 McDermot Avenue, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada R3E 0V9, 5The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1X8, 6Center for Cardiovascular
15 Research, Charite´ Universita¨tsmedizin and Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Genetics, 14195 Berlin, Germany, 7Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100 Fairview Avenue North, Seattle,
WA 98109-1024, USA, 8University of Toronto, 4 Taddle Creek Road, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3G9,
9Department of Molecular Hematology , University of Frankfurt Medical School, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany,
10GSF Research Center for Environment and Health, Institute for Developmental Genetics, Ingolstaedter
20 Landstrasse 1, D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany, 11Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto
University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan and 12University of California, Los Angeles,
650 Charles E. Young Dr So., Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
Received August 16, 2005; Revised October 7, 2005; Accepted October 16, 2005
ABSTRACT
25 Gene trapping is a method of generating murine
embryonic stem (ES) cell lines containing insertional
mutations in known and novel genes. A number of
international groups have used this approach to cre-
ate sizeable public cell line repositories available to
30 the scientific community for the generation of mutant
mouse strains. The major gene trapping groups
worldwide have recently joined together to central-
ize access to all publicly available gene trap lines
by developing a user-oriented Website for the
35 International Gene Trap Consortium (IGTC). This col-
laboration provides an impressive public informatics
resource comprising 45 000 well-characterized ES
cell lines which currently represent 40% of known
mouse genes, all freely available for the creation
40 of knockout mice on a non-collaborative basis. To
standardize annotation and provide high confidence
data for gene trap lines, a rigorous identification and
annotation pipeline has been developed combining
genomic localization and transcript alignment of
45gene trap sequence tags to identify trapped loci.
This information is stored in a new bioinformatics
database accessible through the IGTC Website inter-
face. The IGTC Website (www.genetrap.org) allows
users to browse and search the database for trapped
50genes,BLASTsequencesagainstgene trapsequence
tags, and view trapped genes within biological path-
ways. In addition, IGTCdata havebeen integrated into
major genome browsers and bioinformatics sites to
provide users with outside portals for viewing this
55data. The development of the IGTC Website marks a
major advance by providing the research community
with the data and tools necessary to effectively use
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: tef@cgl.ucsf.edu
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
D642–D648 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gkj097
public gene trap resources for the large-scale charac-
terization of mammalian gene function.
INTRODUCTION
The large and continually growing number of genome
5 sequencing projects provides an opportunity to greatly
advance our understanding of genetics and disease. One of
the keys to realizing this goal is the development of genomic
resources to elucidate functional characteristics of these genes,
especially in mammalian genomes. The mouse is an especially
10 useful mammalian model system, providing an excellent sub-
ject for studies of gene function because of its short genera-
tional span, ease of handling, and the close structural and
functional similarity of its genome to that of humans (1,2).
Furthermore, using this organism, scientists have access to a
15 wide range of procedures for genetic manipulation, including
the use of embryonic stem (ES) cells to create mice with
defined single-gene mutations using gene targeting and
gene trapping techniques (3).
Gene trapping is a high-throughput method of creating
20 mutagenized ES cells for use in generating knockout and
other mutant mouse strains for research in functional genomics
(4). Second generation gene trap vectors have recently
enhanced the value of the method by offering the potential
for creating conditional and other desired alleles using site-
25 specific recombination (5–7). Major scientific initiatives are
currently underway in North America and Europe to knock out
every mouse gene in ES cells in order to characterize gene
function and provide insight into systems associated with
human disease (8,9).
30 A number of gene trap projects have already made notable
progress toward this goal by generating resources of gene trap
mouse ES cell lines harboring well-characterized insertional
mutations (6,7,10–14), although until now the individual gene
trap projects have been isolated, providing only details about
35 their own cell lines. The International Gene Trap Consortium
(IGTC) is a collaboration representing the major public gene
trap resources worldwide, whose mission is to offer the sci-
entific community access to all publicly available gene trap
cell lines on a non-collaborative basis for nominal handling
40 fees (15). The centralization of gene trap resources provides
many advantages to the research community, allowing more
effective utilization of the experimental opportunities offered
by gene trap cell lines through standardized protocols for the
identification and annotation of sequences from trapped loci,
45 and the increased availability of experimental protocols. As
reported here, the release of the IGTC Website (www.
genetrap.org) marks a major advance, generating a standard-
ized informatics pipeline and providing in one place both easy
access to all publicly available gene trap cell lines and sophis-
50ticated tools for analysis of resource data. Gene trap centers
currently involved in this effort are listed in Table 1.
IGTC: RESOURCE OVERVIEW
The IGTC Website centralizes access to all publicly available
gene trap cell line data for the first time. This repository was
55created to address the needs of the international gene trap
community by providing researchers with the data and infor-
matics tools necessary to find gene trap cell lines with muta-
tions in genes and loci of interest. IGTC member projects
produce gene trap cell lines and directly submit gene trap
60sequence tags to the Genome Survey Sequences Database
(dbGSS) division of GenBank at NCBI (16). Data from all
publicly available cell lines are downloaded from dbGSS and
subjected to the IGTC identification and annotation pipeline,
which then automatically populates the MySQL database used
65to generate the annotation information presented on the Web-
site. The IGTCWebsite has been designed to provide easy user
access to the extensive array of assembled gene trap informat-
ics data. Interface options include homology searches using
BLAST, search and browse capabilities, and viewing trapped
70genes within biological pathways. The project also includes
the integration of gene trap data at major genome browsers and
other informatics data sites in order to offer a variety of outside
portals to this data. Cell line requests from the IGTC site are
forwarded to the originating gene trap resource, where the cell
75line is removed from cryogenic storage and sent to the user for
experimental analysis. The IGTC site also provides useful
documentation, on-line tutorials and scientific overviews on
gene trapping and the use of gene trap cell lines.
GENE TRAP IDENTIFICATION AND ANNOTATION
80PIPELINE
Gene trap mutations are characterized through a process of
sequencing, identification and annotation. This process
involves obtaining cDNA or genomic sequence upstream or
downstream of the insertion site and identifying and annotat-
85ing the locus at which the insertion occurs. A full identification
and annotation protocol has been developed for the IGTC that
integrates genomic and transcript-based identification
approaches and adds information from other major informatics
Table 1. IGTC members
IGTC members Cell lines Website
Baygenomics (USA) 9848 www.baygenomics.ucsf.edu/
Centre for Modelling Human Disease (Toronto, Canada) 4137 www.cmhd.ca/genetrap/
Embryonic Stem Cell Database (University of Manitoba, Canada) 8559 www.EScells.ca/
Exchangeable Gene Trap Clones (Kumamoto University, Japan) 49 egtc.jp/show/index
German Gene Trap Consortium (Germany) 13031 www.genetrap.de/
Sanger Institute Gene Trap Resource (Cambridge, UK) 7354 www.sanger.ac.uk/PostGenomics/genetrap/
Soriano Lab Gene Trap Database (FHCRC, Seattle, USA) 1627 www.fhcrc.org/science/labs/soriano/trap.html
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine–TIGEM (Naples, Italy) 1435 core.tigem.it/genetrap/public/
TOTAL 44605
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D643
resources, such as genome browsers and specialized informat-
ics sites to annotate the identified loci (Figure 1). Use of both
genomic and transcript-based annotation methods were incor-
porated to increase confidence in identification and localiza-
5 tion on the genome of trapped loci, providing a significant
improvement over identification strategies previously in use.
This pipeline was designed to be both robust and flexible,
allowing the incorporation of multiple methods of identifica-
tion and mapping and the future integration of new genomic
10 data resources that may be developed.
Gene trap cell line sequences are submitted by each indi-
vidual gene trap resource to dbGSS along with relevant ancil-
lary information about the cell line, including its original
source and the vector used in the trapping experiment. Within
15dbGSS, IGTC sequences are grouped using LinkOut (17)
(http://www.dlib.org/dlib/march02/03inbrief.html KWAN),
which links gene trap dbGSS entries to the IGTC Website.
Requiring gene trap cell lines to be entered into dbGSS ensures
that all IGTC lines are in the public domain, and that all data
20are consistent, transparent and freely accessible. Researchers
can access additional information about methodology and pro-
tocols from the original trapping experiment via links to the
individual gene trap project sites (Table 1).
The two complementary programs, MapTag (15) and
25AutoIdent (12), are used to locate the trapped gene on the
mouse genome by analyzing the similarity between the
unidentified gene trap sequence and genomic and transcript
sequences, respectively. The minimum region of genomic
overlap serves as the primary identification data, from
30which all subsequent annotation is derived. Finally, the iden-
tified map coordinates are annotated with gene features
obtained from major genomic and informatics databases.
Genomic localization: MapTag
MapTag was developed as an automated method of identifying
35homologous genomic regions for gene trap sequences using
the Ensembl database (18) and SSAHA algorithm (19). Map-
Tag identifies matches in genomic sequence and assembles
individual related stretches of genomic similarity using a basic
splice model that takes into account exon boundaries, allowing
40the processing of nucleotide sequences of cDNA or genomic
origin. The program filters alignment results, applying simple
heuristics using the overall match length, percent identity and
exon coverage, and filtering to remove pseudogenes, to deter-
mine the best match. As gene trap sequence tags are typically
45short and imperfect, they can be difficult to identify to a unique
locus. The protocol used by MapTag greatly improves the
ability to differentiate between matches that show comparable
levels of similarity by correctly selecting the result that
exhibits a correspondence to the insertion site. The program
50returns the identified genomic region and an estimate of the
match confidence.
Transcript identification: AutoIdent
The pipeline also uses transcript identification to provide an
independent and orthogonal identification method. AutoIdent,
55an automated protocol developed by BayGenomics, uses the
BLAST (20) algorithm to identify the most similar sequences
in the GenBank non-redundant nucleotide database at NCBI.
When the program identifies many high-scoring matches to
very similar (synonymous) genes, AutoIdent adds steps to
60filter results and condense synonymous transcripts to obtain
a single result. The program applies stringent criteria for
acceptance of a high-quality gene identification but allows
more relaxed criteria to identify multiple matching sequences
or to a homologous sequence in another species. At the end of
65the process, AutoIdent returns the best match transcript along
with alignment data.
Identification reconciliation and confirmation
Genomic and transcript identification data are stored in the
IGTC database. The pipeline then compares results from
70the two identification protocols, using overlap between the
Figure 1. IGTC identification and annotation pipeline. IGTCmembers submit
gene trap cell line data to dbGSS. The first step of the IGTC pipeline is the
download of all publicly available gene trap cell line data from dbGSS. Gene
trap sequences are then processed through the dual identification protocol based
on genomic localization and transcript alignment usingMapTag andAutoIdent,
respectively.Returned homologous genomic regions and transcripts are aligned
to genomic sequence to generate confirmed overlapping sequence regions,
which are used as the primary identification data. Confirmed genomic coordi-
nates are queried against major informatics databases to obtain annotation data
for the genomic locus identified, and the returned data are entered into the
IGTC database.
D644 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
genomic coordinates from MapTag and the genomic localiza-
tion of transcripts returned by AutoIdent to confirm the iden-
tification. Gene trap sequences are assigned as localized when
the genomic and transcript map coordinates overlap, or when
5 only one protocol returns map coordinates. If the identified
coordinates conflict or neither protocol returns map data, the
gene trap sequence is classified as unlocalized and does not go
through the rest of the annotation pipeline. This reconciliation
step assures that each identified cell line is mapped to a
10 genomic insertion locus with high confidence and in a manner
that is fully documented.
Annotation of gene trap cell lines
Gene trap cell line annotation is based on the confirmed
genomic coordinates as the primary identification data. Map
15 coordinates are used to query the Ensembl and Entrez (21)
databases to obtain gene features for the identified locus.
These accessions are used as primary keys to further query
Ensembl, Entrez and the Mouse Genome Informatics (MGI)
resource (22) for secondary annotation data associated with
20 the trapped genes, including major gene accession systems,
Gene Ontology classifications (GO), protein domain, structure
and function, PubMed and phenotype data, homology and
orthology data, and microarray probesets. In addition to sup-
porting an extensive array of informatics data, the IGTC site
25 also includes tissue-specific expression data from the SymAt-
las project (23) and biological pathway and GO hierarchy
diagrams with trapped genes marked, produced using the
GenMAPP program (24).
The IGTC database
30 The IGTC uses the open source MySQL database platform
(www.mysql.com). The database is populated in an automated
process using results from the MapTag and AutoIdent
identification protocols and is structured to optimize informa-
tion access via Web queries. New gene trap cell line entries
35 in dbGSS are downloaded weekly and run through the IGTC
pipeline. Identification results from MapTag are updated
with each Ensembl build and AutoIdent is programmed to
regularly BLAST sequences in the database to update acces-
sion numbers and other changes in the information provided
40 by GenBank. Annotation data generation is synchronized
with the Entrez, MGI and Ensembl databases, and the
IGTC database is updated by downloading information
from these sites as necessary. The information in the IGTC
database is available upon request in a tab-delimited or data-
45 base compatible format.
ACCESSING GENE TRAP DATA
The IGTC site provides a user-friendly approach to gene trap
data, allowing researchers to access the gene trap database
from a sequence, accession number or ID, expression or path-
50 way perspective using a variety of interfaces for searching and
viewing gene trap data. The site is organized around the cell
line annotation page, where the user can view all annotation
data for a selected cell line (Figure 2). Primary identification
and annotation data appear at the top of the page with a link to
55 detailed identification results. This is followed by expandable
lists of secondary annotation data, which provide information
useful in the selection and analysis of cell lines of potential
interest. Below this is a section containing details about the
cell line and gene trap vector, including primer sequences and
60a description of the vector properties. To aid in the comparison
of insertion sites of different cell lines that trap the same gene,
the bottom of the cell line annotation page contains a diagram
showing the gene trap sequence aligned to the transcripts
returned by AutoIdent. The Website provides a similar anno-
65tation page for all trapped genes, organized by gene ID.
Researchers can also access gene trap data via links from
other major informatics resources, including the genome
browsers and primary accession pages at NCBI (25), Ensembl
(26) and UCSC (27).
70The IGTC Website offers users diverse ways to find gene
trap cell lines, ranging from searches using protein data,
microarray probesets or nucleotide sequences, to screening
for traps placed in the context of biological pathways or in
genes that demonstrate a particular expression profile. Figure 3
75lists the ways in which gene trap data can be accessed, cate-
gorized by access type, details about available data type and
data access point. Users can search the IGTC database by
accession number, ID or keyword and chromosomal location.
Results from database searches are displayed as a list of
80cell line IDs or gene symbols, which link to the individual
cell line or gene annotation page. These lists can be exported
as tab-delimited files for use in spreadsheet programs or
custom databases. Users can also browse the database by
MGI Marker Symbol, Gene Name or chromosome location.
85BLAST analysis can be performed using nucleotide sequence
for a gene or locus of interest to search against gene trap
sequences or genomic sequence of trapped genes. Trapped
genes can be viewed with a pathway perspective using bio-
logical pathway diagrams and functional GO groupings,
90which are colored by the number of cell lines available for
each gene. Users can also search for traps in genes with a
designated expression profile by selecting a tissue of interest
and choosing the expression level of the gene relative to the
median tissue expression.
95Finally, users can browse gene trap cell lines displayed at
major external informatics sites, such as genome browsers and
gene pages. IGTC cell lines have been mapped to genomic
sequence using the NCBI map viewer, UCSC genome browser
and Ensembl genome browser. IGTC gene traps are main-
100tained at these sites either as standard map tracks or as
user-configured tracks. (Users should follow site-specific
directions to view gene trap data using these browsers.) In
addition, gene trap cell lines are listed on some of the
major gene pages and in mouse strain resource databases,
105and the IGTC maintains a full list of partnering sites. By
integrating gene trap data into the larger context provided
by these bioinformatics resources, the IGTC can reach
more potential users who are interested in genomic resources
and functional genetics.
110SUMMARY
The establishment of the IGTC database and Website marks
a major advance in making large-scale mouse knockout
resources available to the scientific community. Through the
collaboration of gene trap projects worldwide, a standardized
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D645
Figure 2. IGTCWebsite cell line annotation page. The image provides an example of themain data page for gene trap cell lines.Users can viewprimary identification
and annotation data, with a link to detailed reports from the IGTC pipeline. An extensive amount of related annotation data is also presented to give researchers more
information about the trapped locus. Finally, the page shows details about the cell line and vector and an image showing all gene trap cell line sequences aligned to the
trapped gene. From this page, users are directed to the IGTC member site for cell line requests.
D646 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
identification and annotation pipeline has been developed
to analyze gene trap data and offer the data access tools
necessary for maximum resource utility. For the first time,
researchers investigating gene function in the mouse can
5 query all publicly available gene trap ES cell lines at a single
site. The IGTC Website contains approximately 45 000 cell
lines harboring mutations in nearly 40% of mouse genes (15),
including many genes with gene trap cell lines representing
multiple mutant alleles. Researchers can search and browse
10 the resource based on accession numbers or IDs, keywords,
sequence data, tissue expression and biological pathways, and
can also access the IGTC site from other major informatics
sites. Furthermore, they can easily request IGTC cell lines for
functional characterization of gene function and disease mod-
15 els. For example, BayGenomics cell lines are available from
the Mutant Mouse Regional Resource Center (MMRRC) at
the University of California Davis (www.mmrrc.org). The
MMRRC-UC Davis also offers to microinject ES cells to
derive knockout mice for investigators. Soon, the Soriano
20 and TIGEM collections will also be available from the
MMRRC. The IGTC Website will grow and continue to
develop new tools and features as the diversity of trapped
genes and experimental options for using gene trap cell
lines expand.
25 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work has been supported by NIH grants U01 HL66600
and P41 RR01081, Canadian Institutes of Health grant
GOP-36055 and by The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute.
The authors thank Carol Bult at Mouse Genome Informatics,
30 Deanna Church at the National Center for Biotechnology
Information and Bob Kuhn at University of California at
Santa Cruz for their helpful suggestions. Funding to pay the
Open Access publication charges for this article was provided
by the University of California, San Francisco.
35Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Waterston,R.H., Chinwalla,A.T., Cook,L.L., Delehaunty,K.D.,
Fewell,G.A., Fulton,L.A., Fulton,R.S., Graves,T.A., Hillier,L.W.,
Lindblad-Toh,K.et al. (2002) Initial sequencingandcomparativeanalysis
40of the mouse genome. Nature, 420, 520–562.
2. Sung,Y.H., Lee,H.-W. and Song,J. (2004) Functional genomics approach
using mice. J. Biochem. Mol. Biol., 37, 122–132.
3. Nolan,P.M. (2000) Generation of mouse mutants as a tool for functional
genomics. Pharmacogenomics, 1, 243–255.
454. Stanford,W.L.,Cohn,J.B. andCordes,S.P. (2001)Gene-trapmutagenesis:
past, present and beyond. Nature Rev. Genet., 2, 756–768.
5. Branda,C.S. and Dymecki,S.M. (2004) Talking about a revolution: The
impact of site-specific recombinases on genetic analyses in mice.
Dev. Cell, 6, 7–28.
506. Schnutgen,F., De-Zolt,S., Van Sloun,P., Hollatz,M., Floss,T., Hansen,J.,
Altschmied,J., Seisenberger,C., Ghyselinck,N.B., Ruiz,P. et al. (2005)
Genomewide production of multipurpose alleles for the functional
analysis of the mouse genome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 102,
7221–7226.
557. Cobellis,G., Nicolaus,G., Iovino,M., Romito,A., Marra,E., Barbarisi,M.,
Sardiello,M., Di Giorgio,F.P., Iovino,N., Zollo,M. et al. (2005) Tagging
genes with cassette-exchange sites. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, e44.
8. Austin,C.P., Battey,J.F., Bradley,A., Bucan,M., Capecchi,M.,
Collins,F.S., Dove,W.F., Duyk,G., Dymecki,S., Eppig,J.T. et al. (2004)
60The knockout mouse project. Nature Genet., 36, 921–924.
9. Auwerx,J., Avner,P., Baldock,R., Ballabio,A., Balling,R., Barbacid,M.,
Berns,A., Bradley,A., Brown,S., Carmeliet,P. et al. (2004) The European
dimension for the mouse genome mutagenesis program. Nature Genet.,
36, 925–927.
6510. Hicks,G.G., Shi,E.-G., Li,X.-M., Li,C.-H., Pawlak,M. and Ruley,H.E.
(1997) Functional genomics in mice by tagged sequence mutagenesis.
Nature Genet., 16, 338–344.
11. Wiles,M.V., Vauti,F., Otte,J., Fuchtbauer,E.-M., Ruiz,P., Fuchtbauer,A.,
Arnold,H.-H., Lehrach,H., Metz,T., Von Melchner,H. et al. (2000)
70Establishment of a gene-trap sequence tag library to generate mutant
mice from embryonic stem cells. Nature Genet., 24, 13–14.
Figure 3. Gene trap data access. Several methods for users to find gene trap cell lines of interest are illustrated.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D647
12. Stryke,D., Kawamoto,M., Huang,C.C., Johns,S.J., King,L.A.,
Harper,C.A., Meng,E.C., Lee,R.E., Babbit,P.C., Ferrin,T.E. et al. (2003)
BayGenomics: a resource of insertional mutations in mouse embryonic
stem cells. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 278–281.
5 13. Hansen,J., Floss,T., Wurst,W., Van Sloun,P., Schnu¨tgen,F.,
VonMelchnert,H., Fu¨chtbauer,E.-M.,Vauti,F.,Arnold,H.-H. andRuiz,P.
(2003) A large-scale, gene-driven mutagenesis approach for the
functional analysis of the mouse genome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA,
100, 9918–9922.
10 14. To,C., Epp,T., Reid,T., Lan,Q., Yu,M., Li,C.Y., Ohishi,M., Hant,P.,
Tsao,N.,Casallo,G. et al. (2004)TheCentre forModelingHumanDisease
Gene Trap resource. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D557–559.
15. Skarnes,W.C., Nord,A.S., Cox,T., von Melchner,H., Wurst,W.,
Hicks,G., Young,S.G., Conklin,B.R., Ruiz,P., Soriano,P. et al. (2004)
15 A public gene trap resource for mouse functional genomics. Nature
Genet., 36, 543–544.
16. Benson,D.A., Karsch-Mizrachi,I., Lipman,D.J., Ostell,J. and
Wheeler,D.L. (2005) GenBank. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D34–D38.
17. Kwan,Y.K. (2002) LinkOut: Explore beyond PubMed and Entrez.
20 D-Lib Mag., 8.
18. Hubbard,T., Andrews,D., Caccamo,M., Cameron,G., Chen,Y.,
Clamp,M., Clarke,L., Coates,G., Cox,T., Cunningham,F. et al. (2005)
Ensembl 2005. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D447–D453.
19. Ning,Z., Cox,A.J. andMullikin,J.C. (2001) SSAHA: a fast searchmethod
25 for large DNA databases. Genome Res., 11, 1725–1729.
20. Altschul,S.F., Gish,W., Miller,W., Myers,E.W. and Lipman,D.J. (1990)
Basic local alignment search tool. J. Mol. Biol., 215, 403–410.
21. Maglott,D., Ostell,J., Pruitt,K.D. and Tatusova,T. (2005) Entrez
Gene: gene-centered information at NCBI. Nucleic Acids Res., 33,
30D54–D58.
22. Eppig,J.T., Bult,C.J., Kadin,J.A., Richardson,J.E., Blake,J.A.,
Anagnostopoulos,A., Baldarelli,R.M., Baya,M., Beal,J.S., Bello,S.M.
et al. (2005) TheMouseGenomeDatabase (MGD): fromgenes tomice—
a community resource for mouse biology. Nucleic Acids Res., 33,
35D471–475.
23. Su,A.I., Wiltshire,T., Batalov,S., Lapp,H., Ching,K.A., Block,D.,
Zhang,J., Soden,R., Hayakawa,M., Kreiman,G. et al. (2004) A gene atlas
of the mouse and human protein-encoding transcriptomes. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA, 101, 6062–6067.
4024. Dahlquist,K.D., Salomonis,N., Vranizan,K., Lawlor,S.C. and
Conklin,B.R. (2002) GenMAPP, a new tool for viewing and analyzing
microarray data on biological pathways. Nature Genet., 31,
19–20.
25. Wheeler,D.L., Barrett,T., Benson,D.A., Bryant,S.H., Canese,K.,
45Church,D.M., DiCuccio,M., Edgar,R., Federhen,S., Helmberg,W. et al.
(2005) Database resources of the National Center for Biotechnology
Information. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D39–D45.
26. Stalker,J., Gibbins,B., Meidl,P., Smith,J., Spooner,W., Hotz,H.-R. and
Cox,A.V. (2004)TheEnsemblWeb site:mechanics of a genomebrowser.
50Genome Res., 14, 951–955.
27. Karolchik,D., Baertsch,R., Diekhans,M., Furey,T.S., Hinrichs,A.,
Lu,Y.T., Roskin,K.M., Schwartz,M., Sugnet,C.W., Thomas,D.J. et al.
(2003) The UCSC Genome Browser Database. Nucleic Acids Res.,
31, 51–54.
D648 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
