REPPER—repeats and their periodicities in
fibrous proteins
Markus Gruber*, Johannes So¨ding and Andrei N. Lupas
Max-Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Spemannstr. 35, 72076 Tu¨bingen, Germany
Received February 14, 2005; Revised and Accepted March 21, 2005
ABSTRACT
REPPER (REPeats and their PERiodicities) is an
integrated server that detects and analyzes regions
with short gapless repeats in protein sequences
or alignments. It finds periodicities by Fourier
Transform (FTwin) and internal similarity analysis
(REPwin). FTwin assigns numerical values to amino
acids that reflect certain properties, for instance
hydrophobicity, and gives information on corres-
ponding periodicities. REPwin uses self-alignments
and displays repeats that reveal significant internal
similarities. Both programs use a sliding window to
ensure that different periodic regionswithin the same
protein are detected independently. FTwin and
REPwin are complemented by secondary structure
prediction (PSIPRED) and coiled coil prediction
(COILS), making the server a versatile analysis tool
for sequences of fibrous proteins. REPPER is avail-
able at http://protevo.eb.tuebingen.mpg.de/repper.
INTRODUCTION
Many proteins display repeat patterns in their sequences.
The size of these repeats may range from entire domains,
such as the IG and FN domains in titin, over subdomain-
sized supersecondary structures, such as the a–a hairpins in
TPR proteins or the b-meanders in b-propellers, to the short
elements making up fibrous proteins, such as coiled coils,
collagens and b-helices.
Most currently available repeat detection tools are
homology-based and built to identify divergent, gapped repeats
of variable length and spacing in the size range of 20 residues
and above (i.e. supersecondary structures and domains). For
example, SMART (1), Pfam (2), and REP (3) detect repeats by
reference to a database of repeat profiles, while REPRO (4) and
RADAR (5) detect repeats by aligning the query sequence with
itself. None of these methods is suited to detect repeats shorter
than 20 residues. The profile-based methods do not contain
templates for such short elements, while in REPRO short
ungapped repeats obtain low scores by virtue of the program
using pairwise comparisons to determine significance, and in
RADAR such repeats are even explicitly masked out to reduce
complexity. Thus, these programs are not useful for analyzing
one of the largest classes of repetitive proteins, the fibrous
proteins, in which the repeat size is typically <15 residues.
For fibrous proteins the most commonly used tool for ana-
lysis is Fourier Transform (FT) (6–11). Indeed, the FORTRAN
implementation of this method by McLachlan may have
represented the first bioinformatic program for sequence ana-
lysis (6). This tool has been widely used, particularly in the
analysis of coiled coils, and has proven crucial for deducing
properties of the tertiary structure, for example, supercoil
handedness (12).
With FT, a string of numerical values representing a protein
sequence can be approximated by a linear combination of
trigonometric functions with different periodicities. If the
function has a certain periodic pattern, the contribution of
the trigonometric function with this particular periodicity is
greater than the contribution of trigonometric functions with
other periodicities. The FT gives the quantities of the contri-
butions as a function of the periodicity. FT is useful in detect-
ing repeats of any size and nature, provided that the analysis
is made over a window sufficiently large to include many
copies of the repeating unit and that the window contains
only repeating units of one type.
Inconjunction withprograms that predict secondary structure
and theoccurrenceofcoiled coils,FTcan beverypowerful in the
analysis of fibrous proteins. In addition, these methods can be
usefully complemented by a sequence comparison tool (REP-
win), which is conceptually similar to the ones named above, but
tailored to detect short consecutive repeats by aligning a
sequence to itself, shifted by multiples of a variable offset.
We have therefore built a server that implements new versions
of FT (FTwin) and sequence self-comparison (REPwin) and
combines their output with that of secondary structure predic-
tion (PSIPRED) (13) and coiled coil prediction (COILS) (14–
16) into an integrated and detailed overview. The programs are
implemented using a sliding window, so as to show the bound-
aries of periodic regions and allow the detection of multiple
regions with different periodicities in the same protein.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +49 7071 601 344; Fax: +49 7071 601 349; Email: markus.gruber@tuebingen.mpg.de
ª The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W239–W243
doi:10.1093/nar/gki405
COMPONENT PROGRAMS
FTwin
FTwin is a Fourier Transform analysis tool that
employs a sliding window of user-defined size (default
value 100). A protein sequence is represented by a discrete
function of real numbers. Two scales for the analysis of
hydrophobic periodicity are provided by the program, one
derived from the Kyte–Doolittle hydrophobicity scale
(17) and the other reflecting a binary weighting of
aliphatic residues. In addition, other scales can be set by
the user.
Figure 1. REPPER analysis of YadA. (a) FTwin output showing periodicities along the sequence; level of significance color-coded from yellow to blue. When
clicking on a colored bar, a Fourier spectrum is calculated for this part of the sequence (see spectra for the head and stalk domain). (b) REPwin output displaying
periodicities along the sequence. The head domain with periodicity 14 and the stalk domain with periodicity 15 are clearly distinguished. (c) PSIPRED output;
a-helices are displayed in red, b-sheets in green. (d) COILS output with intermediate probabilities for the stalk domain (window sizes: red, 28; blue, 21; green, 14).
W240 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
For each periodicity p the corresponding intensity can be
calculated as
Ip ¼ 1
W2
XW1
j¼0
aj cos
2pj
p
 !2
þ
XW1
j¼0
aj sin
2pj
p
 !224
3
5‚ 1
with window size W. For a given sequence (or alignment
of sequences) the program returns a graph with the significant
periodicities as a function of the position in the sequence.
Periodicities are significant if they are above a certain thresh-
old that is defined as mi + tsi, where mi is the average intensity
hIpi in the window with starting position i, t is the FTwin
threshold parameter and si is the standard deviation (SD)
of the intensities in window i. The threshold parameter t as
well as values for the window size and the periodicity range
can be changed via the user interface.
REPwin
Repeat patterns can also be found by sequence self-
comparison. REPwin compares a protein sequence with itself,
using the Gonnet similarity matrix (18) and a sliding window
of user-defined size. It returns a graph (19) which shows
regions of significant self-similarities with their corresponding
periodicities (Figure 1b). A similarity in the self-alignment is
indicative of a region with a periodicity equal to the offset.
For each position i and periodicity p REPwin calculates
Score i‚pð Þ ¼
X
k
X
j
S xj‚xjþkp
 
: 2
S(xj, xj+kp) is the Gonnet substitution matrix element for
residues xj and xj+kp. The sum runs over all k and j
such that j and j + kp are inside the window
(i, . . . , i + W  1). Score (i, p) is normalized by dividing
through the SD for nonperiodic sequences. The final score
value for each residue i and periodicity p is the maximum
over all windows containing residue i. The size of the sliding
window is the same as for FTwin. The threshold may also
be changed.
COILS
COILS (14–16) is a program that compares a sequence to a
sequence profile derived from a database of known parallel
two-stranded coiled coils and calculates a similarity score for
each sliding window position (window sizes for COILS are 14,
21 and 28). By comparing this score with the distribution of
scores in globular and coiled-coil proteins, the program then
calculates the probability that the sequence will adopt a coiled-
coil conformation.
Figure 2. FTwin periodicities in multiple-sequence mode differ from those in single-sequence mode (window size 50, threshold parameter 3). (a) FTwin output for
the cortexillin single sequence (PDB: 1D7M). The characteristic periodicity of 7/2 = 3.5 is not detected. (b) FTwin output for a cortexillin multiple sequence
alignment (based on Blast hits with E-value cutoff 104 over the NCBI nonredundant protein database). It reveals the dominant periodicity of 3.5 over a substantial
part of the protein and a periodicity of 7/3 = 2.3. The exact periodicities are shown when clicking on the colored bars.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W241
PSIPRED
PSIPRED is a program developed by David Jones (13), which
predicts protein secondary structure using the position specific
scoring matrices generated by PSI-BLAST (20). It helps to
interpret the predicted periodicities.
EXAMPLE ANALYSIS
As an example for the application of this server we will briefly
discuss its output for the non-fimbrial adhesin YadA from
Yersinia enterocolitica (gi 401465) (11). This protein is
responsible for the adhesion of the pathogen to human tissue
and appears in electron micrographs as a lollipop with a small
head perched on a long stalk. The head is a left-handed b-helix
(PDB: 1P9H) with a degenerate periodicity close to 14 and the
stalk is a coiled coil with an unusual periodicity of 15 residues.
The protein is anchored in the outer membrane by a porin-like
domain consisting of four transmembrane b-strands. Since it
contains two domains with different periodicities and second-
ary structures, YadA makes an ideal example to demonstrate
the impact of a sliding window on the analysis.
As can be seen in Figure 1a and b, FTwin and REPwin
clearly identify the two regions with their correct periodicities.
The 15-residue periodicity of the coiled coil differs markedly
from the canonical 7-residue repeat and COILS therefore
only returns intermediate probabilities (Figure 1d). In fact,
a 15-residue periodicity yields a helical structure with 3.75
residues per turn; it has a right-handed supercoil twist, which is
of the same magnitude but opposite handedness to that of
canonical coiled coils. This fact was predicted from theoretical
considerations (11,12) and was proven by the crystal structure
of a 15-residue periodic protein (PDB: 1USE). PSIPRED also
has problems with this region, since its beginning and end are
conserved in many adhesins that lack the coiled coil. Because
PSIPRED uses a PSI-BLAST derived profile for prediction,
the corruption of the profile by locally dissimilar sequences
leads to a misprediction in this area. Note, however, that the
beginning and end of the coiled coil, which are conserved, are
correctly predicted as a-helices. PSIPRED is also accurate in
assigning an a-helix to the signal sequence and b-strands to
the head and anchor regions. Overall the juxtaposition of the
four sequence analysis methods provides a clear view of the
nature, location and extent of the two periodic regions in YadA
(Figure 1).
USING PROFILES
In REPPER (REPeats and their PERiodicities), the programs
FTwin and COILS allow the user to take a multiple sequence
alignment as input, and there is also the option to calculate a
profile for a given single input sequence using PSI-BLAST
with two iterations and an E-value cutoff of 0.001.
This can improve the accuracy of FTwin (Figure 2). The
single sequence of the long coiled coil cortexillin does not
display the typical periodicity of 3.5, although this coiled coil
is regular. If an alignment is used as input, a periodicity of
exactly 3.5 is revealed. As many coiled coils have exceptions
Figure 3. Comparison between COILS in single-sequence mode and in multiple-sequence mode (window sizes: red, 28; blue, 21; green, 14). (a) Structure of the Bag
domain (PDB: 1HX1) showing the three coiled-coil-like helices H1–H3 (21). (b) COILS output for the Bag domain single sequence. (c) COILS output for a
multiple sequence alignment (based on Blast hits of the Bag domain sequence withE-value cutoff 104 over the NCBI nonredundant protein database filtered to 70%
sequence identity with no low-complexity regions).
W242 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
to the hydrophobic-polar repeat pattern, the FT results get
blurred, but as soon as other similar sequences are aligned
the pattern becomes more pronounced and therefore more
significant in the results.
Profiles may also lead to an improvement of COILS.
For example, the Bag domain (PDB: 1HX1) is a three-helix
bundle with features typical for coiled coils (Figure 3). In a
single-sequence analysis, only the first helix (H1) obtains high
coiled-coil probabilities. H2 contains a slight deformation of
the helix, which substantially lowers its score. When using a
multiple sequence alignment as input, this discontinuity is
averaged with many regular sequences, thereby markedly
improving the scores for H2 and yielding a better match to
the structure.
One should note from the previous example of the YadA
coiled coil that, when produced automatically with PSI-
BLAST, profiles may get corrupted, in which case a single-
sequence prediction is clearly more accurate. For this reason
the default setting of the server is in the single-sequence mode.
Users are encouraged to take advantage of the multiple-
sequence mode by using their own curated alignments.
CONCLUSION
FTwin and REPwin are two new programs for the prediction
of periodic patterns in protein sequences. Although they are
aimed primarily at the analysis of fibrous proteins, they can be
used for any kind of repetitive sequence provided the follow-
ing criteria are met: Repeats of the same nature must be con-
secutive in the sequence, must be of approximately the same
size (no major insertions or deletions) and must occur in suf-
ficient number to be detectable by FT. This number is a func-
tion of the sequence similarity between the repeats; whereas
nearly identical repeats can even be detected in occurrences
of 2–5, more degenerate repeats typically require at least 10
occurrences (the size of the scanning window in REPPER
must be set to reflect this). FTwin and REPwin are comple-
mentary, since REPwin searches for repeats in a general way,
using a global amino acid replacement matrix, wheras FTwin
searches for periodicities of particular, user-defined types
(hydrophobic, polar, positively charged, etc.). Their combina-
tion with secondary structure and coiled-coil prediction into a
single integrated server provides a powerful new tool for the
analysis of protein sequences.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to Mathias Ganter and Andreas Biegert
for integrating REPPER into the MPI Toolkit. Funding to
pay the Open Access publication charges for this article was
provided by the Max-Planck Society.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Schultz,J.,Milpetz,F., Bork,P. and Ponting,C.P. (1998)SMART, a simple
modular architecture research tool: identification of signaling domains.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 95, 5857–5864.
2. Bateman,A., Coin,L., Durbin,R., Finn,R.D., Hollich,V.,
Griffiths-Jones,S., Khanna,A., Marshall,M., Moxon,S.,
Sonnhammer,E.L.L. et al. (2004) The Pfam protein
families database. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D138–D141.
3. Andrade,M.A., Ponting,C.P., Gibson,T.J. and Bork,P. (2000)
Homology-based method for identification of protein repeats using
statistical significance estimates. J. Mol. Biol., 298, 521–537.
4. George,R.A. and Heringa,J. (2000) The REPRO server: finding protein
internal sequence repeats through the web. Trends Biochem. Sci., 25,
515–517.
5. Heger,A. and Holm,L. (2000) Rapid automatic detection and alignment
of repeats in protein sequences. Proteins, 41, 224–237.
6. McLachlan,A.D. and Stewart,M. (1976) The 14-fold periodicity in
a-tropomyosin and the interaction with actin. J. Mol. Biol., 103,
271–298.
7. McLachlan,A.D. and Karn,J. (1983) Periodic features in the amino
acid sequence of nematode myosin rod. J. Mol. Biol., 164, 605–626.
8. Marshall,J. and Holberton,D.V. (1993) Sequence and structure of
a new coiled coil protein from a microtubule bundle in Giardia.
J. Mol. Biol., 231, 521–530.
9. Peters,J., Nitsch,M., Kuhlmorgen,B., Golbik,R., Lupas,A.,
Kellermann,J., Engelhardt,H., Pfander,J.P., Muller,S. and Goldie,K.
(1995) Tetrabrachion: a filamentous archaebacterial surface protein
assembly of unusual structure and extreme stability. J. Mol. Biol.,
245, 385–401.
10. Pasquier,C.M., Promponas,V.I., Varvayannis,N.J. and Hamodrakas,S.J.
(1998) A web server to locate periodicities in a sequence.Bioinformatics,
14, 749–750.
11. Hoiczyk,E., Roggenkamp,A., Reichenbecher,M., Lupas,A. and
Heesemann,J. (2000) Structure and sequence analysis of Yersinia YadA
and Moraxella UspAs reveal a novel class of adhesins. EMBO J.,
19, 5989–5999.
12. Lupas,A.N. and Gruber,M. (2005) The structure ofa-helical coiled coils.
Adv. Protein Chem., in press.
13. Jones,D.T. (1999) Protein secondary structure prediction based on
position-specific scoring matrices. J. Mol. Biol., 292, 195–202.
14. Parry,D.A. (1982) Coiled-coils in a-helix-containing proteins:
analysis of the residue types within the heptad repeat and the use of these
data in the prediction of coiled-coils in other proteins. Biosci. Rep.,
2, 1017–1024.
15. Lupas,A., Van Dyke,M. and Stock,J. (1991) Predicting coiled coils from
protein sequences. Science, 252, 1162–1164.
16. Lupas,A. (1996) Prediction and analysis of coiled-coil structures.
Meth. Enzymol., 266, 513–525.
17. Kyte,J. and Doolittle,R.F. (1982) A simple method for displaying the
hydropathic character of a protein. J. Mol. Biol., 157, 105–132.
18. Gonnet,G.H., Cohen,M.A. and Benner,S.A. (1992) Exhaustive
matching of the entire protein sequence database. Science, 256,
1443–1445.
19. Sonnhammer,E.L. and Durbin,R. (1995) A dot-matrix program with
dynamic threshold control suited for genomic DNA and protein sequence
analysis. Gene, 167, GC1–GC10.
20. Altschul,S.F., Madden,T.L., Schaffer,A.A., Zhang,J., Zhang,Z.,
Miller,W. and Lipman,D.J. (1997) Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST:
a new generation of proteindatabase search programs.NucleicAcidsRes.,
25, 3389–3402.
21. Kraulis,P.J. (1991) MOLSCRIPT: a program to produce both detailed
and schematic plots of protein structures. J. Appl. Cryst., 24,
946–950.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W243
