MIDAW: a web tool for statistical analysis of
microarray data
Chiara Romualdi, Nicola Vitulo, Micky Del Favero and Gerolamo Lanfranchi*
Dipartimento di Biologia, CRIBI Biotechnology Centre, Universita` degli Studi di Padova,
Via Ugo Bassi 58/B, I-35121 Padua, Italy
Received February 8, 2005; Revised March 21, 2005; Accepted April 26, 2005
ABSTRACT
MIDAW (microarray data analysis web tool) is a web
interface integrating a series of statistical algorithms
that can be used for processing and interpretation
of microarray data. MIDAW consists of two main sec-
tions: data normalization and data analysis. In the
normalization phase the simultaneous processing
of several experiments with background correction,
global and local mean and variance normalization
are carried out. The data analysis section allows
graphical display of expression data for descriptive
purposes, estimation of missing values, reduction
of data dimension, discriminant analysis and identi-
fication of marker genes. The statistical results are
organized in dynamic web pages and tables, where
the transcript/gene probes contained in a specific
microarray platform can be linked (according to user
choice) toexternal databases (GenBank,EntrezGene,
UniGene). Tutorial files help the user throughout the
statistical analysis to ensure that the forms are filled
out correctly. MIDAW has been developed using Perl
and PHP and it uses R/Bioconductor languages and
routines. MIDAW is GPL licensed and freely access-
ible at http://muscle.cribi.unipd.it/midaw/. Perl and
PHP source codes are available from the authors
upon request.
INTRODUCTION
Microarray technology allows the monitoring of the expres-
sion levels of large numbers of genes simultaneously, with a
relatively low experimental effort. The exponential increase
of data on gene expression and the application of expression
profiling to sensitive fields (such as classification and pro-
gnosis of human pathologies) require very advanced and integ-
rated statistical tools for the analysis and mining of data.
Several tools have already been developed for normalization
(1,2) and analysis (3–5) of microarray data. Most of these
[apart from GEPAS (4)], however, (i) deal with just one
specific aspect of data analysis (either cluster analysis, or dis-
criminant analysis, gene scoring, normalization); (ii) require
software download and employ different file formats; (iii) use
complicated statistical packages that are not easy to use by
individuals not familiar with multivariate statistics (e.g.
R/Bioconductor). Here we present a web-based tool for the
analysis of gene expression data, called MIDAW. This tool
can be used for the analysis of microarray platforms developed
with the two fluorescence colours approach. With the upload-
ing of one single file, MIDAW can immediately process
expression data from normalization to discriminant analysis.
Our aim was the implementation of a web interface for
some R/Bioconductor packages [http://www.r-project.org
and http://www.bioconductor.org/ (5)]. The structure of this
interface is flexible in the selection of algorithms and effortless
in the construction of the input data file.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 1A shows the main page of MIDAW. Here the user can
start with data normalization (Figure 1B) or skip directly to
data analysis (Figure 2A). Once the data have been normal-
ized, the user can decide to download the results or to
continue with the data analysis. Input files should always
be tab-delimited. Tutorial pages are provided for each section
to help the user through the diverse web forms.
Normalization
In this section MIDAW allows the normalization of several
two-channel (ch) microarray experiments simultaneously. The
data should be organized in one single file, and the order of
columns should be the same for all experiments. For example,
if columns 2, 3, 4 and 5 contain, respectively, ch1, ch2, ch1
background and ch2 background fluorescence values of the
first experiment, then columns 6, 7, 8 and 9 (of the same file)
will contain the fluorescence values of ch1, ch2, ch1 back-
ground and ch2 background of the second experiment and the
number of experiments should be set as 2. Table 1 shows the
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +39 0498276221; Fax: +39 0498276259; Email: lanfra@cribi.unipd.it
 The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
W644–W649 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gki497
required structure of a MIDAW input file. The normalization
form is divided into the following parts: (i) data upload and
input file description, (ii) normalization procedures. Normal-
ization techniques (6) that have been implemented in MIDAW
include (i) global mean normalization: the mean intensities
of ch1 and ch2 are calculated on the whole set of microarray
probes, then the final intensity of each spot is divided by
the global mean; (ii) local mean normalization (LOWESS):
systematic mean biases of the ch1/ch2 intensity are corrected
according to the local mean, calculated across the range of
Figure 1. (A) MIDAW main web page. Two sections are available: normalization and data analysis. A tutorial is available for filling the MIDAW input forms.
(B) The MIDAW normalization form needs channel 1 and channel 2 column numbers, background columns if applicable and the number of experiments to be
normalized. This section allows the simultaneously normalization of several microarray experiments (included in one single file), provided that the order of the
columns (ch1/ch2 intensity and ch1/ch2 background levels) is the same for all experiments. Finally, global normalization, local mean and variance normalization are
provided. (C) An example of the output web page for the normalized data.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W645
gene expression levels; (iii) local variance normalization:
systematic variance biases (heteroscedastic data) of the ch1/
ch2 intensity (corrected in the previous steps) are normalized
according to the local variance calculated across the range of
gene expression levels. As a result, different HTML pages are
provided for each normalized experiment, with diagnostic
plots and normalized text files (Figure 1C). The user can then
choose to proceed with the analysis or download the data and
terminate the MIDAW session. The data analysis section does
not require any further uploads, since the normalized dataset is
automatically uploaded and processed through the next steps
of analysis.
Multivariate analysis
The form (Figure 1A) is divided into the following parts:
(i) data upload and input file description, (ii) descriptive
analysis, (iii) assignment of missing values, (iv) dimension
reduction, (v) identification of differentially expressed genes,
(vi) cluster analysis and (vii) discriminant analysis. Results
Figure 2. (A) MIDAW form for data analysis. The form is divided into seven sections: data upload and input file description, descriptive analysis, imputation of
missing values, data reduction, detection of differentially expressed genes and discriminant analysis. (B) An example of a dynamic HTML page generated by
MIDAWwith the results of microarray data analysis. Results are referred to each of the sections listed above and specific links allow the user to download the results
as text files. (C) Lists of selected genes are shown in HTML tables linked to external databases, and search tools allow the browsing of the tables using keywords.
W646 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
are issued as dynamic HTML pages divided into sections
(Figure 2B), and selected genes are listed on web tables
with hyperlinks to external databases (Figure 2C). A search
tool is provided to browse gene lists by keywords.
Data upload. Here the user should define (i) the number of
columns containing gene descriptions and gene expression
values; (ii) the string used to identify missing values; (iii) the
presence of the header in the file (only one); (iv) the number of
columns containing gene accession numbers that have to be
linked to external databases; (v) possible log transformation
(base 2); (vi) the presence of a unique gene identification.
Furthermore, it is possible to standardize the data before stat-
istical analysis. With this option the mean and the variance
for each experiment will be rescaled to zero and one, respect-
ively. Table 2 shows an example of an input file with the
following settings: columns 1–3 contain gene description
data; columns 4–7 gene expression values; the header is pre-
sent and column 2 could be linked to the Entrez Gene database;
each gene is uniquely identified and expression values are log
transformed.
Descriptive analysis. With MIDAW it is possible to compare
density distributions of selected gene expression experiments
using different graphical tools. For each selected microarray
experiment the following plots are provided: (i) a kernel
density estimation (‘density’ function in R), (ii) box plot
(‘boxplot’ function in R), (iii) an estimation of the mean
kernel density of the selected column (the average of each
gene through the selected experiments is calculated and then
the density of this mean is estimated), (iv) a kernel density
estimation of the standard deviation of the selected column
(the standard deviation of each gene through the selected
experiments is calculated and then the density of this standard
deviation is estimated).
Estimation of missing values. Four different types of missing
value imputation (7) are allowed. The first is the ‘deletion’
option: genes with at least one missing expression value are
removed from the analysis. Alternatively, each single missing
value is replaced with the average of the corresponding
column or row. The last option is the k-nearest neighbour
technique, which replaces missing values with a weighted
average of values in the genes k-nearest to the missing one.
A distribution plot of the missing values on the data matrix
is also shown and a text file with all the new imputed expres-
sion values is provided. The R libraries used are ‘impute’
and ‘e1071’.
Cluster analysis. The user can choose between hierarchical
and non-hierarchical (k-means) cluster analysis. Further
options are available in the selection of distance measures
(Euclidean distance or Pearson correlation coefficient) and
link functions (complete, single and average link) and also
for the number of clusters. MIDAW creates a graphical dis-
play of similarity structure that is coherent in terms of the user
settings of the different options (dendrogram or profile sim-
ilarity plot). Each resulting plot is actually an HTML map,
and the user can click on different map positions to obtain an
HTML table with the description and expression values of the
genes lying in a selected area (see Figure 3). Text files of the
experiments and genes are also provided, ordered according
to the selected cluster analysis. The R libraries used are ‘sma’
and ‘cluster’ with functions ‘agnes’ and ‘pam’.
Dimension reduction.MIDAW can apply principal component
analysis (PCA) or partial least square (PLS) analysis to genes
(rows) and to experiments (columns). These are two different
techniques that can be applied for the simplification of dataset
structure without losing the characteristics that contribute
most to data variance/covariance. For the PLS technique,
the user should provide a class identification for each experi-
ment (column of the expression matrix) and then enter in
the dedicated field a string with as many integers (separated
by commas) as the expression experiments. Experiments with
the same integer belong to the same class. Plots of genes/
experiments in the new two-dimensional space are provided
(the first principal component versus the second component
or the first PLS factor versus the second one). Scores and
loadings of the entire set of components of both analyses
can be downloaded as text files. The R libraries used are
‘mva’ and ‘pls.pcr’.
Identification of differentially expressed genes. The user can
choose among three alternative statistical tests for the identi-
fication of differentially expressed genes: t-test with false
discovery rate (FDR) control (8), the Significance Analysis
of Microarray [SAM (9)] test and the threshold method with
Table 1. Structure and syntax to be used for the MIDAW microarray data input file
ID cy1 cy1-back cy2 cy2-back cy1 cy1-back cy2 cy2-back
1 607 206 488 80 1469 225 2707 871
2 561 171 540 50 696 112 1025 217
3 33303 399 16378 290 9819 570 13823 557
4 29990 466 14206 275 9341 675 13178 566
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Table 2. Structure and syntax used in the MIDAW input file for the multivariate analysis step
ID Entrez Gene Description A B D F
1 6217 Hs ribosomal protein S16 0.012 1.273 0.364 0.335
2 1158 Hs creatine kinase, muscle 0.749 2.419 1.293 2.966
3 2597 Hs glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 1.295 4.303 0.880 2.557
4 4633 Hs myosin, light polypeptide 2, regulatory, cardiac, slow 0.970 0.003 2.270 1.959
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W647
standard deviation control. The threshold method selects all
genes whose expression values within the same class are
higher or lower than a defined cut-off value, and whose
standard deviation within the class is less than a selected
value. For each of the above technique the user should
provide a class identification for the experiment (column of
the expression matrix). MIDAW creates lists of differentially
expressed genes as HTML tables where cells appear with
different intensities of red and green colours according to
the level of expression of the corresponding genes. The R
libraries used are ‘multtest’ (for t-test calculation) and
‘siggenes’ (for SAM).
Discriminant analysis. Tibshirani and colleagues proposed
the Prediction Analysis of Microarray [PAM (10)] algorithm
for the identification of the set of the best marker genes. The
selection of genes is determined by a procedure of error rate
minimization obtained by cross-validation. Differently from
other discriminant algorithms, PAM can provide not only a
measure of the algorithm performance (misclassification
rate through cross-validation), but also a list of the best dis-
criminating genes. PAM analysis has been integrated into
MIDAW. As for the identification of differentially expressed
genes and for PLS procedures, PAM needs the class identi-
fication for each experiment. The R library used is ‘pamr’.
CONCLUSION
MIDAW is a system-independent, freely accessible and easy-
to-use web tool for complete analysis of microarray data. It is
divided into two main sections: data normalization and data
analysis. The workflow started by the interface is illustrated
in Figure 4. The tool requires the initial input of a single text
file with expression data. The construction of the input file is
relatively simple and user-friendly. MIDAW then processes
data, under user control, through different steps of analysis up
to the discovery of differentially expressed genes. Results are
Figure 3. Zoom section of the cluster analysis step. The image of expression profiles is an HTML map that shows a table with descriptions and expression values
of the genes that lie in a specific area selected by the user.
W648 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
organized in dynamic HTML pages that make data inter-
pretation more comprehensive.
MIDAW runs on a server equipped with a Dual-Opteron
(64 bit CPU) processor with 8 GB RAM. It performs all the
statistical analysis in <2 min. To avoid web server timeout,
result pages are generated dynamically, one section at a time,
following the user choice defined in the main web page.
MIDAW will be regularly updated and improved to follow
the constant development of R/Bioconductor routines for
microarray data analysis.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the Fondazione Telethon ONLUS
Italy, by the Ministero dell’Universita` e della Ricerca
Scientifica, Italy (grants FIRB and COFIN) and by the
Fondazione della Cassa di Risparmio di Verona–Vicenza–
Belluno–Ancona, Italy. Funding to pay the Open Access
publication charges for this article was provided by Telethon,
Italy.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Colantuoni,C., Henry,G., Zeger,S. and Pevsner,J. (2002) SNOMAD
(StandardizationandNormalizationofMicroArrayData):web-accessible
gene expression data analysis. Bioinformatics, 18, 1540–1541.
2. Vaquerizas,J.M., Dopazo,J. and Dı´az-Uriarte,R. (2004) DNMAD:
a web-based diagnosis and normalization for microarray data.
Bioinformatics, 20, 3656–3658.
3. Dudoit,S., Gentleman,R.C. and Quackenbush,J. (2003) Open source
software for the analysis of microarray data. Biotechniques (Suppl.),
45–51.
4. Herrero,J., Al-Shahrour,F., Dı´az-Uriarte,R.,Mateos,A.,Vaquerizas,J.M.,
Santoyo,J. and Dopazo,J. (2003) GEPAS: a web-based resource for
microarray gene expression data analysis. Nucleic Acids Res., 31,
3461–3467.
5. Gentleman,R.C., Carey,V.J., Bates,D.M., Bolstad,B., Dettling,M.,
Dudoit,S., Ellis,B., Gautier,L., Ge,Y., Gentry,J. et al. (2004)
Bioconductor: a software development project. Genome Biol., 5, R80.
6. Yang,Y.H., Dudoit,S., Luu,P., Lin,D.M., Peng,V., Ngai,J. and Speed,T.P.
(2002) Normalization for cDNA microarray data: a robust composite
method addressing single and multiple slide systematic variation.
Nucleic Acids Res., 30, e15.
7. Troyanskaya,O., Cantor,M., Sherlock,G., Brown,P., Hastie,T.,
Tibshirani,R., Botstein,D. and Altman,R.B. (2001) Missing value
estimation methods for DNA microarrays. Bioinformatics, 17, 520–525.
8. Reiner,A., Yekutieli,D. and Benjamini,Y. (2003) Identifying
differentially expressed genes using false discovery rate controlling
procedures. Bioinformatics, 19, 368–375.
9. Tusher,V.G., Tibshirani,R. and Chu,G. (2001) Significance analysis of
microarrays applied to the ionizing radiation response. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA, 98, 5116–5121.
10. Tibshirani,R., Hastie,T., Narasimhan,B. and Chu,G. (2002) Diagnosis of
multiple cancer types by shrunken centroids of gene expression.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 99, 6567–6572.
Figure 4. Flow chart of the workflow behind the web interface. Initially, the
user can choose to begin either with normalization or with analysis steps. After
the normalization step, the user can choose to download results and finish the
MIDAW session or to proceed with the analysis. In this second case, the novel
input file is automatically prepared by MIDAW.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W649
