2990-2997 Nucleic Acids Research, 1994, Vol. 22, No. 15
High sensitivity mapping of methylated cytosines
Susan J.Clark 2, *, Janet Harrison!, Cheryl L.Paul1 and Marianne Frommer3
1Kanematsu Laboratories, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Missenden Road, Camperdown, NSW 2050,
2CSIRO Division of Biomolecular Engineering, Sydney Laboratory, PO Box 184, North Ryde,
NSW 2113 and 3School of Biological Sciences, A12, University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
Received May 16, 1994; Revised and Accepted July 1, 1994
ABSTRACT
An understanding of DNA methylation and its potential
role in gene control during development, aging and
cancer has been hampered by a lack of sensitive
methods which can resolve exact methylation patterns
from only small quantities of DNA. We have now
developed a genomic sequencing technique which is
capable of detecting every methylated cytosine on both
strands of any target sequence, using DNA isolated
from fewer than 100 cells. In this method, sodium
bisulphite is used to convert cytosine residues to uracil
residues in single-stranded DNA, under conditions
whereby 5-methylcytosine remains non-reactive. The
converted DNA is amplified with specific primers and
sequenced. All the cytosine residues remaining in the
sequence represent previously methylated cytosines
in the genome. The work described has defined
procedures that maximise the efficiency of denatur-
ation, bisulphite conversion and amplification, to permit
methylation mapping of single genes from small
amounts of genomic DNA, readily available from germ
cells and early developmental stages.
INTRODUCTION
Although 5-methylcytosine (5-MeC) was the first modified base
to be discovered, nearly fifty years ago (1), its precise function
and significance in the control of gene expression of higher
organisms has remained elusive. The lack of information on the
role of 5-MeC has been due, in part, to a lack of suitable detection
techniques. Recently, however, there have been major
improvements in the methods available for determining the
methylation status of single cytosine residues in genomic DNA
(2,3). Most of the methods developed to date depend upon
cleavage of the phosphodiester bond alongside cytosine residues,
using either methylation-sensitive restriction enzymes or reactive
chemicals such as hydrazine which differentiate between cytosine
and its 5-methyl derivative. The use of methylation-sensitive
enzymes (4,5) suffers from the disadvantage that it is not of
general applicability, since only a limited proportion of potentially
methylated sites in the genome can be analysed and, in general,
hemi-methylation remains undetected. Current genomic
sequencing protocols (6,7), which identify a 5-MeC residue in
genomic DNA as a site that is not cleaved by any of the Maxam
and Gilbert sequencing reactions (8), are a substantial
improvement on the original genomic sequencing method (9),
but still have a number of disadvantages, including the
requirement for a relatively large amount of genomic DNA and
the necessity to detect a gap in a sequencing ladder which may
contain bands of varying intensity and shadow bands.
A different approach, developed recently in our laboratory (10),
relies on the ability of sodium bisulphite to efficiently convert
cytosine residues to uracil in single-stranded DNA, under
conditions whereby 5-MeC remains essentially non-reactive
(11,12). The DNA sequence under investigation is then amplified
by PCR with two sets of strand-specific primers to yield a pair
of fragments, one derived from each strand, in which all uracil
and thymine residues have been amplified as thymine and only
5-MeC residues have been amplified as cytosine. This method
for identifying 5-MeC is therefore a positive one, in which the
position of each 5-MeC residue is given by a distinct band on
a sequencing gel.
Cytosine forms adducts across the 5-6 bond with a number
of oxidation reagents including bisulphite ion (13). The
deamination of cytosine by sodium bisulphite (Fig. 1) involves
the following steps: (1) addition of bisulphite to the 5 -6 double
bond of cytosine, (2) hydrolytic deamination of the resulting
cytosine-bisulphite derivative to give a uracil-bisulphite derivative,
and (3) removal of the sulphonate group by a subsequent alkali
treatment, to give uracil. Bisulphite reacts with cytosine either
as the free base, the nucleoside (ribo- or deoxyribo-), the
nucleotide or the oligonucleotide. The reaction is highly single-
strand specific. Indeed, it can be used to distinguish regions of
DNA that are single stranded from those that are double stranded
by their differential reactivity (11,12,13).
The first step of the reaction, formation of the sulphonated
cytosine derivative (cytosine-S03) is reversible (14).
Equilibrium is reached much more slowly for DNA than for
nucleotides. The extent of adduct formation is controlled by pH,
bisulphite concentration and temperature (13). The forward
reaction is favoured by low pH and the reverse reaction by high
*To whom correspondence should be addressed at: CSIRO Division of Biomolecular Engineering, Sydney Laboratory, PO Box 184, North Ryde, NSW 2113,
Australia
Nucleic Acids Research, 1994, Vol. 22, No. 15 2991
(5') a --GAGTCAC-------CG----CG--------GCTTCAG---
(3')b --CTCAGTG-------GC----GC--------CGAAGTC---
m
- Denaturation
IFn
(5') a --GAGTCAC-------CG--CG-------GCTTCAG---
(3' ) b --CTCAGTG-------GC----GC--------CGAAGTC---
m
H,O
STEP2|
Hydrolytic
Deamination
HSO,-_
OHf
\N FSTEP3 N
H H
Alkali
Uracil Desulphonation Uracil
sulphonate
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the bisulphite conversion reaction.
pH. In the second step of the reaction, cytosine-S03 undergoes
hydrolytic deamination to give uracil-S03 (12). This step is
catalysed by basic substances, such as sulphite, bisulphite and
acetate anions (13). Since sulphonation is favoured by acidic pH,
the reversible sulphonation reaction and the subsequent
irreversible deamination step are both carried out at a pH below
7. The third step of the reaction involves alkali treatment to
remove the bisulphite adduct. Although 5-MeC can also react
with bisulphite, the reaction is extremely slow and the equilibrium
favours 5-MeC rather than the deaminated product, thymine (11).
Protocols which define the methylation status of every cytosine
in a DNA sequence (6,7,10) have required relatively large
amounts of DNA (2- 100,tg). These methods, therefore, have
not been readily applicable to the study of methylation in the
germline and during early development, when methylation
patterns are established and when large scale demethylation and
active de novo methylation are occurring in a small number of
cells. We have now developed the bisulphite genomic sequencing
method to analyse the methylation profile of single genes from
as little as 200pg of genomic DNA, corresponding to fewer than
100 cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Bisulphite genomic sequencing protocol
1. Bisulphite conversion reaction. The bisulphite reaction was
carried out on linear fragments of genomic or plasmid DNA
which had been digested with an appropriate restriction enzyme
(i.e. one that did not cut within the target sequence). However,
if no suitable restriction site is available, for instance when
multiple target sequences are to be amplified, DNA can be
sheared by passing through a narrow gauge needle. The DNA
(200pg-50,ug in a volume of 20-200td) was denatured by
adding freshly prepared NaOH to a final concentration of 0.3M
and incubating for 15 minutes at 37°C. At this stage, immediately
before use, 10mM hydroquinone and 3.6M sodium bisulphite
(Sigma) or 2M sodium metabisulphite (BDH), pH 5.0 (pH
Sulphonation (Stepl)
Deamination (Step2)
f-Desulphonation (Step3)
m(5')a --GAGTUAU-------UG----CG--------GUTTUAG---
(3 )b --UTUAGTG-------GU----GC-------UGAAGTU---
PCR amplification
both DNA strands
(5' ) --GAGTTAT-------TG----CG--------GTTTTAG---
(3' ) a --CTCAATA-------AC----GC--------CAAAATC---
(5')b--TTTAGTG-------GT----GC--------TGAAGTT---
(3')b--AAATCAC- CA----CG--------ACTTCAA---
Sequence PCR product directly Clone and sequence
for strand average for individual molecules
Figure 2. Bisulphite genomic sequencing procedure. The two complementary
strands in the original DNA are labelled (a) and (b). Cytosine residues and their
corresponding uracil and thymine conversion products are shown in bold type.
It should be noted that, after the bisulphite reaction, the two DNA strands (a)
and (b) are no longer complementary and therefore can be amplified independently.
adjustment with 10M NaOH), were prepared. Degassed water
was not used to dissolve the reagents, but solution was achieved
by gently inverting the reagent/H20 mixtures, with minimum
mixing and aeration. Sodium bisulphite, to a final concentration
of 3.1M, and hydroquinone, to a final concentration of 0.5mM,
were added to the denatured DNA to a final volume of
240-240Ogd, the sample was gently mixed, overlayed with
mineral oil and incubated at 55°C for 16 hours. The DNA was
recovered from under the oil layer after snap freezing the reaction
and removing the unfrozen oil.
Removal of free bisulphite was achieved by one of two
procedures:
(1) The sample was dialysed at 4°C against (a) 2 x2 litres 0.5mM
hydroquinone/5mM NaOAc pH 5.2 for 1 hour each, (b) 2 x2
litres 0.5mM NaOAc pH 5.2 for 1 hour each, (c) 1 x2 litres
MilliQ H20 for 1 hour and (d) 1 x2 litres MilliQ H20
overnight. After dialysis he DNA was dried down in a vacuum
desiccator until reduced in volume but not completely dried. (2)
Alternately, the sample was purified using a desalting column
(Promega Magic DNA Clean-Up System), according to the
manufacturer's instructions, and eluted in 501I of H20. DNA
buffer (10mM Tris, 0.1mM EDTA, pH 8) was added to both
dialysed and column-purified samples to bring the volume to
50-200%,d.
STEP 11
Sulphonation
HSO,- +H
-O
ORH
NH2
N
N
H
Cytosine Cytosine
sulphonate
2992 Nucleic Acids Research, 1994, Vol. 22, No. 15
l)
G A T C
(bI
G A T C
_v/ec-
2 ec.-
:...
Bisulphite
Block
.........
.
....
........
-
--
"
W
'111
so
Wo
F.......
Bisulphite
Block
jr,
-4 CG
Fgure 3. Effect of more stringent denaturation conditions on efficiency of
bisulphite conversion. DNA sequence profile of EcoRi methylated pBluescript
DNA which was derived from bisulphite-treated mouse genomic DNA spiked
with 100 copies of EcoRII methylated plasnid, amplified using specific pBluescript
primers designed to bisulphite converted DNA from position 825-854 and
1090-1115 (Stratagene SK sequence). PCR products were cloned into pXT (15)
and individual clones sequenced. Prior to bisulphite treatment, the spiked mouse
genomic DNA was (a) denatred in 0.2M NaOH and precipita prior to bisulphite
treatment (original conditions), or (b) denatured in 0.3M NaOH, with bisulphite
directly added to DNA/NaOH mix.
Freshly prepared NaOH, to a final concentration of 0.3M, was
added and the sample incubated at 37°C for 15 minutes. The
solution was neutralised by addition of NH4OAc, pH 7, to 3M
and the DNA was ethanol precipitated, dried, resuspended in
DNA buffer (1001l) and stored at -20°C.
2. PCR amplification. Amplifications were performed in 1001I
reaction mixtures containing 1 -51d of bisulphite-treated genomic
DNA, 200,uM dNTPs, l,uM primers, 3mM MgCl2, 50mM
KCI, 10mM Tris-HCI pH 8.3, 0.51I (2.5 units) AmpliTaq
DNA polymerase (Cetus), in a Corbett Research DNA Thermal
Cycler under the following conditions: 94°C/2 min x 1 cycle;
94°C/1 min, 50°C/2 min, 72°C/3 min, x5 cycles; 94°C/0.5
min, 500C/2 min, 720C/1.5 min, x25 cycles; 720C/6 min x I
cycle.
3. Cloning and sequencing. Amplified DNA was ligated into an
XcmI T-vector (15) and transformed into competent E. coli
(DH5a). Cloned DNA was sequenced using Sequenase version
2.0 DNA sequencing kit (USB). PCR products were directly
sequenced using the Circumvent Kit (New England Biolabs), with
primers end-labelled using T4 polynucleotide kinase and
[Py-33P]ATP. To reduce cross banding in some of the sequences,
2.5 units of terminal transferase, in 1 xSequenase reaction buffer,
and 1mM dNTPs were added after the cycling reaction, and the
mixture was incubated for 30 minutes at 370C before addition
of stop dye.
Optimisation of reaction conditions
Optimisation of each step of the protocol was carried out on
mouse L cell genomic DNA spiked with pBluescript (SK) plasmid
DNA of known methylation status, at a copy number of 10-100
per genome. Optimised conditions were tested on (1) the same
pBluescript sequences, stably integrated at a copy number of
1-10 per genome into F9 and 3T3 cells, and (2) a segment of
the mouse endogenous Thy-i gene. The various bisulphite
treatment conditions were assayed in all cases by yield of PCR-
amplified products and in some cases by sequencing cloned PCR
products or by direct sequencing of PCR products.
RESULTS
Important reaction parameters
We have tested a wide range of parameters at each step of the
bisulphite conversion reaction, and have determined which
conditions are critical for obtaining a fully-deaminated and
amplifiable product. The overall genomic sequencing procedure
is outlined in Fig. 2. Among the cloned and sequenced samples,
full bisulphite conversion of unmethylated cytosines was observed
in most cases. However, the amount of product that could be
amplified after bisulphite treatment was highly variable. Of the
various parameters tested, we found that there were only a few
key factors which determined the extent to which the bisulphite-
treated DNA could be readily amplified. These factors were:
(a) Denaturation ofthe target DNA. The initial denaturation step
was found to be critical both for PCR yield and for full
deamination. At 0.2M NaOH, the original denaturation
conditions, incubation of the DNA followed by ethanol
precipitation sometimes resulted in patches of DNA resistant to
bisulphite conversion, as shown in Fig.3(a). The pattern of
resistance was largely, but not totally, sequence specific,
suggesting that the DNA was not being fully denatured prior to
incubation with the bisulphite. More stringent denaturation
conditions, 0.3M NaOH for 15 minutes at 370C, resulted in a
consistently greater yield of PCR end product. Furthermore,
adding the bisulphite directly to the DNA/NaOH mix, instead
of firstly precipitating the DNA, also gave a significantly
increased yield of PCR product and resolved sequence-specific
bisulphite blocks, Fig.3(b).
(b) Bisulphite treatment. The brand of sodium bisulphite or
metabisulphite, or the ratio of bisulphite to metabisulphite, used
to modify the DNA did not appear to be as critical as the
individual batch or length of storage of the chemical. However,
Nucleic Acids Research, 1994, Vol. 22, No. 15 2993
A Temperature C
I I no pBR
B Hours of incubation
I no pBR
4 8 16 36 72 DNA Hinf
Figure 4. (A) Temperature of bisulphite reaction. PCR products derived from
mouse L cell genomic DNA (20ng) spiked with 10 copies of Thyl gene and
bisulphite treated, as described in methods, at either 37°C, 55°C or 72°C for
16 hours and amplified using nested Thyl primers (497-526) and (806-837)
designed to converted DNA, as shown in Fig. 8. (B) Time course of bisulphite
reaction. PCR products derived from mouse L cell genomic DNA (20ng) spiked
with 10 copies of Thyl gene and bisulphite treated, as described in methods,
at 550C for 4, 8, 16, 36, or 72 hours and amplified using nested Thyl primers
(497-526) and (806-837) designed to converted DNA, as shown in Fig.8.
it is important to ensure that the bisulphite is made fresh
immediately prior to use. The molarity of dissolved bisulphite
(3.0-4.OM) and pH range (4.8-5.8) of the bisulphite solutions
tested had no great effect on PCR amplification. The reaction
temperatures (37-72°C) resulted in similar yields of PCR
product (Fig. 4A); however this yield decreased when the reaction
was performed at higher temperatures. Performing the
modification reactions under N2, using degassed solutions,
appeared to be no different to modification reactions incubated
under oil.
Time course incubation samples (4, 8, 16, 36, 72 hours) were
tested, as shown in Fig. 4B, and of these, the optimal incubation
times for DNA with bisulphite were routinely 8-16 hours. Since
the rate of depurination ofDNA is enhanced by acidic pHs, some
random strand breakage may occur when the bisulphite-treated
DNA solution is made strongly alkaline to remove the -SO3
adduct from the uracil residues prior to PCR amplification. At
longer incubation times, 36 to 72 hours, the PCR products
become more diffuse(Fig. 4B) and DNA degradation starts to
become evident after the alkali treatment step. This was observed
by spiking the bisulphite reactions with labelled HindIll markers
and visualising the converted DNA on agarose gels after the final
aLkali step. However, we have not found degradation to be a
major problem under the optimised reaction conditions. In fact,
sequencing of time course samples showed that 95% of the
cytosines had already been converted to uracils by 8 hours.
The bisulphite reaction conditions tested above made little
difference to the yield of PCR product using a number of sets
(a) (b)
G A T C G A T C
-~5MeC
(Hpall site)
CCGG
Aft.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~p.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~H
4K 5MeC
- (EcoRi site)
CCTGG
45MeC TCTGG
(Hpall site)
M
CCGG
TCGG
Figur 5. Genomic sequence profile of HpallI and EcoRIl miethylated pBluescript.
PCR products, derived from bisulphite-treate mouse genomic L cell DNA spiked
with 100 copies of pBluescript DNA and amnplified using specific pBluescript
primers, were cloned into pXT (15) and individual clones sequenced. The specific
primers were designed to converted DNA, top sftrand, fr-om position 825 -854
(GTGGAATTCTTATTGGITTATAAT1TTATA) and 1090-1115 (AA-
CCGAATTCCCACCTTTAAATAAACTAA) fr-om Stratagene SK sequence.
Underlined sequence in primer shows introduced restriction enzyme site and bases
in bold indicate thymines corresponding to converted cytosines or adenines
comnplementary to converted cytosines. pBluescript was methylated either at HpallI
sites (a) or EcoR. sites (b).
of primners. Many of the PCR products were cloned and the
resulting individual clones sequenced. The sequence of the PCR
products also showed that there was little difference between the
variety of conditions tested. The extent of cytosine deamination
was between 98-100% (Fig. 5).
(c) Desalting. We compared various methods to remove the salt
from the reaction-dialysis, Centricon filters and desalting
columns. We found the DNA loss from Centricon filters
unacceptable. We found dialysis to be consistently reliable,
especially with the inclusion of the last overnight dialysis step
in water, which was crucial in order to reduce the salt
concentration. After this step, the DNA was concentrated in the
2994 Nucleic Acids Research, 1994, Vol. 22, No. 15
i:.
2..tg 2OOng 20ng 2pg 200pg 20P9 DNA
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~... =..__.__.___________..._... _.__.___.___U/. Dialysis
Qp )DN FI
;2.,g 200ng 20ng 2pg 200pg 20pg DNA Hire'-
_,.......
Column
Desalted
Figure 6. Comparison of desalting using dialysis versus desalting column. PCR
products, derived from mouse L cell genomic DNA (2Ag-20pg) spiked with
10 copies of Thyl gene and bisulphite treated as described in methods, desalted
either using dialysis or Promega DNA Clean-up System (column desalted) and
amplified using nested Thyl primers (497-526) and (806-837) designed to
converted DNA, as shown in Fig. 8.
vacuum desiccator, but not dried to completion as re-dissolution
was sometimes difficult. If the concentrated sample was yellow,
we found that it was difficult to amplify the modified DNA. It
was therefore necessary to ensure adequate dialysis and frequent
changes of buffer. The desalting column provided the most simple
procedure and resulted in a PCR substrate that was amplified
most efficiently. In general, the sensitivity ofPCR amplification
was 10-100 fold greater when the DNA was desalted using
clean-up columns compared to dialysis, as shown in Fig. 6.
(d) Alkali treatment. The final step of the bisulphite reaction
involves removal of the bisulphite adduct from the uracil ring
by alkali treatment. It was important that this desulphonation step
was complete, and we found that incubating the DNA with 0.3M
NaOH for 15 min at 37°C resulted in a consistendy greater yield
of PCR products than detailed in the original protocol.
(e) Design of primers. Perhaps the most critical step in the
bisulphite genomic sequencing protocol is the design of primers
to the deaminated DNA. This is the step that amplifies the
complementary DNA strands and therefore allows analysis of
the methylation status of each individual CpG on both strands
of DNA. The primers are designed to favour the amplification
of fully bisulphite-converted DNA from a mixture which may
also contain some partially converted molecules.
The primers that we successfully used had the following
properties:
(i) They were approximately 30bp in length.
(ii) They were designed to an evenly C-rich DNA region.
(iii) They contained a minimum number of CpG dinucleotides,
unless the methylation status of CpG residues within the
primer region was known. If a CpG dinucleotide within the
primer sequence could not be avoided, a mismatch to both
the methylated and unmethylated sequence was incorporated
into the primer at the C residue of the CpG dinucleotide.
Figure 7. PCR amplifications comparing different primer sets. Mouse genomic
DNA was spiked with 100 copies of pBluescript DNA, bisulphite treated as
described in methods and ampif with primer sets at different sequence positions,
designed to both top and bottom strands of the bisulphite converted DNA. Lanes
(a)-(e) show pBluescriptderived PCR products obtined with five different primer
pairs, with positions identifid by nucleotide number in the Stratagene SK sequence;
(a) (b)-strand primers: pBluescript 2131-2159 (CTCCGAATTCATCAAC-
AATAAACCAACCA) and pBluescript 2448-2419 (ATAATACTGC-
AGTTAATTTATTTTTGATAA); (b) (a)-strand primers: pBluescript
272 -301bases (AGTATTAACTAGTAATTTTAAAGGGAGTTT) and
pBluescript 638-609 (CTATAATAAATCCTATTAGAATTCACTAAC); (c)
(b)-strand primers: pBluescript 284-313 (AAACTCTAGAAAAAACCCCC-
TATTTAAAAC) and pBluescript 638-609 (TTATAGTGACTA-
GTATTATAATTTATTGGT); (d) (a)-strand primers: pBluescript 1147-1118
(TCTTTCCTACCTTATCCCCGAATTCTATAA) and pBluescript 791-821
(GTTTGGAGGAATTCTGGTTATAGTTGlTI1T); (e) (b)-strand primers:
pBluescript 1111-1084 (GTATACTAGTTITITGAGTGAGTTGATAT) and
pBluescript 802-833 (CATAATCATAACTAGTTCCTATATAAAATTA).
Lane (f) contains size markers, PBR322 digested with Hinfl. Underlined sequence
in primer shows introduced restriction enzyme site and bases in bold indicate
thymines corresponding to converted cytosines or adenines complementary to
converted cytosines.
(iv) They showed limited internal complementarity and limited
complementary sequences between primer pairs.
(v) They had a minimal number of mismatches to the bisulphite-
converted sequence from which the primer was designed,
including any mismatches incorporated at CpG dinucleotides
and restriction sites.
We found that following these design principles resulted in
primers that reliably yielded a PCR product. However, the
efficiency of different primers was still quite variable, ranging
from very poor (Fig. 7, lane a) to highly efficient (Fig. 7, lane
e). It is therefore important to design a number of primers to
any target sequence. Furthermore, when amplifying small
amounts of DNA, it is desirable to allow for a nested PCR
strategy. An example of nested primer design is shown in Fig. 8.
(f) PCR amplification ofDNA. Amplifications were optimised
for a number of different primers and were consistently found
to be improved at 3mM MgCl2 and at 500C annealing
temperature, as described in Materials and Methods. It is
important to emphasise that, although these conditions were
reliable for our sequences, it may be necessary to optimise PCR
conditions for each DNA sequence of interest.
d; i b ) () vi) \,i;
Nucleic Acids Research, 1994, Vol. 22, No. 15 2995
404 bp
r
. PCR(1)
340 bp
. 1 PCR(2)
Mouse Thy 1 5' L -J 3'
(433-462) (497-526) (806-837)
(a)Strand _ - -
Original 5'CAGCCTCCGATTGGCTGAATCTAGAGTCCC 5'AACTGCGGGCTTCAGGCTGGGTGCAGCAAC 5'CCATGAGGMGGACATCAAGGACAGCCITUGG
Converted 5' UAGUUTUYGATTGGUTGAATUTAGAGTUUU 5'MUTGYGGGUTTUAGGUTGGGTGUAGUAAU 5' UUATGAGGAAGGAUATUAAGGAUAGUUITTGG
Xba I Xba I SDel
Primer 5' TAGTTCTAGATTGGTTGAATTTAGAGTTTT* 5'AATTGAGGGTTCTAGATTGGGTGTAGTAAT* * AATACTCCTTCCTATAATTCdTGATCAAAACC 5'
x x xxx x x x xx xx
x x x
x x x xx x x xxx xx
xx
Figure 8. Example of semi-nested primer set, designed for amplification of a segment of the Thy-I gene from bisulphite-treated mouse genomic DNA. The DNA
sequences used to design only the top (a) strand primers are shown. Numbers in brackets give the nucleotide positions of each primer. Original: DNA sequence
before bisulphite treatment; Converted: DNA sequence after bisulphite treatment. CpG dinucleotides, methylation status unknown, are marked with lines; restriction
sites incorporated into the primers are marked with brackets. U: uracil, Y: thymine or cytosine, x: sequence mismatch. Thy-i DNA sequences used were those
of the mouse Thy-I 1.2 glycoprotein gene (Accession Number M12379, GenBank).
B
tRNA 2,g 200ng 20ng 2ng 200pg 20pg
3,
G \
G \
A
G
G
A
A
c
G
T
A
G
A
C
A
G
G
G
A
G
G
G/
A I
Gf
iI
5I
5'
pBR
Hinfl
D'irect Ci
sequence sec
Gi A T C C 7
*...:.. .......
\.........
loned
quence
T A G
Figure 9. Sensitivity of bisulphite conversion (A) PCR amplifications from decreasing amounts of bisulphite-treated mouse genomic DNA (24g-20pg). The amplifications
used the nested primers for Thy-I converted DNA as detailed in Fig. 8. (B) Genomic sequencing gels of the Thy-I PCR product from the 200pg bisulphite-treated
mouse genomic DNA sample. The PCR product was both directly sequenced and cloned into pXT, as shown. Arrows indicate the positions of equivalent CpG
dinucleotides. In most cases, the CpG dinucleotides were found to be methylated, as the C residues in these positions remained unconverted by bisulphite. In the
direct sequence, one CpG dinucleotide was found to be partially methylated, as indicated by C/T, and unmethylated in the illustrated cloned sequence, as indicated
by T. The open arrow indicates the position of a single unconverted cytosine, not in a CpG dinucleotide.
Mismatches
Original
Converted
x xxxxx
x x
A
2996 Nucleic Acids Research, 1994, Vol. 22, No. 15
(g) Cloning and sequencing. We routinely cloned amplified DNA
and sequenced individual clones. Alternatively, it is possible to
sequence the PCR product directly. Direct sequencing allows the
overall methylation status of individual cytosine residues to be
analysed, whereas sequencing cloned DNA allows the analysis
of cytosine methylation in individual molecules.
For almost all sequences, under most conditions, no unreacted
cytosine residues.were observed. However, we found two regions
ofDNA in different PCR products where there were patches of
up to lOObp of unreacted cytosines in an otherwise fully-converted
DNA fragment. In both cases, these unreacted blocks of DNA
were only seen when the PCR fragment had been cloned into
a pBluescript-based vector and were not present in any clones
of the same PCR fragment cloned into a pGem-based vector.
It appears that cloning into different vectors may provide some
selective advantage for molecules with patches of non-converted
sequences over fully-converted molecules. The partially-
converted products became evident only when cloning efficiencies
were low. When cloning efficiencies were high, pBluescript
vector also gave fully-converted products only. We have not
observed any blocks of unreacted sequence that were not resolved
by changing the vector and increasing the efficiency of the ligation
and transformation. However, these products were clearly present
as minor components of the PCR amplification. It is possible that
some regions of DNA may be intrinsically less reactive with
bisulphite because of regions of self complementarity or a
particular base sequence. It is interesting to note that Tasheva
and Roufa (16) used the protocol of Frommer et al. (10) with
one modification: the bisulphite reaction was carried out in a
thermal cycler for 48 hours, and every three hours the reaction
temperature was taken up to 95°C for 5 minutes to ensure that
complete denaturation of the sample was malntained. Although
this treatment may, to some extent, increase the amount of
depurination in the DNA sample, and may therefore limit the
absolute sensitivity of the procedure, it provides a possible
solution if DNA templates which present problems of reactivity
are found.
Sensitivity of bisulphite conversion
It is important that the genomic sequencing method be highly
sensitive, to probe changes in methylation patterns of specific
genes during early development. In the original protocol, the
minimum quantity of genomic DNA assayed was 24g. Using the
protocol described in Materials and Methods, we have
successfully scaled down the reaction 104 fold. A range of
genomic DNA concentrations (2pg-2g) spiked with 2,tg of
yeast tRNA as carrier, was treated with bisulphite in a 240iz
reaction volume. A 300bp endogenous Thy-i gene fragment was
amplified in two rounds using nested primers (Fig. 8). A PCR
product of the correct size was successfully amplified from a lOpg
aliquot of the bisulphite reaction carried out on 200pg genomic
DNA (Fig. 9A). This PCR product was sequenced, both directly
and from a number of individual cloned molecules, and was found
to be fully converted (Fig. 9B).
DISCUSSION
Genomic sequencing protocols allow the methylation status of
every cytosine residue in genomic DNA to be determined. This
information is particularly relevant to studies of methylation in
changes in methylation patterns occur. However, the potential
utility of genomic sequencing for methylation has not been
realised because the current methods available (6,7) have not been
sufficiently sensitive. We have developed the bisulphite genomic
sequencing method to determine exact methylation patterns of
specific genes in very small amounts of genomic DNA, and the
alterations to the method substantially enhance its efficiency and
reproducibility. The bisulphite conversion conditions are now
sensitive enough to allow methylation analyses of at least 20 gene
sequences in DNA isolated from less than 100 cells.
The high sensitivity of the bisulphite method is possible
because, during the sequencing procedures, DNA strands remain
intact. The bisulphite-treated and amplified DNA is sequenced
by the dideoxy protocol, where each DNA strand contributes to
every band on a sequencing gel. This means that the theoretical
limit of sensitivity of the bisulphite method is one cell, a sensitivity
that is not possible in Maxam and Gilbert-derived genomic
sequencing protocols, where each strand can only contribute to
one band on a sequencing gel.
The non-destructive nature of the bisulphite conversion reaction
also means that the PCR product can be cloned and sequenced
to provide methylation maps of single DNA strands within a large
population of molecules. If partial methylation of sites is observed
in a population ofDNA molecules, bisulphite genomic sequencing
of cloned PCR products gives infonnation on whether correlations
exist between the methylation of particular sites on the same DNA
molecule, for example, during spreading of methylation from
an initiation point. The sequencing of single strands of genomic
DNA permits the protocol to be used to identify different
methylation patterns in mixed populations of cells or in DNA
strands of different parental origin. The protocol has particular
utility when local DNA polymorphisms, that do not involve CpG
sites, can be identified in the sequence prior to bisulphite
treatment.
Important insights into methylation profiles can be gleaned by
comparing methylation maps of individual molecules with the
methylation map from the population average. Therefore, it is
beneficial that PCR products can be sequenced directly to provide
a strand-specific average for the population of molecules. Partial
methylation at any site can be readily observed in the direct
sequence of a PCR product by the presence of both a cytosine
and a thymine residue at the same sequencing position (Fig. 9B).
Methods for quantitation of the proportion of cytosine and
thymine residues at these individual sites in the direct PCR
sequence are now being developed using an automated DNA
sequencer (C.L. Paul and S.J. Clark, unpublished).
Finally, the bisulphite method provides a positive test for
methylation. The position of each 5-MeC residue is indicated
by a distinct band on a sequencing gel, in a lane where all
cytosine-derived bands are absent, making the location of
methylated sites very easy to score. The method now paves the
way for detailed studies of the role of methylation in
developmental processes such as genomic imprinting, sex
determination and X inactivation, as well as in inherited diseases
and cancer.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Dr J.Sved for assistance with preparation of diagrams
and Dr P.Hendry for advice on the chemical structures. This work
developmental processes and in cancer where time-dependent was supported by NH&MRC project grant 890420.
Nucleic Acids Research, 1994, Vol. 22, No. 15 2997
REFERENCES
1. Hotchkiss,R.D. (1948) J. Biol. Chem., 168, 315-332.
2. Saluz,H.P. and Jost,J. P. (1993) In Jost,J.P. and Saluz,H.P (eds.), DNA
Methylation: Molecular Biology and Biological Significance. Birkhauser
Verlag, Basel, pp. 11-27.
3. Grigg,G.W. and Clark,S.J. (1994) Bioessays (in press).
4. Singer,J., Roberts-Ems,J. and Riggs,A.D. (1979) Science, 203, 1019-1021.
5. Singer-Sam,J., Grant,M., LeBon,J.M., Okuyama,K., Chapman,V.,
Monk,M. and Riggs,A.D. (1990) Mol. Cell. Biol., 10, 4987-4989.
6. Saluz,H.P. and Jost,J.P. (1989) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sc. USA., 86, 2602-2606.
7. Pfeifer,G.P., Steigerwald,S.D., Mueller,P.R., Wold,B. and Riggs,A.D.
(1989) Science, 246, 810-813.
8. Maxam,A.M. and Gilbert,W. (1980) Meth. Enzymol., 65, 499-560.
9. Church,G. M. and Gilbert,W. (1984) Proc Natl. Acad. Sci. USA., 81,
1991- 1995.
10. Frommer,M., McDonald,L.E., Millar,D.S., Collis,C.M., Watt,F.,
Grigg,G.W., Molloy,P.L. and Paul,C.L. (1992) Proc. Nati. Acad. Sci. USA.,
89, 1827-1831.
11. Wang,R.Y-H., Gehrke,C.W. and Ehrlich,M. (1980) Nucd. Acids Res., 8,
4777-4790.
12. Shapiro,R., Braverman,B., Louis,J.B. and Servis,R.E. (1973) J. Biol. Chem.,
248, 4060-4064.
13. Shapiro,R., DiFate,V. and Welcher,M. (1974) J. Am. Chem. Soc ., 96,
906-912.
14. Hayatsu,H. (1976) In Cohen,W.E. (ed.), Progress in Nucleic Acid Research
and Molecular Biology, Academic Press, New York, Vol. 16, pp. 75-124.
15. Harrison,J., Molloy,P.L. and Clark,S.J. (1994 ) Analytical Biochemistry,
216, 235-236.
16. Tasheva,E.S. and Roufa,D.J. (1993) Somatic Cell and Molecular Genetics,
19, 275-283.
