Extraction of transcription regulatory signals from
genome-wide DNA–protein interaction data
Yael Garten, Shai Kaplan and Yitzhak Pilpel*
Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel
Received August 5, 2004; Revised November 26, 2004; Accepted December 15, 2004
ABSTRACT
Deciphering gene regulatory network architecture
amounts to the identification of the regulators,
conditions in which they act, genes they regulate,
cis-acting motifs they bind, expression profiles they
dictate and more complex relationships between
alternative regulatory partnerships and alternative
regulatory motifs that give rise to sub-modalities of
expression profiles. The ‘location data’ in yeast is a
comprehensive resource that provides transcription
factor–DNA interaction information in vivo. Here, we
provide two contributions: first, we developed means
to assess the extent of noise in the location data, and
consequently for extracting signals from it. Second,
we couple signal extraction with better characteriza-
tion of the genetic network architecture. We apply two
methods for the detection of combinatorial associa-
tions between transcription factors (TFs), the integra-
tion of which provides a global map of combinatorial
regulatory interactions. We discover the capacity of
regulatory motifs and TF partnerships to dictate fine-
tuned expression patterns of subsets of genes, which
are clearly distinct from those displayed by most
genes assigned to the same TF. Our findings provide
carefullyprioritized,high-qualityassignmentsbetween
regulators and regulated genes and as such should
prove useful for experimental and computational
biologists alike.
INTRODUCTION
Regulation of gene expression patterns represents one of the
most complicated computational tasks for living cells. Often,
the determination of gene expression patterns is the result of
highly intricate calculations that a gene network performs on
the cell’s environment. The computational task is to reflect
as accurately as possible a multi-component cellular environ-
ment and to integrate a diversity of inputs into a decision
about the preferred level of activity of each gene at a given
external condition, internal state, developmental stage, etc.
A convenient way to construct such a detailed multi-dimen-
sional transcription regulatory input function is to use multiple
transcriptional regulators that, when wired by the appropriate
logical gates, may provide reliable mapping of the environ-
ment onto gene expression patterns.
The modern genomic era provides opportunities to study
gene network architectures in an unprecedented throughput.
Comprehensive characterization of networks amounts to
identifying the individual regulators, followed by identification
and characterization of functional combinations they form,
along with the identity of the regulated genes. In the present
study, we have focused on the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
and have taken several steps toward obtaining this goal.
We departed from a recently published most valuable
resource of functional genomic data (1), which consists of
113 yeast transcription factor (TF) proteins whose spectrum
of promoter-binding sites was determined in vivo (for further
detail see Materials and Methods). This so-called ‘location
data’ thus provides a matrix of regulatory connections between
the regulatory proteins in the cells and their regulated genes.
Following the original publication of the location data, a gene is
considered ‘assigned to a TF’ if the p-value on the interaction
between the TF and the gene’s promoter is below a threshold.
Although most highly valuable and comprehensive, the loca-
tion dataset contains an amount of noise that has yet to be
determined. False positives in the location data may come at
two levels. First, it is not certain that all 113 proteins examined
indeed serve as TFs. Second, it is likely that some portion of the
genes assigned to true regulators are not actually regulated by
them (e.g. binding to regions of the chromosome in which
protein binding to DNA is not followed by transactivation).
We used the multiple hypotheses assessment algorithm False
Discovery Rate (FDR) (2) to roughly assess the amount of
noise in the location data with the strictest p-value originally
used (p-value = 0.001). Our calculation suggests that using this
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +972 8 9346058; Fax: +972 8 9344108; Email: pilpel@weizmann.ac.il
The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors
ª The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 2 605–615
doi:10.1093/nar/gki166
threshold, the expected amount of false TF assignments is
18% (see details below in Results and in Materials and Meth-
ods). Indeed, our observations show that while genes associated
with many of the TFs in the data show significant coherence
in their mRNA expression profiles, some TFs appear to be
associated with genes that show close-to-random expression
profiles in a variety of conditions.
As in many other genome-scale methodologies, the ChIP–
chip technology which produced the location data is likely to
generate false-positive observations that may be filtered
out with the aid of additional sources of information. Interest-
ingly, such additional sources may themselves be noisy and yet
serve the purpose of filtering, provided that the noise in the
different methods is not trivially correlated. We hypothesized
that the analysis of the following may serve for filtering noise
in the location data: (i) the coherent expression of genes regu-
lated by the TFs, (ii) the identification of regulatory motifs
among the genes assigned to each TF [in similarity to other
recent publications (3,4)] and (iii) combinatorial partnerships
between sets of TFs. For each of the filtration methods, we
present (i) the rational underlying the method, along with the
relevant algorithm or computation, (ii) exemplifying figures,
(iii) a ‘birds-eye view’ of the results of application of the
method to the entire dataset and (iv) the subset of the TF-gene
assignments reported by the location data, which is supported
by this method (on the website). In the datasets we provide in
our website, genes are assigned to TFs only if expression,
sequence and/or combinatorial TF interaction support such
assignments. In addition, we provide designation of the con-
ditions in which the TFs appear to be functional. The result is
not only a more reliable set of TF-to-promoter assignments,
but, most crucially, higher-level genetic network wiring
information.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Location data
In vivo TF location data lists, for each TF, the promoters that
are detected to be bound by it in vivo. This is a result of an
immunoprecipitation assay in which DNA-binding proteins
are allowed to bind their target sites along the genome, fol-
lowed by detection of the sites bound by each protein indi-
vidually. We used the data produced by Lee et al. (1) obtained
for yeast cells grown in rich medium. The TF-promoter assign-
ments in that data are provided in the form of a p-value on the
hypothesis that there exists an interaction between a TF and a
promoter. In all analyses reported here, we adopted the most
restrictive p-value as suggested in the original publication (1).
For the purpose of our analysis, we only used intergenic
region bindings that occurred upstream of an open reading
frame (ORF).
The data of Lee et al. was downloaded in April 2003
from: http://staffa.wi.mit.edu/cgi-bin/young_public/navframe.
cgi?s=17&f=downloaddata. It provides data for 113 TFs,
while the original Lee et al. paper included genome-wide
location analysis experiments performed for only 106 yeast
strains that expressed epitope-tagged regulators.
Since about a quarter of yeast genes are arranged in pairs
transcribed from divergent promoters, the number of inter-
genic regions is considerably smaller than the number of
ORFs. On the other hand, long intergenic regions were
segmented in the location data chips. In total, the number
of printed probes was 6756 and the number of ORFs in this
dataset is 6270.
Calculating FDR
In many instances of the present analyses, we generate a mul-
tiplicity of hypotheses. We adjust p-value thresholds on the
generated hypotheses by controlling the rate of false discovery
as follows:
Let R denote the number of hypotheses rejected by a
procedure.
Let V denote the number of true null hypotheses erroneously
rejected (type I error).
q denotes V/R when R > 0 and 0 otherwise.
The FDR (or q-value) is the expected proportion of false
positives (type I error) among the rejected hypotheses. It is
given by the following FDR theorem formula (2): FDR = E(q).
In the context of the location data analysis, V is the number
of expected false-positive binding predictions. At a given
p-value threshold p, V = p · number of hypotheses.
R is the number of predicted binding events at the current
p-value threshold. In the location data, the probability that
R > 0 is effectively equal to 1 at the p-value of 0.001. Of
the 4177 TF-intergenic region assignments predicted by the
location data, 763 are expected to be false discoveries (0.001
p-value · 113 TFs · 6756 intergenic regions = 763). There-
fore, calculation of the FDR q-value for a p-value of 0.001
yields a q-value of 0.18, or 18% (q-value = 763/4177 = 0.18).
Supplementary Figure S1 shows an analysis of the effects of
using various p-value thresholds to capture true assignments.
Supplementary Figure S2 contains a thorough analysis of the
trade-off between FDR and the location data p-value thresh-
old. We also used positive FDR analysis (5) that changed only
negligibly the q-value estimation (see our Supporting web-
site). The code and further FDR analysis of the location
data are available in our Supporting website.
We have fixed a permissive expected rate of false discovery
of 10% in all FDR analyses in this paper.
Statistical significance of expression coherence (EC)
score and TF synergies
The EC score is a measure of the extent to which a set of genes
is clustered into one or more clusters in expression space, and
is equal to the fraction of gene pairs in the set whose normal-
ized Euclidean distance (between expression profiles) falls
below a threshold (6).
The significance of the EC score of a set of X genes is
measured by randomly sampling 105 sets of X genes and
calculating the EC score for each sampled set. The fraction
of sets that have an EC score greater than or equal to the score of
the original set of genes is the p-value on the significance of the
score (7).
Significantly, synergistic TF pairs were detected in a way
similar to our original definitions (6,8). Let G1 be the set of
genes assigned to TF1, and let G2 be the set of genes assigned
to TF2. G12 is the set of genes in the intersection of G1 and
G2, i.e. the set of genes assigned to both TF1 and TF2. We
define and calculate the ‘intersection set EC score’ as the EC
606 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 2
score of N genes in G12. We then randomly sample 1000 sets
of N genes from G1, and also 1000 sets of N genes from G2,
and calculate their EC scores. A pair of TFs is synergistic if its
intersection set EC score is at the top 5% of each of the two
distributions of random EC scores. The use of a relatively
permissive 5% threshold is justified for two reasons. First,
each of the two sets of genes already has a relatively
high EC score, since each set is bound by a regulating TF.
Therefore, a subset of these coherent sets, which is at their top
fifth percentile in EC score, is even more significant. Second,
since the score of the intersection set, in synergistic pairs, is at
the top of both gene sets’ distribution of scores, the effective
significance of two events with p-value of 0.05 should typic-
ally be even better than 0.05.
mRNA expression data
Whole-genome mRNA expression data of 40 time series in
yeast were obtained from ExpressDB (9). These time series
represent a wide range of natural (e.g. cell cycle) (10–12) and
perturbed (13–17) conditions. Detailed description of all ana-
lyzed conditions is available on our Supporting website.
Clustering parameters
In clustering the expression profiles of the genes assigned to
each TF using the QT_clust algorithm in each condition, we
explored various thresholds of cluster diameters, defined as the
maximal Euclidean distance between any two genes within a
cluster. The diameters were chosen as follows: for each con-
dition, all pairwise distances between each pair of genes meas-
ured were calculated, yielding a distribution of pairwise
distances. The 6 diameter thresholds we explored were the
distances associated with the top 5, 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50
percentile of this distance distribution. An adaptive clustering
algorithm was recently developed for similar purposes, see
Supporting website for application of this algorithm (18).
RESULTS
The p-value trade-off in the original location data
The location data assigns a p-value on the hypothesis that TF X
binds to promoter Y and thus contains p-values for a set of
multiple hypotheses. In order to determine which hypothesis is
true, a p-value threshold is selected and only those hypotheses
that pass this threshold are assumed to be correct. This thresh-
olding, while probably capturing true assignments of TFs to
promoters, results in a yet-to-be-determined amount of false
assignments. We started by statistical assessment of the FDR
in the location data with the strictest p-value used by its
authors ( p-value = 0.001). Our calculations suggest that
using this threshold the expected amount of false assignments
of intergenic regions to TFs is 763 of the 4177 assignments
(i.e. the FDR, known as q-value, equals 0.18), hence there are
3414 expected true positives (4177  763 = 3414). For details
on calculations, see Materials and Methods. Without
additional sources of information, it is thus impossible to
establish which of the added hypotheses are likely to be
true TF-promoter assignments.
With the goal of a cleaner version of the location data in
mind, which will allow better deciphering of the genetic regu-
latory map, we applied a number of methods which each
produces a matrix, identical in size to that of the location
data, of regulatory connections between the regulators in
the cells and their regulated genes. These matrices were
then used in combination to produce the noise-filtered version
of the location data. In each matrix, a gene i was marked as
regulated by TF j if and only if it was (i) assigned to TF j in the
original location data and (ii) it also had evidence strengthen-
ing this assignment as found by at least one of the following
methods of detection: (a) clustering of gene expression pro-
files, (b) regulatory motif detection, (c) synergy interactions or
(d) co-localization of TFs.
Method (i): Decomposition of expression profiles
of the regulated genes
We begin by inspection of the mRNA expression profiles of
genes associated by the location dataset to each of the 113 TFs
in a diverse set of 40 conditions. Here and in all subsequent
analyses we refer to a whole time series (such as exposure
to heat shock or progression through the cell cycle) as a ‘con-
dition’, which is composed of 3–28 time points. An intuitive
expectation from a set of genes that are indeed regulated by a
shared TF is that they display similar expression profiles at
least in the conditions in which the TF exerts a significant
regulatory effect. Yet, we need not necessarily anticipate one
coherent cluster; an alternative may be that some TFs will give
rise to several distinct expression patterns. The EC score is
thus a suitable measure of the extent to which a set of genes is
clustered into one or more clusters in expression space (for
definition of EC score, see Materials and Methods). We
explored various thresholds that correspond to different
extents of expression similarities that may be dictated by
various regulators.
We have examined the expression profiles of the genes
assigned to each TF in the location data in 40 time-series
experiments that span a broad range of natural (10–12) and
perturbed (13–17) conditions. We performed EC analyses
(6,7) on each gene set in each condition and evaluated their
statistical significance using our recently proposed formalism
(7). We used the FDR theorem (2) to account for the multi-
plicity of hypotheses tested and determined a p-value thresh-
old that guaranteed a desired FDR.
Figure 1A is a matrix depicting significant EC of particular
TFs in particular conditions (for details on statistical signific-
ance of EC score, see Materials and Methods). We assume that
a TF regulates the gene set assigned to it in the location data in
a particular condition if these genes are significantly coherent
in that condition. Figure 1B and C depicts distributions of the
number of TFs regulating each condition and number of con-
ditions regulated by each TF, respectively. The conditions that
are controlled by the largest number of TFs are the Cho cell-
cycle experiment (10,12), the MAPK signaling experiment
(11) and the nitrogen depletion experiment (13). These con-
ditions are subject to the regulation of 30–34 TFs. The two
ribosomal protein regulators, Rap1 and Fhl1, show regulation
in many of the conditions. Conversely, 16 out of the 113 TFs in
the dataset, which had three or more genes assigned to them,
had no condition in which the genes assigned to them show
significant coherence. Some of these TFs may be involved in
AND-gated combinatorial regulation, and only when inspect-
ing them along with their partners may coherence emerge.
Alternatively, it may be that such TFs represent multiple
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 2 607
cases of false TF-promoter assignments. It is also possible that
some of the low-scoring TFs are in fact regulating conditions
not examined here.
The EC score was deliberately designed such that TFs that
predominantly give rise to one or a few tight clusters of genes
(when clustered by expression profiles) can score highly, while
a significant amount of genes with no clear cluster-assignment
may be tolerated. In order to detect such behaviors, we have
subjected the mRNA expression profiles of genes assigned to
each of the TFs to decomposition by the QT_clust clustering
algorithm (19). Unlike many clustering algorithms, such as
k-means, that require in advance the determination of number
of clusters and that give rise to clusters of various extents of
tightness (20), in this algorithm the only input is the minimal
cluster tightness, and the output is the number of clusters along
with the gene-cluster assignments. In all present analyses we
used a relative, rather than absolute, measure of cluster tight-
ness. The distance between each two genes in a cluster was
required to be lower than a distance D, such that the probab-
ility of two random genes from that experiment to be at dis-
tance D or lower was p. For each TF, we experimented with a
range of values of p, from 0.05 to 0.5. Figure 2A shows the
result of running QT_clust over the set of genes assigned to
Abf1 using Chu’s sporulation expression data (16). This is a
clear example of a TF whose associated genes display various
different expression patterns (colors of expression profiles are
only relevant later in the text). Our analyses show such situa-
tions where the genes regulated by a TF may be decomposed
into several distinct expression profiles, even in conditions in
which the genes assigned to the TF are significantly coherent.
For example, in only 288 of the 738 cases in which a TF scored
highly at a condition, the most populated cluster is at least
three times larger than the second largest cluster; the rest of the
TFs represent cases in which the genes assigned to the TF give
rise to several sizeable well-separated clusters.
Clustering of the expression profiles often yields several
major clusters that are highly populated and have a clear,
distinct expression pattern, and many more clusters that are
lowly populated, often containing only one or few genes
whose expression profile was dissimilar from that of all
other genes. Additionally, it is possible and even likely that
the lowly populated clusters consist of genes that were mis-
assigned to the TF, since they have a profile so different than
that of the genes that appear to be tightly regulated by the TF.
Such a decomposition of the expression signal allows us to
view the genes assigned to each TF and distinguish the signal
from noise in the data. For example, refer again to Figure 2A.
It seems that this TF gives rise to several different temporal
patterns. In addition, 8 out of 28 of the clusters not shown
contain only one or two genes. Thus, expression-based data
A B
C
Figure 1. (A) A matrix depicting EC of each TF in each condition. An ij-th entry in the matrix is colored black if the i-th TF was significantly coherent in the j-th
condition, and white otherwise. Conditions marked as ‘a’ are Cho’s cell cycle (12) and Chu’s sporulation (16), in ‘b’ are Spellman’s four cell-cycle conditions (10) and
in ‘c’ are predominantly stress responses (13–15,17). Selected TFs are designated by their names; all TF and condition names, along with textual version of the matrix,
are available online. (B) A histogram with the number of TFs regulating each condition. (C) A histogram depicting the number of conditions regulated by each TF.
608 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 2
cannot support the proposed assignments of these genes to the
corresponding TFs. On the other hand, the genes in the sub-
stantially populated clusters are the most likely true assign-
ments, and recalculating the EC score of these genes alone
may show that the TFs do in fact give rise to significantly
coherent expression profiles, which were undetectable amidst
the noise.
Hence, filtration method (i) yields a matrix in which gene i is
assigned to TF j only if it was assigned in the original location
data, and also if it belongs to a cluster of at least three genes, in
at least one of the conditions in which the set of genes assigned
to TF j is significantly coherent. This choice of minimal cluster
size reflects a balance between the desire to include as many
assignments as possible and the tendency to remove those that
seem to be outliers (see our Supporting website).
Following this filtration, the EC score of each TF’s genes
was recalculated. Of the TF-condition pairs that did not pass
the EC significance test on the original data, 96 TF-condition
pairs were significantly coherent after this filtration.
We examined the relationship between the results of clus-
tering the genes assigned to a TF, in multiple experimental
conditions. For each TF, we calculated the number of common
genes in the largest cluster, in all pairs of conditions in which
the EC score of that TF was significantly coherent. Supple-
mentary Figure S3 shows a plot of the distribution of these
pairwise overlaps, which are significantly larger than that
expected at random. Thus, the sets of coherent genes of the
same TF in different conditions significantly overlap.
It is noteworthy that the location data was generated from
yeast grown in rich medium, a growth condition quite different
from many of the conditions for which we have expression
data. Yet, our analysis shows that often genes associated
with many of the TFs display good coherence in multiple,
diverse conditions. This may be taken to indicate that the
TF is localized in the vicinity of its binding site, perhaps
somewhat statically, and some additional modifications may
render it active in the appropriate condition.
We next turned to investigate reasons underlying the exist-
ence of one or several large tightly controlled clusters of genes
for each TF. In order to detect such behaviors, we inspected the
results of the clustering of the mRNA expression profiles of
genes assigned to each of the TFs. In order to understand what
may be responsible for a unique expression pattern of a subset
of the genes assigned to the TF, we turned first to analyze
regulatory sequence motifs.
Method (ii): From location data to regulatory motifs
We used AlignACE (21), a Gibbs sampler that searches for
over-represented motifs in a set of DNA sequences, to derive
regulatory motifs from promoters of sets of genes assigned to
each TF in the location data. We identified a total of 567
significant motifs for 61 of the TFs. (A significant motif is
one that had a MAP score >10, as proposed in the original
AlignACE paper (21), and a group specificity score <106. In
addition, we required that the ratio between the number of
consecutive gaps and the nucleotides in the consensus
sequence be <0.4, a threshold that reconciles removal of
false motifs with maximization of the number of TFs for
which motifs are derived.) We then turned to recalculate
the EC score of genes assigned to each of these TFs, this
time considering only a subset of these genes, namely the
ones that contain the significant motif in their promoter.
For each TF for which a motif was found, we compared
A
B
Figure 2. Expression profiles of genes regulated by Abf1 during sporulation (A) and Bas1 during nitrogen depletion (B). The first box on the left in each panel
represents the expression profiles of all the genes assigned by the location data to the respective TFs. The rest of the boxes represent the results of decomposition of
these genes into the most populated clusters generated by QT_clust. In (A), genes containing NCGTNNNNARTGAT and CGATGAGMTK are colored green, genes
with only the first motif are colored blue, genes with only the second motif are colored red and genes with none of the motifs are black. In (B), genes containing the
RNMRGAGTCA motif in their promoter are colored green, the rest are blue.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 2 609
each such EC score with a distribution of 10 000 EC scores of
random samples of genes assigned to the TF, but that do not
necessarily contain the motif. The sample size of each such
random gene set was the number of genes assigned to the TF
that also contained the motif in their promoter. We say that the
motif improves the EC score of the TF in a given condition if
its EC score is at the top 5% of the random scores distribution
for that condition. Of the 738 TF-condition pairs shown as
significant in Figure 1A across all 113 TFs, 641 pairs represent
61 TFs for which we found significant motifs. For 421 out of
the 641 TF-condition pairs, we obtained a motif that signifi-
cantly improves the EC score. In these cases, we hypothesize
that the genes that contain a motif and belong to the cluster it
dictates are the more likely targets of the TF.
An example of such behavior is the histidine and adenine
biosynthesis regulator Bas1 that gives rise to incoherent
expression profiles in the nitrogen depletion condition
(Figure 2B) (13). Yet, a motif we discovered by AlignACE,
using the promoters assigned to this TF, whose consensus is
RNMRGAGTCA (MAP score 24, group specificity score
3.8 · 1010), is most highly over-represented in only one
of the two major clusters of this TF. This motif is highly
similar to a motif experimentally shown to be bound by
Bas1 (22). While it is still possible that some of the genes
in the other clusters are also targets of Bas1, by reassigning to
this regulator only the genes that contain the motif found, we
may have filtered a significant amount of false assignments.
Another interesting behavior is displayed by the genes
assigned to the chromatin remodeling factor, Abf1 (see
Figure 2A). AlignACE run on the promoters of 282 genes
assigned to this TF resulted in two regulatory motifs:
NCGTNNNNARTGAT (MAP score 390, group specificity
score 1.6 · 1098) that occurs in 262 of the TF targets and
CGATGAGNTK (MAP score 26, group specificity score
9.9 · 106) that occurs in 37 of the targets. The latter
motif is also known as the PAC motif, whose binding TF
remains elusive (23). All of the 37 genes that contain the
second motif in their promoters contain the first as well,
and a possible interpretation is that these genes are under
the regulation of at least two TFs. Interestingly, while a sig-
nificant portion of the genes that have both motifs (Figure 2A,
green) co-cluster in the sporulation condition shown here,
across many conditions they display more complex behavior
(data not shown) that probably reflects condition-dependent
dominance of either of the motifs.
When examining the significant motifs found, it is
important to bear in mind that not all of the genes assigned
a TF in the location data contain the significant motif found for
that TF. The average ratio between the number of genes
containing the motif and the number of genes assigned to
the TF is 39% (for further detail see Supporting website).
This may indicate the level of noise in the data, although
alternative motif-searching algorithms may change the exact
picture.
The significant motifs discovered gave rise to a matrix, in
which gene i is assigned to TF j only if it was assigned in the
original location data, and also the promoter of gene i con-
tained a significant motif which was found for TF j. This
matrix portrays filtration method (ii).
Method (iii): Synergistic interactions between TFs and
a synergy map of the yeast TF combinatorial network
Figure 3A shows the expression profiles of the genes assigned
to the regulator Ndd1 in the Carbon-1 medium in the envir-
onmental stress experiment (13). Here, again the expression of
A
B
Figure 3. Genes assigned to Ndd1 in the Carbon-1 medium in the environmental stress experiment (A) and Yap5 during exposure to the reducing agent dtt (B) (13),
with the same QT_clust-based clustering as in Figure 2. In (A), genes that are assigned to Ndd1 and Swi5 are colored red, while genes that are assigned to Ndd1 and
Mcm1 are colored green. Genes assigned to Ndd1, but not to Swi5 and not to Mcm1 are colored blue. In (B), genes that are assigned also to Fhl1 are colored red, while
genes only assigned to Yap5 are blue.
610 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 2
these genes is not coherent, yet the clustering shows that the
gene expression profiles may be decomposed predominantly
into two coherent clusters. Interestingly, we have identified
two TFs, Swi5 and Mcm1, such that half of the genes bound by
both Ndd1 and Swi5 fall in the largest cluster, and over a
quarter of the genes bound by both Ndd1 and Mcm1 fall in
the second largest cluster (see Figure 3A). It thus appears that
with alternative partners Ndd1 may participate in regulation of
completely different responses. Interestingly, all three regula-
tors in this set are known as cell-cycle regulators, yet we
provide here an indication that they are involved in the
regulation of the response to nitrogen depletion, a process
that evokes meiosis in yeast. This is another demonstration
(6,24) of the extensive regulatory cross-talk between the
meiotic and mitotic cell-division processes.
In the detection of such combinatorial interactions between
regulatory motifs, we have previously defined motif synergy
(6,8). A pair of regulatory motifs is considered synergistic if
the EC score of the genes containing the two motifs together
is significantly higher than that of the genes that contain either
of the motifs alone. Zhang and Banerjee (25) have recently
adopted this definition and explored synergistic interaction
in the location data during cell cycle. We report here the detec-
tion of synergistic interactions among all pairs of TFs in the
location data, in each of the above 40 conditions. A pair of TFs is
considered synergistic if the EC score of the genes assigned to
both TFs is significantly higher than that of the genes assigned
to either of the TFs alone. We used our previous statistical
formalism for calculating a p-value on the hypothesis that
two TFs are synergistic (6,8). (For details on calculation of
significance of synergy see Materials and Methods.) For each
condition, we derived a list of all pairs of TFs which are syn-
ergistic in that condition. This resulted in a total of 279 unique
significant synergistic interactions across all 40 conditions.
An example of two synergistic TFs is given in Figure 3B,
which shows the expression profiles of the genes assigned to
the regulator Yap5 during exposure to the reducing agent dtt
(13). The genes that are also assigned to Fhl1 are colored red,
and appear predominantly in the largest cluster. Thus, it
appears that when the promoter of a gene is bound by both
Yap5 and Fhl1, the expression profile of this gene is likely to
be very specific, and distinct from the expression profile of
genes bound by Yap5 alone.
Figure 4A is a graph depicting all significant synergistic
interactions of one of the 40 conditions, namely exposure to
the dtt reducing agent (13), in which synergism between the
two TFs described in Figure 3B is highlighted. Similar maps in
additional conditions, in addition to a combined map of all
conditions, appear on the website.
Synergistic interactions provide us with strengthened evid-
ence of a true regulatory interaction. Thus, the data of syner-
gistic interactions produces the matrix of filtration method
(iii). In this matrix, gene i is assigned to TF j only if it was
assigned in the original location data, and also was assigned to
another TF that shows synergy with TF j.
Method (iv): Co-localization of TFs in shared
promoters
Another means to detect interactions between regulatory pro-
teins, which does not involve expression data, is to detect their
degree of co-localization in shared promoters. Two TFs are
said to co-localize if they are shown in the location data to bind
to the same promoter. Significant co-localization describes
cases in which the number of promoters assigned to the
two TFs is significantly large, given the number of promoters
assigned to each TF alone. The basic premise here is that if two
or more TFs co-localize in a significantly high number of gene
promoters, the genes in which the TFs co-localize are more
likely to be true targets of the respective TFs compared with
genes that are associated with each TF alone. However, we
note that high rate of co-localization of two TFs does not
necessarily imply temporal co-localization, namely it may
be that the two TFs are bound to the promoter in different
conditions, perhaps even in a mutually exclusive manner.
Analogous to our previous motif co-occurrence calculation
(8), we consider two TFs, TF1 and TF2, as potentially func-
tionally interacting if the number of promoters in which they
co-localize is significantly high considering the number of
promoters assigned to each of them individually. To test
the null-hypothesis that the observed or higher rate of co-
localization of two TFs could be obtained by chance given
the above priors, we use the cumulative hyper-geometric prob-
ability distribution.
P X> tf12ð Þ ¼
Xmin tf1‚ tf2ð Þ
i¼tf12
tf1
i
 
g tf1
tf2 i
 
g
tf2
 
where g is the number of promoters in the genome, tf1 and tf2
are the number of promoters assigned to TF1 and TF2, respect-
ively, and tf12 is the number of promoters assigned to both
TF1 and TF2.
We have generated a graph of all pairwise interactions in the
location dataset (Figure 4B). While co-occurrence analysis of
regulatory motifs was introduced before (8), we now provide
an analysis at the level of the TFs themselves and show that
most such interactions occur within one highly connected
graph. The nodes of the graph correspond to TFs, and
edges connect between pairs of TFs if the p-value on the
hypothesis that they significantly co-localize falls below a
determined threshold. For clarity of the graph, and due
to the high number of significant co-localizations, we set a
p-value threshold of 1010. The graph displays several inter-
esting properties. Coloring the graph according to the biolo-
gical function ascribed to each TF, we discover clustering of
TFs according to their annotated function. (For details on
derivation of biological functions, see legend of Figure 4B.)
In particular, we discern a highly connected cluster of cell-
cycle regulatory TFs (see cluster I in Figure 4B). This obser-
vation is similar to the one we have initially made with
cell-cycle regulatory motifs yet with a completely different
criterion for regulatory interactions (6). This is another clear
indication that the cell-cycle is one of the most tightly con-
trolled processes in yeast, and that an intricate network of
regulators is at work in its regulation. The map shows two
other clusters that are also rather homogenous in terms of the
functions of the TFs they contain. This clustering by function
suggests, as in other biological networks (26), that a ‘guilt-
by-association’ approach may be used for annotating the
regulatory role of poorly characterized TFs by ascribing
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 2 611
them the role of their annotated partners, if they occur in such
‘functionally coherent’ clusters.
Significant co-localization interactions provide us with
strengthened evidence of a true regulatory interaction, and
thus this data produces the matrix of filtration method (iv).
In this matrix, gene i is assigned to TF j only if it was assigned
in the original location data, and also was assigned to another
TF which co-localizes significantly with TF j.
Relationship among the four methods of filtration
The four filtration methods discussed here each served to
produce a higher quality matrix of TF-gene interactions.
The numbers of interactions predicted by the single methods
are 4044, 2795, 2313 and 2418 for clustering of gene expres-
sion profiles followed by filtration of lowly populated clusters,
motif detection, synergy and co-localization analysis, respect-
ively. Altogether, 1487 interactions were predicted by all four
filtration methods presented in this study. Figure 5A shows the
number of TF-gene assignments supported by each unique
combination of methods. Supplementary Figure S4A and B
show in each of the four filtration methods, and in their union
and intersection, per TF, the percent and absolute numbers of
gene assignments not supported by the method, relative to the
total number of genes assigned to the TF in the location data.
Figure 5B shows an analysis of three of these methods:
motifs, synergy and co-localization. Each of the three methods
A
B
Figure 4. Graphs depicting TF synergy during exposure to the reducing agent dtt (A), and co-localization (B). The nodes in the maps represent TFs, an edge between
two nodes represents significant synergy in (A), and significant (p-value < 1010) co-localization in (B), between the two corresponding TFs. Graph rendering was
performed with Pajek (http://vlado.fmf.uni-lj.si/pub/networks/pajek/doc/pajekman.htm). Two nodes that are analyzed in detail in Figure 3B, that correspond to Yap5
and Fhl1, are highlighted in (A). The three main clusters of co-localized TFs are circled red in (B). Nodes in (B) are colored according to the regulatory function of the
TFs. Such functions were annotated in (1) according to the biological function of genes assigned to the TF. Width of lines connecting two TFs reflects the number of
genes assigned to both TFs; size of node reflects the number of genes assigned to the TF.
612 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 2
utilizes a different type of data source, sequence analysis,
expression data or statistical analysis of common gene sets.
The Venn diagram portrays the relationship between the cases
of TF-gene interactions and the methods that predict each
interaction. For instance, there is a significant overlap between
those interactions predicted by the synergy method, with the
interactions predicted by the co-localization method. In addi-
tion, there are a significantly large number of TF-gene inter-
actions, which were predicted by all three methods. A total of
3626 unique TF-gene interactions were predicted by the three
methods.
Finally, we consider the matrices resulting from each fil-
tration method as part of a more global prioritization scheme.
On one extreme, the 1487 predictions supported by all four
methods represent the highest-quality set of interactions.
Nevertheless, this set has the lowest coverage. The union of
all four methods lies on the other end of the scale, and predicts
4274 interactions (all but 159 of the original TF-gene assign-
ments in the location data). Between these two extremes are
TF-gene assignments that are supported by various subsets of
the filters. We have implemented a relatively simple prioriti-
zation scheme, offered on the Supporting website that ranks
assignments based on the number of filters supporting them.
In the future, more sophisticated means will be offered that
prioritize predictions according to the confidence of filter-
specific scores supporting each assignment and partial depend-
encies between the different filters.
DISCUSSION
Functional genomics provides bioinformatics with genome-
and proteome-wide data with an unprecedented throughput.
Yet, the optimal utilization of these data sources requires
establishing efficient means to assess the extent of noise in
the data, and potentially also to filter it out. It is desired that in
parallel to technological improvements on the experimental
side that will reduce the noise level, accompanying computa-
tional tools will be developed to provide noise-filtration. It is
likely that such tools will have to involve data from other
sources (that themselves may be noisy as well). In the current
work, we achieve exactly that. By combining the location data
with promoter sequence data and extensive information on
mRNA expression, we have significantly improved the accur-
acy of the DNA–protein location data and, through this
process, have gained new insights on gene network design
principles. An approach developed recently by Bar-Joseph
et al. (27) is most useful for adopting a more permissive
p-value threshold on TF-gene assignments in the location
data in order to reduce false negatives, when TF combinatorics
and expression data support it. On the other hand, our methods
are mainly aimed at removing false positives. In that respect,
the two approaches are complementary to each other. Another
method that prioritized TF-promoter interactions based on the
location and expression data was that of Gao et al. (3). We
have thus performed comparative analysis that gauged the
extent of overlap between TF-gene assignments supported
by the three studies, using in our study the intersection of
assignments derived from all four filters (see Supplementary
Figure 5). We found that the three studies produce signific-
antly overlapping sets of assignments, yet each study identifies
B
A
Figure 5. (A) Table displaying number of TF-gene assignments supported by
all possible combinations of methods. For each combination marked by gray
boxes, the number of assignments supported by this unique combination of
methods is reported. The first column reports the number of assignments
supported by all of the methods marked in each row (an ‘AND’ relationship
between the methods), while the second column reports assignments supported
by any of the methods (an ‘OR’ relationship). For example, the 5th row reports
that there are 1009 interactions supported by both the coherence and the motif
method (and not supported by the other methods), and 1706 interactions
supported by either the coherence or the motif method (and not supported
by the other methods). For further details, see Supporting website. (B)
Venn diagram depicting the relationships among the TF-gene interaction
predictions of three methods of filtration: motif detection, synergy and
co-localization. A total of 3626 unique interactions were predicted by at
least one of the three methods, and 1527 interactions were predicted by all
three methods.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 2 613
unique assignments that the other studies do not provide sup-
port for. Among the possible reasons for lack of congruence
are Bar-Joseph’s algorithm’s sensitivity toward assignments
with higher than 0.001 p-value, our explicit reliance on TF
synergies, co-localization and sequence motifs, and Gao’s
emphasis on contribution of the TF to the expression fold
change of regulated genes at individual time points (as
opposed to effect across an entire time series).
It should be noted that while we have considerable confid-
ence in TF-gene assignments supported by at least one of the
four filters presented here, it is entirely possible that additional
filters may be proposed that would support additional such
assignments. Such filters may include functional annotations
or genome-wide transcription response to deletion of TFs. In
addition, we stress that supporting evidence for assignments in
this work is mainly proposed for cases in which the DNA–
protein interaction data show regulatory effect on gene expres-
sion. It is possible that some assignments represent true bind-
ing events that resulted in no detectable transcriptional effects.
In this study, we used motif-finding algorithms for binding
site predictions and microarray expression data, both of which
are noisy techniques which will be further refined in the future.
However, as long as the situation of noisy genome-wide tech-
nologies prevails, the course of action must be cleaning of one
noisy data by intersection with other, potentially noisy, data
sources. This is of course legitimate only in cases where there
is no correlation between noise in the different technologies,
and there is no reason to assume that noise in expression,
sequence and location data should be correlated. Thus, our
final products are rigorously statistically prioritized observa-
tions for which support comes independently from multiple
sources that each by itself may be noisy, yet their concurrence
is unlikely by chance.
In the present analysis, subsets of co-expressed genes
assigned to a TF are considered true positives even if they
display expression profiles completely un-correlated with that
of the TF itself. This reflects the notions that not all TFs vary at
the mRNA expression level, that TF-gene interaction may
include negative effects, and that various logical interactions
may be used to combine multiple regulators. While the basic
building blocks of transcription regulatory networks are the
TFs and the regulatory motifs they bind, this work also
provides the next level in gene network deciphering, namely
TF-motif combinations. We provided here two largely inde-
pendent methods for TF interaction, and were encouraged to
realize that a sizable number of predictions are in the inter-
section of the two methods. Proposed interactions that are
supported by the two methods constitute our highest quality
predictions.
Combinatorial interactions among multiple regulators pro-
vide organisms with exponentially growing computational
capacity, as well as the potential to respond to their multi-
dimensional complex environment. These responses control
the level of activity of each gene in the genome. In the present
analysis, TF combinatorics plays a dual role. On the technical
level, it serves to clean the location data. On the biological
level, the discovery (and rediscovery) of combinatorial
interactions constitute a crucial step toward full deciphering
of the architecture of gene regulatory networks. Might it be that
in addition to the role of TF combinatorics in representation of
the multi-dimensional cellular environment, they are also
employed by biology itself for the task of noise-filtering?
Since the DNA-binding sites of most TFs are relatively
short [5–20 bp (28)], their specificity toward their actual
sites, which reduces sharply with increased genome size, is
very low even for small genomes, such as yeast’s. A potential
solution could be perhaps to increase the size of the individual
DNA-binding sites of TFs, but this would probably require
a complete redesign of their protein folds. The obvious
alternative is to employ simple AND-gated combinatorics,
of homo- or hetero-TF combinations, in order to filter out
genes that are bound by individual TFs but should not be
regulated by them.
Supporting website
Supporting website is available at http://longitude.weizmann.
ac.il/TFLocation/TFLocation.html.
Included in the website is a Matlab GUI that allows explora-
tion of the expression profiles of TFs in multiple conditions,
detection of combinatorial interactions among them, and effect
of regulatory motif on their coherence patterns. In addition, the
website provides our noise-filtered version of the location
database and various interactive means for user-defined filter-
ing strategies.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Material is available at NAR Online.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank all members of the Pilpel laboratory for many
stimulating discussions, and H. Benjamin, G. Getz,
M. Lapidot, A. Mitchell, D. Peer, R. Sharan and I. Simon for
critically reviewing the manuscript. Y.P. is an incumbent of the
Rothstein Career Development Chair in Genetic Diseases and
is a Fellow of the Hurwitz Foundation for Complexity Sciences.
We are grateful to the Israeli Science Foundation, the Minerva
foundation, the Ben May Foundation, and the Leo and Julia
Forchheimer Center for Molecular Genetics for grant support.
Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this
article was provided by The Israeli Science Foundation.
REFERENCES
1. Lee,T.I., Rinaldi,N.J., Robert,F., Odom,D.T., Bar-Joseph,Z.,
Gerber,G.K., Hannett,N.M., Harbison,C.T., Thompson,C.M., Simon,I.
et al. (2002) Transcriptional regulatory networks in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Science, 298, 799–804.
2. Benjamini,Y. and Hochberg,Y. (1995) Controlling the false discovery
rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. J. R. Stat. Soc.,
57, 289–300.
3. Gao,F., Foat,B.C. and Bussemaker,H.J. (2004) Defining transcriptional
networks through integrative modeling of mRNA expression and
transcription factor binding data. BMC Bioinformatics, 5, 31.
4. Segal,E., Yelensky,R. and Koller,D. (2003) Genome-wide discovery of
transcriptional modules from DNA sequence and gene expression.
Bioinformatics, 19, i273–i282.
5. Storey,J.D. and Tibshirani,R. (2003) Statistical significance for
genomewide studies. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 100, 9440–9445.
6. Pilpel,Y., Sudarsanam,P. and Church,G.M. (2001) Identifying regulatory
networks by combinatorial analysis of promoter elements. Nature
Genet, 29, 153–159.
614 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 2
7. Lapidot,M. and Pilpel,Y. (2003) Comprehensive quantitative analyses of
the effects of promoter sequence elements on mRNA transcription.
Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 3824–3828.
8. Sudarsanam,P., Pilpel,Y. and Church,G.M. (2002) Genome-wide
co-occurrence of promoter elements reveals a cis-regulatory cassette of
rRNA transcription motifs in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genome
Res., 12, 1723–1731.
9. Aach,J., Rindone,W. and Church,G.M. (2000) Systematic management
and analysis of yeast gene expression data. Genome Res., 10,
431–445.
10. Spellman,P.T., Sherlock,G., Zhang,M.Q., Iyer,V.R., Anders,K.,
Eisen,M.B., Brown,P.O., Botstein,D. and Futcher,B. (1998)
Comprehensive identification of cell cycle-regulated genes of the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae by microarray hybridization. Mol. Biol.
Cell, 9, 3273–3297.
11. Roberts,C.J., Nelson,B., Marton,M.J., Stoughton,R., Meyer,M.R.,
Bennett,H.A., He,Y.D., Dai,H., Walker,W.L., Hughes,T.R. et al. (2000)
Signaling and circuitry of multiple MAPK pathways revealed by a
matrix of global gene expression profiles. Science, 287,
873–880.
12. Cho,R.J., Campbell,M.J., Winzeler,E.A., Steinmetz,L., Conway,A.,
Wodicka,L., Wolfsberg,T.G., Gabrielian,A.E., Landsman,D.,
Lockhart,D.J. et al. (1998) A genome-wide transcriptional analysis of the
mitotic cell cycle. Mol. Cell, 2, 65–73.
13. Gasch,A.P., Spellman,P.T., Kao,C.M., Carmel-Harel,O., Eisen,M.B.,
Storz,G., Botstein,D. and Brown,P.O. (2000) Genomic expression
programs in the response of yeast cells to environmental changes. Mol.
Biol. Cell, 11, 4241–4257.
14. Jelinsky,S.A., Estep,P., Church,G.M. and Samson,L.D. (2000)
Regulatory networks revealed by transcriptional profiling of damaged
Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells: Rpn4 links base excision repair with
proteasomes. Mol. Cell. Biol., 20, 8157–8167.
15. Causton,H.C., Ren,B., Koh,S.S., Harbison,C.T., Kanin,E.,
Jennings,E.G., Lee,T.I., True,H.L., Lander,E.S. and Young,R.A. (2001)
Remodeling of yeast genome expression in response to environmental
changes. Mol. Biol. Cell, 12, 323–337.
16. Chu,S., DeRisi,J., Eisen,M., Mulholland,J., Botstein,D., Brown,P.O. and
Herskowitz,I. (1998) The transcriptional program of sporulation in
budding yeast. Science, 282, 699–705.
17. Eisen,M.B., Spellman,P.T., Brown,P.O. and Botstein,D. (1998) Cluster
analysis and display of genome-wide expression patterns. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA, 95, 14863–14868.
18. De Smet,F., Mathys,J., Marchal,K., Thijs,G., De Moor,B. and Moreau,Y.
(2002) Adaptive quality-based clustering of gene expression profiles.
Bioinformatics, 18, 735–746.
19. Heyer,L.J., Kruglyak,S. and Yooseph,S. (1999) Exploring expression
data: identification and analysis of coexpressed genes. Genome Res., 9,
1106–1115.
20. Tavazoie,S., Hughes,J.D., Campbell,M.J., Cho,R.J. and Church,G.M.
(1999) Systematic determination of genetic network architecture.
Nature Genet., 22, 281–285.
21. Hughes,J.D., Estep,P.W., Tavazoie,S. and Church,G.M. (2000)
Computational identification of cis-regulatory elements associated with
groups of functionally related genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
J. Mol. Biol., 296, 1205–1214.
22. Springer,C., Kunzler,M., Balmelli,T. and Braus,G.H. (1996) Amino
acid and adenine cross-pathway regulation act through the same
50-TGACTC-30 motif in the yeast HIS7 promoter. J. Biol. Chem., 271,
29637–29643.
23. Dequard-Chablat,M., Riva,M., Carles,C. and Sentenac,A. (1991)
RPC19, the gene for a subunit common to yeast RNA
polymerases A (I) and C (III). J. Biol. Chem., 266,
15300–15307.
24. Bussemaker,H.J., Li,H. and Siggia,E.D. (2001) Regulatory element
detection using correlation with expression. Nature Genet., 27,
167–171.
25. Banerjee,N. and Zhang,M.Q. (2003) Identifying cooperativity among
transcription factors controlling the cell cycle in yeast. Nucleic Acids
Res., 31, 7024–7031.
26. Schwikowski,B., Uetz,P. and Fields,S. (2000) A network of
protein-protein interactions in yeast. Nat. Biotechnol., 18,
1257–1261.
27. Bar-Joseph,Z., Gerber,G.K., Lee,T.I., Rinaldi,N.J., Yoo,J.Y., Robert,F.,
Gordon,D.B., Fraenkel,E., Jaakkola,T.S., Young,R.A. et al. (2003)
Computational discovery of gene modules and regulatory networks.
Nat. Biotechnol., 21, 1337–1342.
28. Stormo,G.D. (2000) DNA binding sites: representation and discovery.
Bioinformatics, 16, 16–23.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 2 615
