FlyRNAi: the Drosophila RNAi screening
center database
Ian Flockhart1,*, Matthew Booker1, Amy Kiger3, Michael Boutros4,
Susan Armknecht1, Nadire Ramadan1, Kris Richardson1, Andrew Xu1,
5 Norbert Perrimon1,2 and Bernard Mathey-Prevot1
1Department of Genetics and 2Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA,
3Department of Biological Sciences, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0346, USA and
4German Cancer Research Center, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany
Received August 10, 2005; Revised and Accepted October 18, 2005
10
ABSTRACT
RNA interference (RNAi) has become a powerful tool
for genetic screening inDrosophila. At theDrosophila
RNAi Screening Center (DRSC), we are using a lib-
rary of over 21 000 double-stranded RNAs targeting
15 known and predicted genes in Drosophila. This
library is available for the use of visiting scientists
wishing to perform full-genome RNAi screens. The
data generated from these screens are collected in
the DRSC database (http://flyRNAi.org/cgi-bin/RNAi_
20 screens.pl) in a flexible format for the convenience of
the scientist and for archiving data. The long-term
goal of this database is to provide annotations for
as many of the uncharacterized genes in Drosophila
as possible. Data from published screens are avail-
25 able to the public through a highly configurable inter-
face that allows detailed examination of the data and
provides access to a number of other databases and
bioinformatics tools.
INTRODUCTION
30 In recent years, we have witnessed the wide application of
high-throughput screening (HTS) technologies to approach
biological questions. Arguably, the most promising HTS
approach for discovering gene function is based on RNA
interference (RNAi). RNAi results in the silencing of a
35 gene through the specific degradation of its mRNA, which
is triggered by double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) fragments
complementary to that transcript. In Drosophila, RNAi can
be achieved in cell lines and primary cells simply by adding
long dsRNA to the medium (1,2). The long dsRNA are taken
40 up by the cells, and are rapidly processed to 21–24 nt short-
interfering RNAs (siRNAs) that guide the specific degradation
of target mRNAs. The biochemical steps involved in the pro-
cessing of dsRNAs and loading of the siRNAs into the RNA-
induced silencing complex (RISC) are carried out by a number
45of proteins, including members of the Dicer protein family (3).
In the last 2 years that technique has been adapted to HTS,
allowing genome-wide screens to be performed efficiently in
384-well assay plates (1). With the support of a grant from
NIGMS, we created in May 2003 the Drosophila RNAi
50Screening Center (DRSC) (http://flyRNAi.org) with the
following goals:
(i) Make genome-wide RNAi screening technology avail-
able to the scientific community by providing a facility
with the required infrastructure and expertise.
55(ii) Provide a common platform to diminish variables between
screens, allowing for functional comparisons across
studies.
(iii) Create a database, in a standardized format, for the repo-
sitory of results from all screens, which, upon publication,
60are made available to the public. The public database is
divided into sections that offer researchers several basic
data viewing options as well as a number of bioinformatic
tools and links to other databases. The long-term purpose
of the database is to provide experimental information to
65functionally annotate uncharacterized genes in Droso-
phila, to give a comprehensive list of genes involved in
distinct cell biological and cell signaling processes and to
be a resource for data mining by the scientific community.
70SCREENING AT THE DRSC
Visiting scientists typically perform their screens in
duplicate—screening against two full-genome sets. Raw data
from duplicate genome sets are collected along with pheno-
type and ‘hit’ information. Data are primarily stored by plate
75and well, rather than by dsRNA, which allows for comparison
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 617 432 0365; Fax: +1 617 432 6238; Email: iflockha@genetics.med.harvard.edu
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D489–D494
doi:10.1093/nar/gkj114
between genome sets and facilitates plate-wide analysis. The
scientists perform their screens blind—only learning the iden-
tity of the dsRNA in a particular well after entering the data
from that well into the system. Once the screen is completed,
5 the data are held privately until the results are published or
a 2 year period passes after completion of the screen.
The scientists have password-protected accounts which give
them access to data entry interfaces and direct links to their
personal data, both published and unpublished. The scientist’s
10 data are broken down by assay. Any changes the scientist may
make to the experimental data display (as described below)
are saved between sessions. The logged in user also has access
to some tools for viewing data a plate at a time, direct links
to the bioinformatic tools (listed below) and functions for
15 directly querying the quality control (QC) information for
the source plates.
An important aspect of how the database is organized is
in the distinction among genes, amplicons and dsRNAs. The
dsRNA library was designed in collaboration with R. Paro’s
20 group and collaborators (ZMBH Heidelberg) (4). The
approach taken was to generate gene-specific primers to
21 396 putative open reading frames (ORFs) covering the
entire Drosophila genome. Choice of the primers was based
on the combined genome annotations available from BDGP/
25 Celera (5) and the Sanger Center. A pair of a specific forward
and reverse primer was used to amplify a genomic region
(henceforth called amplicon) corresponding to each predicted
ORF. Each amplicon, flanked by RNA polymerase T7 pro-
moters, was in turn used as a template in an in vitro trans-
30 cription reaction to generate dsRNA. As new releases of the
Drosophila genome result in slightly revised annotations, the
predicted gene target of each amplicon may change accord-
ingly. Because of this unavoidable issue, result and ‘hit’
information from screens is focused more on amplicons and
35 the corresponding dsRNA than on genes. However, the key
piece of information that remains invariant is the nucleotide
sequence of the specific region encompassed by an amplicon
and by extension of its related dsRNA. For the purpose of data
tracking in the database, the term amplicon can refer to two
40 distinct biological entities that are related through their
sequences: the DNA fragment amplified with specific primers
or its corresponding dsRNA.
WEBSITE OVERVIEW
The main URL for the public database is http://flyRNAi.org/
45 cgi-bin/RNAi_screens.pl.
This page has four major parts; a menu bar to the left,
a link to the Gene Lookup Page (Search for Genes in Public
Screens), a list of public screens below it for which all data are
accessible, and a list of ongoing screens for which the data are
50 kept confidential until the time of publication or the 2 year
limit after their completion, whichever comes first (Figure 1).
The menu bar provides links to a number of informational
resources. The ‘About Us’ link provides general information
about the DRSC, such as personnel, location, equipment,
55 funding and DRSC news. The ‘Screening’ header opens up
a ‘how-to’ section and summarizes the current protocols in use
at the DRSC to conduct RNAi screens in the 384-well plate
format (1). The ‘Applications’ link is for scientists interested
in submitting an application to come and carry out a screen at
60the DRSC. The ‘Literature’ and ‘Links’ pages are lists of
external resources that the DRSC wishes to highlight for
RNAi screeners. The ‘Tools’ section consists of a number
of small bioinformatics applications that we have developed
to help screeners or interested scientists search for and manage
65information displayed in the Data section of the database.
It also offers links to other databases with the purpose of
providing additional information on particular genes or gene
function.
The published screens page is organized by screen publica-
70tion date, the most recent of which are listed first. Each screen
field consists of the title and the authors of the screen. A pdf
file of the publication, as well as the supplementary data (when
available), are included whenever possible. One or more direct
links are provided to access the raw data, with a listing of
75the dsRNAs (or their corresponding amplicons) found to have
an effect in the assay under study. Immediately below the
record, which is updated as is appropriate, of the published
screens (6–13) follows a list of screens that have just been
completed at the DRSC. These screens are yet to be fully
80analyzed and have not yet reached the stage of publication.
For each unpublished screen listed, the title and brief summary
of the screen are given along with details about the scientists
involved in the screen (names, academic affiliation, etc.).
A contact email address is provided for each screen.
85EXPERIMENTAL DATA INTERFACE
Each screen has links to one or more listings of the amplicons
for which phenotypic data was entered during that assay. Mul-
tiple listings appear in cases when several different assays
were combined in the screen, such as when two different
90cell lines are screened for comparison. Each listing is organ-
ized in rows representing DRSC amplicons. The data being
displayed are fully configurable by the user (Figure 2).
The user can use search criteria to display a subset of rows,
or use check boxes to indicate the rows to display when a
95redisplay button is pressed. More significantly, the user can
sort the data, based on any displayed column of information,
by clicking the column header. The set of columns that is
displayed is likewise configurable via a selection menu at
the bottom of the page, which offers a choice of over 40
100columns of information per row (Table 1). When the page
displays data to the user’s liking, the displayed contents
of the page can be saved as a tab-delimited text file, to be
imported into the user’s spreadsheet program of choice.
For further details about any row, the user can click the
105triangle icon at the start of the row to go to the amplicon detail
page for that amplicon.
INFORMATIC TOOLS
This page provides a link to the Gene and Amplicon Lookup
page (Figure 3). The Gene and Amplicon Lookup function
110provides a simple interface that allows visitors to get infor-
mation on any amplicon in the DRSC library related to a
particular gene. The search function is flexible and accepts
queries by gene name, gene alias, FlyBase gene number
(FBgn), CG accession number or by our internal DRSC ID
115number. When a gene is queried, the user is presented with
a detailed page of information about the amplicon(s) found
D490 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
and any gene(s) targeted by it. A gene may have more than
one amplicon as the original collection was based on early
annotations of the Drosophila genome (5). Subsequent revi-
sion of the annotation resulted in several cases in the merging
5 of two ORFs into a single gene. Currently, 1365 genes are
targeted by more than one amplicon in our collection. If any
amplicon targeting a queried gene has been associated with a
phenotype in any public screens, then that information is
presented at the top of the page.
10 The top section of the results page shows whether a par-
ticular gene and its related amplicon(s) have been identified in
a public screen as ‘hit’(s). If so, the targeting amplicon is listed
with the name of the screen, the phenotype and the screener’s
evaluation of the strength of that hit (see also Table 1). Below
15 that, there is a section for each amplicon in the DRSC library
that targets that gene. It is broken into subsections detailing
general information about the amplicon (predicted sequence,
primer sequences, length, etc.), genomic position, detailed
information about the gene, links to other databases and some
20 historical information relating to the creation of the amplicon.
An additional important tool is the off-target sequence
search tool. As in the mammalian field, the issue of off-
target effects caused by siRNAs is emerging as a significant
issue inDrosophila (14,15) and potential off-targets associated
25with dsRNAs for Caenorhabditis elegans have been annotated
at RNAiDB (16). An initial review of the data at the DRSC
confirms that off-target effects do happen in Drosophila and
need to be taken into account when interpreting knock-down
data by long dsRNAs (M. Booker, S. Silver, M. Kulkarni,
30A. Friedman, N. Perrimon and B. Mathey-Prevot, manuscript
in preparation). As discussed earlier, long dsRNA (typically
400 nt) are processed to 21–23 nt siRNAs by the Dicer protein.
Dicer does not appear to have a sequence preference for
where processing will occur and as a result we do not
35know in advance which and how many siRNAs are produced
from any particular dsRNA. However, we can check any pos-
sible 21mer sequence that is included in a given dsRNA (or
within its corresponding amplicon) for a possible match with
other mRNAs which are not the intended target. Ideally,
40only one match corresponding to the targeted mRNA should
Figure 1. The DRSC Data page. Published works are bordered in black. Screens awaiting publication are listed below, bordered in gray.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D491
Figure 3. Gene Lookup Results page. This master page of amplicon information is available from the Gene and Amplicon Lookup and Data Display pages.
Figure 2. The Experimental Data Summary page. The columns shown are a typical example of the data that may be displayed. Data columns are chosen by the user.
D492 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
be found. To facilitate this search, we have developed a
bioinformatics tool based on our own faster algorithm, some-
what similar to that published by Arziman et al. (17) except
that it does not have a built-in primer design component. Our
5 off-target search tool allows a user to provide one or more
DNA sequences in FASTA format and search those sequences
for predicted off-targets among all fly gene transcripts. The
user can specify an off-target length (16–50 bp) with a default
value of 21 bp. A color-coded map of gene matches for a given
10 sequence is returned to the user. The map shows regions of the
submitted sequences that are devoid of predicted matches
with genes other than the intended target (no off-target) as
well as stretches which do have matches with off-target
genes. The intended or primary target is determined based
15on a match over all or most of the length of submitted
sequence. The tool also reports the number of off-target
genes.
The sequence extraction tool allows users to retrieve
multiple FASTA-formatted DRSC amplicon sequences. It
20can also be used to retrieve fly gene sequences.
The FlyBase Identifier retrieval tool allows the user to do
a batch query for FlyBase FBgn identifiers by giving a list of
fly gene symbols, names, synonyms and CG accessions.
The genetic interactions tool allows the user to construct a
25graph of genes of interest for their reported genetic interactions
based on data stored at FlyBase. The user may query for these
Table 1. Definitions of columns
Column Information
Results information
Hit This indicates that this amplicon was a positive result in the screen
Phenotype The result or phenotypic information that the scientist recorded
Amplicon information
DRSC amplicon ID An identifier assigned to the amplicon by the DRSC
‘S’ primer The primer at the 50 end of the ORF this amplicon was designed to target
‘R’ primer The primer at the 30 end of the ORF this amplicon was designed to target
Amplicon length(s) The predicted length in base pairs of the amplicon
HDC target The predict ORF the amplicon was designed to target
Hits in public screens The number of screens which report this amplicon as a hit
Chromosomal location information
Number of chromosome locations The number of sequences the primer pair for the amplicon is predicted to amplify
Chromosome locations Details regarding the genomic positions of the sequences the primer pair for the
amplicon is predicted to amplify
Chromosome The chromosome(s) which contains the sequence targeted by the amplicon
Chromosome start The genomic position of the first nucleotide of the amplicon
Chromosome stop The genomic position of the last nucleotide of the amplicon
Gene information
Gene symbol The symbol or name of the gene targeted by this amplicon
FlyBase gene ID The FlyBase FBgn identifier of the gene targeted by this amplicon
Deprecated FlyBase gene IDs Former FBgn identifiers of the gene targeted by this amplicon
Gene name The gene name of the gene targeted by this amplicon according to FlyBase
Gene synonyms Alternative names and symbols
NCBI nucleotide accessions Accession numbers of nucleotide sequences in GenBank of the gene targeted
by this amplicon
Entrez gene identifiers An Entrez Gene identifier of the gene targeted by this amplicon
UniGene identifiers A UniGene identifier of the gene targeted by this amplicon
RefSeq RNA accessions A RefSeq identifier of the gene targeted by this amplicon
HomoloGene group identifiers A HomoloGene group identifier of the gene targeted by this amplicon
Homo sapiens gene(s) via HomoloGene The human orthologue of the gene targeted by this amplicon according to
HomoloGene
Mus musculus gene(s) via HomoloGene As above for mouse
Caenorhabditis elegans gene(s) via HomoloGene As above for nematode
Saccharomyces cerevisiae gene(s) via HomoloGene As above for yeast
Homo sapiens putative orthologues according to inParanoid The human orthologue of the gene targeted by this amplicon according to
InParanoid
Mus musculus putative orthologues according to inParanoid As above for mouse
Caenorhabditis elegans putative orthologues according to inParanoid As above for nematode
Saccharomyces cerevisiae putative orthologues according to inParanoid As above for yeast
Miscellaneous organism putative orthologues according to inParanoid As above for miscellaneous organisms
Homophila—possible human disease homologs A link to Homophila which provides a fly to human disease gene cross-reference
Gene Ontology GO identifiers for the gene targeted by this amplicon
Protein domains Protein domains contained in the gene targeted by this amplicon
Amplicon 21 bp fragment information
Number of potential off-targets based on 21 bp fragments Self-explanatory
Maximum continuous sequence overlap of potential off-target(s) Maximum sequence length of a match to an off-target
Quality control information
RNA concentration RNA concentration provided for quality control purposes
Gel evaluation Gel-based quality control assay result
PCR evaluation PCR-based quality control assay result
PCR T7 evaluation PCR-based quality control assay result
Gel eval comment Additional comments about the gel-based quality control assay result
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D493
by submitting one or more gene symbols, synonyms or FBgn
identifiers.
The Screen Analysis Tutorial is a series of web pages that
provides screen analysis assistance to DRSC screeners as well
5 as to public users interested in mining the data available in our
database. This guide offers the user multiple resources and
some graphical approaches to help integrate and explore rela-
tional associations between DRSC hits and other gene func-
tion, ontology or expression data sources.
10 FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS
The DRSC database/interface is constantly evolving and new
experimental data accrue at a pace of 20–30 genome-wide
screens a year. The DRSC library of amplicons (and dsRNAs)
is also evolving as new Drosophila genome annotations come
15 on line, and new insights about the specificity of our dsRNAs
come to our attention (e.g. the need to replace amplicons
associated with off-target effects). We are committed to the
idea that our database be an important resource for public data
mining and will make available all screen data as soon as it is
20 permitted by the general agreement signed between the screen-
ers and the DRSC. We will work to provide additional bioin-
formatic tools and search capabilities to enhance our current
database, and we welcome any suggestion or collaboration to
improve the integration of our database with others. Finally,
25 we encourage comments to make our database more useful to
scientists and hope that similar databases will be created to
collect information from RNAi screens in mammalian cells.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors of this paper would like to thank Carolyn Shamu
30 and Tim Mitchison of The Institute of Chemistry and Cell
Biology (ICCB) at Harvard Medical School and Erik
Brauner of the Broad Institute for all their help and guidance
in setting up the early phase of the DRSC database. We would
also like to thank Sara Cherry, Ramanuj Dasgupta, Kent
35 Nybakken, Adam Friedman, Jennifer Philips and the rest of
the Perrimon lab for their helpful suggestions on the web inter-
face and feedback on the features of the database. This work
was supported by grant R01 GM067761 from the National
Institute of the General Medical Sciences. N.P. is a Howard
40 Hughes Medical Institute investigator. Funding to pay the
Open Access publication charges for this article was pro-
vided by the NIGMS grant listed above.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
45REFERENCES
1. Armknecht,S., Boutros,M., Kiger,A., Nybakken,K., Mathey-Prevot,B.
and Perrimon,N. (2005) High-throughput RNA interference screens in
Drosophila tissue culture cells. Methods Enzymol., 392, 55–73.
2. Clemens,J.C., Worby,C.A., Simonson-Leff,N., Muda,M., Maehama,T.,
50Hemmings,B.A. and Dixon,J.E. (2000) Use of double-stranded RNA
interference in Drosophila cell lines to dissect signal transduction
pathways. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 97, 6499–6503.
3. Meister,G. and Tuschl,T. (2004) Mechanisms of gene silencing by
double-stranded RNA. Nature, 431, 343–349.
554. Hild,M., Beckmann,B., Haas,S.A., Koch,B., Solovyev,V., Busold,C.,
Fellenberg,K., Boutros,M., Vingron,M., Sauer,F. et al. (2003) An
integrated gene annotation and transcriptional profiling approach towards
the full gene content of the Drosophila genome. Genome Biol.,
5, R3.
605. Adams,M.D., Celniker,S.E., Holt,R.A., Evans,C.A., Gocayne,J.D.,
Amanatides,P.G., Scherer,S.E., Li,P.W., Hoskins,R.A., Galle,R.F. et al.
(2000) The genome sequence ofDrosophila melanogaster. Science, 287,
2185–2195.
6. Agaisse,H., Burrack,L.S., Philips,J., Rubin,E.J., Perrimon,N. and
65Higgins,D.E. (2005) Genome-wide RNAi screen for host factors required
for intracellular bacterial infection. Science, 14, 14.
7. Baeg,G.H., Zhou,R. and Perrimon,N. (2005) Genome-wide RNAi
analysis of JAK/STAT signaling components inDrosophila.Genes Dev.,
29, 29.
708. Boutros,M., Kiger,A.A., Armknecht,S., Kerr,K., Hild,M., Koch,B.,
Haas,S.A., Consortium,H.F., Paro,R. and Perrimon,N. (2004) Genome-
wide RNAi analysis of growth and viability inDrosophila cells. Science,
303, 832–835.
9. Cherry,S., Doukas,T., Armknecht,S., Whelan,S., Wang,H., Sarnow,P.
75and Perrimon,N. (2005) Genome-wide RNAi screen reveals a specific
sensitivity of IRES-containingRNAviruses to host translation inhibition.
Genes Dev., 19, 445–452.
10. DasGupta,R., Kaykas,A., Moon,R.T. and Perrimon,N. (2005) Functional
genomic analysis of the Wnt-wingless signaling pathway. Science, 308,
80826–833.
11. Eggert,U.S., Kiger,A.A., Richter,C., Perlman,Z.E., Perrimon,N.,
Mitchison,T.J. and Field,C.M. (2004) Parallel chemical genetic and
genome-wide RNAi screens identify cytokinesis inhibitors and targets.
PLoS Biol., 2, e379.
8512. Kiger,A., Baum,B., Jones,S., Jones,M., Coulson,A., Echeverri,C. and
Perrimon,N. (2003) A functional genomic analysis of cell morphology
using RNA interference. J. Biol., 2, 27.
13. Philips,J.A., Rubin,E.J. and Perrimon,N. (2005)DrosophilaRNAi screen
reveals CD36 family member required for mycobacterial infection.
90Science, 14, 14.
14. Qiu,S., Adema,C.M. and Lane,T. (2005) A computational study of off-
target effects of RNA interference. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, 1834–1847.
15. Naito,Y., Yamada,T., Matsumiya,T., Ui-Tei,K., Saigo,K. and
Morishita,S. (2005) dsCheck: highly sensitive off-target search software
95for double-stranded RNA-mediated RNA interference. Nucleic Acids
Res., 33, W589–W591.
16. Gunsalus,K.C., Yueh,W.C., MacMenamin,P. and Piano,F. (2004)
RNAiDB and PhenoBlast: web tools for genome-wide phenotypic
mapping projects. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D406–D410.
10017. Arziman,Z.,Horn,T. andBoutros,M. (2005)E-RNAi: awebapplication to
design optimized RNAi constructs. Nucleic Acids Res., 33,
W582–W588.
D494 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
