ASGS: an alternative splicing graph web service
Durgaprasad Bollina1, Bernett T. K. Lee2, Tin Wee Tan2 and Shoba Ranganathan1,2,*
1Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology Research Institute, Macquarie University,
Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia and 2Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Singapore, 119260
Received February 14, 2006; Revised March 1, 2006; Accepted March 31, 2006
ABSTRACT
Alternative transcript diversity manifests itself a
prime cause of complexity in higher eukaryotes. The
Alternative Splicing Graph Server (ASGS) is a web
service facilitating the systematic study of alternati-
vely spliced genes of higher eukaryotes by gene-
rating splicing graphs for the compact visual
representation of transcript diversity from a single
gene. Taking a set of transcripts in General Feature
Format as input, ASGS identifies distinct reference
and variable exons, generates a transcript splicing
graph, an exon summary, splicing events classifica-
tion and a single line graph to facilitate experimental
analysis. This freely available web service can be
accessed at http://asgs.biolinfo.org.
INTRODUCTION
The discovery of the intron simultaneously in 1977 (1) by the
groups of Sharp and Roberts, has been summarized by
Gilbert (2) in 1978 as ‘genes in pieces’ for eukaryotes. The
combinatorial possibilities of transcript generation from a
limited number of genes is now attributed to alternative spli-
cing (AS) of exons as a means to explore the protein land-
scape. Until recently, AS was considered a sporadic occur-
rence in an otherwise orderly world of one gene leading to
one protein product. However, it is now established that AS is
ubiquitous and a major contributor to the complexity of
higher organisms, with almost 80% of human genes (20 000–
25 000) estimated to be alternatively spliced, with each gene
generating multiple mRNA products (3). Stetefeld and Ruegg
(4) estimate that almost 50% of eukaryotic genes are altern-
atively spliced. AS changes the structure of transcripts, which
has the potential to dramatically increase the functional diver-
sity of encoded gene products and allow mRNA isoforms to
be differentially regulated in disparate biological processes
(5). Furthermore, its disruption is associated with many dis-
eases, such as cardiovascular, cancer and neurodegenerative
disorders. Given the widespread appearance and functional
diversity, understanding the mechanism and regulation of
AS is a major goal of modern biological and biomedical
research.
As more eukaryotic genomes are sequenced and annotated,
several databases dedicated to AS are now available (7–11),
leading to genome-wide computational analysis, reviewed by
Lee and Wang (12). Although AS databases give an insight
into the amount of AS, they do not provide any visual repres-
entation and classification of the types of AS events occurring
(12). As the number of transcripts per gene increases, it has
become increasingly difficult to identify branch points and
systematically analyse and classify AS events. Directed
acyclic graphs were used by Modrek and Lee (13) for
EST analysis, with the genomic DNA sequence as reference.
Pevzner and co-workers (14) first used de Bruijn graphs to
depict the transcripts alone, without referring to the genomic
DNA sequence, where the maximum common sub-sequences
between transcripts were condensed into nodes and the
variable regions connected by edges. Such an approach has
been used to generate the Alternative Splicing Gallery
(ASG) resource (7).
Our approach has been to use directed acyclic splicing
graphs, without a genomic DNA sequence as reference and
defining exons as nodes, interconnected by introns as edges,
with paths through the splicing graph representing the tran-
scripts; such a schema was applied to the Drosophila
melanogaster genome (8), to the DEDB data resource.
Here, the first transcript served as a reference sequence to
generate splicing graphs, with automatic rule-based classi-
fication of splicing events. The use of exons and introns as
nodes and edges, respectively, has the intuitive advantage
of biological interpretation.
The ease of representing a set of transcripts as a compact
graphic is provided by the Alternative Splicing Graph server
(ASGS), a web service for generating the splicing graph, with
automatic ruled-based classification of AS events, to facilitate
transcriptome analysis. We have also methodologically
enhanced our earlier approach (8), to identify the most con-
served exons as distinct, with the rest classified as variable
exons, independent of the first transcript provided. Splicing
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +61 2 9850 6262; Fax: +61 2 9850 8313; Email: shoba@els.mq.edu.au
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
W444–W447 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gkl268
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 25, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
junctions are often validated by RT–PCR, to verify gene
models predicted by gene finding programs, exemplified by
Eyras and co-workers (15) for the chicken genome. For this
purpose, the collapsed splicing graph form, the ‘single line
graph,’ is also provided by our server, which gives a compre-
hensive view of all splicing junctions in a single gene.
OVERVIEW OF WEB SERVICES
The ASGS web service provides dynamic image generation
of splicing graphs by parsing and identifying distinct refer-
ence exons and their variants. The user can submit the tran-
script information for a particular gene in the General
Feature Format (GFF) (16). Alternatively, a GFF file can be
uploaded to the server. Links to utilities that convert other file
formats to GFF are provided from the ‘create’ web page. The
software is designed based on the MVC (Model-View-
Controller) architecture, described elsewhere in detail (17)
with design patterns, completely written in java, and
deployed using the Java system application server, to harness
the computing power on the client side.
ASGS aims to provide the global AS research community
with free web services to visualize alternative transcript
diversity. ASGS fulfils these collective aims using a three-
step process showing individual transcript representation,
splicing graph and single line splice pattern to facilitate
RT–PCR experimental analysis. This visual representation
is followed by a detailed listing of distinct and variable
exons and the transcripts they occur in as well as an AS
event classification. The splicing graphs are created and dis-
played as high-resolution downloadable images, for local
analysis, publication and presentation. A detailed description
of transcript input required for visualization and the output
has been provided on the online help page. Useful links to
AS resources and a list of references is also available at the
ASGS website.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Data input
As primary data source, ASGS uses input lines based on the
GFF standard file format. Each GFF input line has nine
required fields that must be tab-separated. To create splicing
graphs, the user needs to first create a GFF file containing
sequence information organized as a series of exon positional
information (13). Different biological sequence tools are
freely available to convert other formats to GFF. Data from
the user in GFF is converted into the transcript input model
and passes to the server side program for dynamic image gen-
eration. Our web application extracts gene structure informa-
tion such as the transcript location and the start and end
positions of each exon that make up the transcript, which
are then parsed out and checked for consistency.
In order that transcript information is useful to the gene
prediction and genome annotation community, we have
designed a single line graph, of the type that is seen in
molecular biology text books, by merging all the variant
exons of distinct reference exons leading to a one-line sum-
mary transcript diversity diagram. This one-line graph is
what an experimentalist will be interested in, for the AS
events of a specific gene, as it suggests sequences for primer
design across splice junctions. Further, AS events such as
intron-retention are clearly seen in the single line graph.
ASGS also transforms any anti-sense transcripts to the
sense direction before calling the transcript model and pro-
vides a detailed list of classification events to help experi-
mental verification of AS, to maintain consistency of
definition, description and visualization.
Construction of the splicing graphs
Gene structure information including the location of the tran-
script and the start and end positions of each exon/intron that
make up the transcript model are checked for consistency and
then loaded into a list. All transcripts are converted to the
leading strand for consistency. The exon list is then retrieved
and clustered on the basis of the exons occupying overlapping
genomic positions. When exons overlap, the server checks for
well-determined borders and also which exons occur in the
majority of transcripts and retains these as distinct exons. If
an exon is completely contained in another larger exon,
these are not merged but retained as individual exons and
then entered into a list maintaining the mapping of variable
exons to distinct exons. Splicing graphs are then drawn
using these clusters of transcripts from the node list. The
first line of the resultant splicing graph is composed entirely
of distinct reference exons, followed by subsequent lines
showing the locations of variable exons. The exons are con-
nected by edges, representing introns in the set of transcripts
provided. Since the splicing graph could be interpreted as
paths corresponding to hypothetical transcripts, the observed
or input transcript set is also shown, indicating true paths
through the graph.
Classification of alternative splicing
ASGS follows the classification schema described in DEDB
(8). Rules are derived to detect specific AS events from the
distinct and variable exon sets (details and examples of the
rules are available on the website). Different from ASG (7),
we have an enlarged set of AS classification events. Apart
from the classical AS events like cassette exons, intron-
retention, alternative donor sites and alternative acceptor
sites, we have also elected to classify other gene structure
events like alternative transcriptional start/termination sites
as well as alternative initiation/termination exons (8). The
reason for the existence of the alternative initiation/
termination exon categories is due to the fact that the 50
and 30 ends of the transcripts are usually difficult to determine
experimentally and are thus less accurate. Therefore, any dif-
ferences in the start and end positions of the transcripts could
be simply due to the sequencing difficulties. The inclusion of
the alternative initiation/termination exons category is an
attempt to circumvent this problem as alternative initiation/
termination exons (which are classified based on the end posi-
tion of initiation exons and the start position of termination
exons) are unaffected by the sequencing difficulties and
thus represent true alternative exons. Alternative transcrip-
tional start/termination sites, however, are dependent on
sequencing results and provide a means of classifying gene
segments with differences in the start positions of initiation
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue W445
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 25, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
(a) ASG
(e) DEDB-like
(c) ASGS-1 
(b) ASD
(d) ASGS-2
Figure 1. Transcript diversity information for the human hyaluronidase gene, HYAL1 (hyaluronoglucosaminidase 1, ENSG00000114378) (a) from the ASG (7), (b)
from the ASD (10) and from ASGS (c) as a splicing graph and (d) a single line splice diagram and (e) the splicing graph diagram using the DEDB formalism (8).
W446 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 25, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
exons and the end positions of termination exons, with a view
to update entries in this category, when the 50 and 30 ends of
these transcripts are determined accurately. These rules are
applied to each splicing graph generated by the server.
SAMPLE OUTPUT
An example of the splicing graph and single line diagram for
a human gene [HYAL1 or hyaluronoglucosaminidase 1,
ENSG00000114378 (10)] with seven transcripts is shown in
Figure 1. We have provided the transcript summary images
from ASG (7) and Alternate Splice Database (ASD) (10)
for comparison purposes, to highlight the utility of the spli-
cing graph approach over the conventional representation of
each transcript as separate lines, used in the ASD database.
The ASG graphic (Figure 1a) is comprehensive in its
presentation of transcripts and AS events are colour-coded.
The ASD representation of the same gene (Figure 1b) is a
set of individual transcripts. The ASGS transcript splicing
graph (Figure 1c) provides a compact representation of all
transcripts, with exons organized into distinct reference and
variable nodes. The distinct exons form the first line of the
splicing graph, with other exons arranged in subsequent
lines. The nodes are connected by edges representing the
introns in the transcripts shown in Figure 1b. The condensed
single line splicing graph (Figure 1d) permits the identifica-
tion of all splicing junctions. For comparison with our earlier
approach, adopted in DEDB (8), where the first transcript was
taken as the reference sequence, we note that our present
approach is able to identify four reference exons that occur
in five, three, six and four of the seven transcripts, respect-
ively. This would be value in comparing AS events occurring
in the same gene in different species or under different envir-
onmental and disease conditions.
SPLICING GRAPHS FOR HUMAN GENES
AS has emerged as a major causative agent for several human
diseases (5). To facilitate the creation of splicing graphs for
human genes of interest, we have added an interactive spli-
cing graph generation utility, iASGS, which can read tran-
script data directly from the curated ASD (10), without
generating an input GFF file. ASD provides a user-friendly
search facility, for locating specific alternatively spliced
human genes. The EnsEMBL identifier for each selected
human gene is then provided to iASGS for dynamic retrieval
of transcript information from ASD, followed by processing
by ASGS. As the transcript information for human genes is
not stored permanently on the ASGS server, the splicing
graph images and analyses will be generated based on the pri-
mary data updated and provided by ASD. This eliminates the
need to maintain the data locally and update it periodically to
mirror the ASD content. The ASGS output provides compact
and single line splicing graph images and tables with exon
and AS event information. This utility can also be used for
alternatively spliced mouse genes, provided by ASD.
FUTURE WORK
Following this approach, ASGS will focus on developing
XML standards for comparing AS events in different
genomes by representing them as splicing graphs.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
D.P. is grateful to the Macquarie University for the award of a
research scholarship (iMURS) and a travel grant (MUPGR),
facilitating useful discussions with Dr T. A. Thanaraj and the
EBI ASD team. Funding to pay the Open Access publication
charges for this article was provided by Macquarie University.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Sharp,P.A. (1994) Split genes and RNA splicing. Cell, 77, 805–815.
2. Gilbert,W. (1978) Why genes in pieces? Nature, 271, 501.
3. International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium (2004) Finishing
the euchromatic sequence of the human genome. Nature, 431,
931–945.
4. Stetefeld,J. and Ruegg,M.A. (2005) Structural and functional diversity
generated by alternative mRNA splicing. Trends Biochem. Sci., 30,
515–521.
5. Hagiwara,M. (2005) Alternative splicing: a new drug target of the
post-genome era. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1754, 324–331.
6. Lee,C., Atanelov,L., Modrek,B. and Xing,Y. (2003) ASAP: the
Alternative Splicing Annotation Project. Nucleic Acids Res., 31,
101–105.
7. Leipzig,J., Pevzner,P. and Heber,S. (2004) The Alternative Splicing
Gallery (ASG): bridging the gap between genome and transcriptome.
Nucleic Acids Res., 32, 3977–3983.
8. Lee,B.T., Tan,T.W. and Ranganathan,S. (2004) DEDB: a database of
Drosophila melanogaster exons in splicing graph form. BMC
Bioinformatics, 5, 189.
9. Kim,P., Kim,N., Lee,Y., Kim,B., Shin,Y. and Lee,S. (2005) ECgene:
genome annotation for alternative splicing. Nucleic Acids Res., 33,
D75–D79.
10. Stamm,S., Riethoven,J.J., Le Texier,V., Gopalakrishnan,C.,
Kumanduri,V., Tang,Y., Barbosa-Morais,N.L. and Thanaraj,T.A.
(2006) ASD: a bioinformatics resource on alternative splicing. Nucleic
Acids Res., 34, D46–D55.
11. Holste,D., Huo,G., Tung,V. and Burge,C.B. (2006) HOLLYWOOD: a
comparative relational database of alternative splicing. Nucleic Acids
Res., 34, D56–D62.
12. Lee,C. and Wang,Q. (2005) Bioinformatics analysis of alternative
splicing. Brief. Bioinform., 6, 23–33.
13. Modrek,B. and Lee,C. (2002) A genomic view of alternative splicing.
Nature Genet., 30, 13–19.
14. Heber,S., Alekseyev,M., Sze,S.H., Tang,H. and Pevzner,P.A. (2002)
Splicing graphs and EST assembly problem. Bioinformatics, 18,
S181–S188.
15. Eyras,E., Reymond,A., Castelo,R., Bye,J.M., Camara,F., Flicek,P.,
Huckle,E.J., Parra,G., Shteynberg,D.D., Wyss,C. et al. (2005) Gene
finding in the chicken genome. BMC Bioinformatics, 6, 131.
16. GFF: an Exchange Format for Feature Description. http://www.sanger.
ac.uk/Software/formats/GFF/, last accessed on 13/02/2006.
17. Bollina,D., Lee,B.T.K. and Ranganathan,S. (2005) MVC Architecture
in Bioinformatics web applications and its Java implementation. In
Kotsis,G., Tanier, D., Bressan,S., Ibrahim,I.K. and S. Mokhtar,S. (eds),
The seventh International Conference on Information Integration and
Web-based Applications and Services (iiWAS2005), September 19–21,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, Austrian Computer Society, vol. 2,
pp. 759–764.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue W447
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 25, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
