Campus spies? Using mystery students
to evaluate university performance
Alex Douglas* and Jacqueline Douglas
Liverpool John Moores University, UK
Background
This paper explores the appropriateness of using mystery customer programmes in higher education
institutions (HEIs) in the UK.
Purpose
The main aim of the paper is to examine potential advantages and disadvantages of mystery
customer programmes within HEIs, and to identify any issues that would need to be successfully
resolved were they to be integrated into current quality assurance methods.
Sources of evidence
The main sources of evidence employed in this paper include a review of the extant literature and a
small empirical survey of staff from a university business school.
Main argument
There are a number of advantages and disadvantages to using mystery customers in HE; however,
mystery students could indeed be used to monitor large sections of university processes and
services. For this to happen, a large number of operational issues would need to be resolved,
including the development of standards of service for staff, recruitment of students, conﬁdentiality,
information utilization, the unions, costs and staff resistance.
Conclusions
The use of mystery students in HE today would appear to be a long way off; however, it may have a
place, alongside peer observation and feedback questionnaires, to appraise service quality at the
point of delivery. For this to happen, university management would need to develop a set of metrics
to evaluate all aspects of service performance.
Keywords: Mystery students; Higher education; Service quality; Performance appraisal;
Customer satisfaction
Introduction
Determining the quality of the service encounter has provided management with a
challenge they have yet to consistently overcome. The main difﬁculties with such a
task are associated with, inter alia, the heterogeneous nature of services, their perishab-
ility, their blend of tangible and intangible elements and the fact that consumption
takes place simultaneously with production (Fitzsimmons & Fitzsimmons, 2004).
*Corresponding author. School of Management, Faculty of Business and Law, Liverpool John
Moores University, 98 Mount Pleasant, Liverpool L3 5UZ, UK. Email: A.Douglas@ljmu.ac.uk
Educational Research, Vol. 48, No. 1, March 2006, pp. 111 – 119
ISSN 0013-1881 (print)/ISSN 1469-5847 (online)/06/010111-09
ª 2006 NFER
DOI: 10.1080/00131880500498560
Customer satisfaction surveys, focus groups, complaints data, mystery customer
programmes and peer appraisal are some of the traditional methods utilized by
management to try to gauge the quality of their service delivery processes and people.
Management clearly recognize that the service delivery process is important in relation
to customer satisfaction (Wilson, 2000).
Mystery customers, the focus of this paper, are used extensively within service
organizations within the UK to assess customer service, monitor front-line
performance and to benchmark against competitors’ performance (Finn &
Kayende, 1999). They should not be thought of in terms of management ‘spies’.
Indeed, within the limited literature available on this subject, the general consensus
is that operating mystery customer programmes provides a positive method of
service performance measurement that is welcomed by ‘good’ employees (see e.g.
Zeldis, 1988; Leech, 1995; Erstad, 1998; Wilson, 1998; Finn & Kayende, 1999;
Bromage, 2000). As yet, however, their use has not been considered within the HE
teaching environment.
It is the main aim of this paper to explore the possible role and use of mystery
students within both HE teaching and service environments and to ﬁll a substantial
gap within the academic literature on both the concept and understanding of mystery
customers. The concept will be described, and its perceived advantages and
disadvantages identiﬁed. The practical implications of adopting the concept within
the HE environment are then examined.
Mystery customers
The Market Research Society (MRS, 2003) deﬁnes mystery customers as:
‘individuals trained to experience and measure any customer service process, by
acting as potential customers and in some way reporting back on their experience in a
detailed and objective way’. It is a form of participant observation, albeit that the
observation is carried out secretly (Calvert, 2005).
Harvey (1998) recognizes two differing modus operandi. The ﬁrst uses a professional
who poses as a customer and evaluates various aspects of the service encounter using
a checklist as an aide-me´moire. Based on the information noted in the checklist, a
detailed report is then prepared. The second utilizes actual customers who are trained
to make detailed notes based on their shopping encounters, which are then handed
over to the service management at regular intervals.
The UK government in their recent Code of practice on consultation (GB. Cabinet
Ofﬁce, 2004) stated that mystery customer programmes can be used to gather
speciﬁc and detailed feedback on areas of service and commends it as a simple
process, but with limitations. The advantages and disadvantages are examined in the
next section.
Advantages and disadvantages of using mystery customers
The scant literature on the use of the mystery customer concept identiﬁes a number
of advantages in its use:
112 A. Douglas and J. Douglas
. It enables the evaluation of processes not outcomes, and importantly, this
evaluation occurs at the time of the service delivery—i.e. ‘measuring the service as
it unfolds’ (Wilson, 1998). This avoids one of the main pitfalls of post-service
delivery survey methods, that of ‘misremembering’ by the customer. It also
enables a ‘customer’ to evaluate the service delivery process with a view to
improving a process that can be seen to actively work against the provision of high-
quality services;
. It recognizes the ‘genuine desire among employees to provide good customer
service’ (Erstad, 1998);
. It collects facts, not perceptions. This allows an objective view to be registered,
again negating another weakness of customer surveys—i.e. that customers only
remember their overall impression of a service and not the details (Wilson, 1998);
. It is an integral training tool, in that it can be used to identify training needs
(Bromage, 2000);
. It can be a positive, motivational tool for employees (Zeldis, 1988; Erstad, 1998);
. It can bring immediate service improvements with continuous improvement
possibilities (GB. Cabinet Ofﬁce, 2004).
Some of the disadvantages include:
. It can be viewed as threatening to employees, in that staff may view the use of
mystery customers as management checking on their performance with a view to
instigating some form of disciplinary action, rather than as a trigger for staff
training and development (Erstad, 1998);
. It only reviews processes and not their outcomes (Wilson, 1998). This can be
problematic for many services that, as already stated, are a mixture of tangible and
intangible elements, for example, the restaurant’s service was excellent, but the
meal itself was substandard;
. For the employees the novelty of the process can quickly wear off and so any
advantages may be short-lived (Wilson, 1998);
. The memory demands placed on assessors could affect the accuracy of the surveys
(Morrison et al., 1997);
. As with all sampling techniques, it offers only a ‘snapshot’ of the service process,
which may or may not be representative (GB. Cabinet Ofﬁce, 2004).
Quality in higher education
There is a debate within the literature on exactly what the outcome of a university
education is and whether students are ‘customers’ or not (see e.g. Emery et al., 2001;
Watson & Crossley, 2001; Palacio et al., 2002; Constanti & Gibbs, 2004). However,
Crawford (1991) argued that within the UK, HE students should be considered to be
the ‘primary customers’ of a university. This position has been strengthened in recent
years, as they are now liable for the payment of ‘up-front’ tuition fees.
Regardless of whether students are viewed as customers or not, they are the
direct recipients of university services and their experiences and their improvement
Mystery customer programmes in HE 113
should be at the forefront of any monitoring of HE quality. There are two main
ways to monitor service quality at the point of delivery in HE, namely student
satisfaction surveys, and inspection (via peer observation), although a small
number of HE institutions have also introduced comments/complaints cards as a
further means of gaining feedback. Surveys, particularly those conducted
electronically, do not generally have a high response rate (Blackmore et al.,
2004). The resultant information is supposed to provide local and central
management with information on which to act (Harvey, 1995). Unfortunately,
there is anecdotal evidence to suggest that these surveys have been conducted in
order to satisfy assessment bodies, such as the Quality Assurance Agency (QAA)
and the Higher Education Funding Council for England and Wales (HEFCE),
rather than to bring about improvements in modules, courses or university services
in general. Furthermore, the validity and reliability of the data remains a
contentious issue with academics and faculty managers (see e.g. concerning
questionnaires, King et al., 1999; Ramsden, 2000; Rowley, 2003, and concerning
peer review, Landy & Farr, 1983; Murphy & Cleveland, 1995; Bingham &
Ottewill, 2001; Greguras et al., 2001).
The use of mystery students can address some of these criticisms and given the
ﬁndings of Finn and Kayende (1999) that using mystery customers’ data can provide
more reliable information than traditional customer surveys, and that it is best suited
to assessing objective characteristics, it would seem an appropriate tool to be both
adapted and adopted by HE institutions to measure their service offerings (academic
and support) against preset standards.
Mystery students within higher education
The idea of using mystery students within HE, per se, is not new. A number of
universities utilize their services to monitor the performance of support services, for
example, the University of Central Lancashire uses them to get feedback on their
catering services (University of Central Lancashire, 2004). However, the idea of using
mystery students within HE to monitor the performance of people and processes
across the whole range of a university’s service offering, particularly, teaching and
learning, is both new and controversial.
A mystery student is deﬁned as a trained person who monitors and assesses the
quality of the teaching and learning experience and the processes and procedures
used in the delivery of university services.
This paper proposes that mystery students could be used to monitor large sections
of university processes and services, including IT and technical services, library
services, and administrative services, including recruitment, admissions, enrolment
and day-to-day administrative operations, as well as determining facts regarding
teaching and learning. It accepts that typically mystery students could not judge the
quality of any lecture’s content, in the same way that a patient would not be able to
judge the quality of a doctor’s diagnosis unless medically qualiﬁed to do so. A typical
mystery student could be asked to evaluate a particular lecture given by a particular
tutor on a particular module at a particular time.
114 A. Douglas and J. Douglas
Provided a university had in place standards of service for teaching staff, a mystery
student evaluation sheet for such a lecture would be able to provide information on,
inter alia:
. lecturer punctuality;
. lecturer audibility;
. PowerPoint slide clarity from back of lecture theatre (where appropriate);
. adequacy of lecture theatre regarding seating, lighting, technology and cleanliness;
. duration of lecture;
. lecturer handout materials.
Likewise if a university had in place standards of service for its various support
services, a mystery student evaluation sheet for such services would be able to provide
information on inter alia:
. time taken to answer the telephone;
. problem resolution or otherwise;
. length of time waiting in line for service;
. attitude of staff;
. observance to any service script.
The above has demonstrated that data from mystery student evaluations can
obviously provide university management with important information on service
performance. However, this could only be achieved if a number of operational issues
(standards of service have already been demonstrated to be a necessary prerequisite
for a mystery student evaluation) can be addressed. It is these issues that are
addressed in the next section.
Operational issues
A number of issues surrounding the use of mystery students within HE would need to
be resolved if they were to be successfully implemented within the sector. Such issues
include: standards of service, recruitment, conﬁdentiality, use of mystery student
reports, unions, costs and staff resistance. Each of these issues will be addressed in turn.
Standards of service
Since mystery students would record objective performance against preset standards,
it is important that a service has in place such objective standards against which their
performance can be measured. Unfortunately, at the time of writing, this is not the
case for the great majority of services provided in UK universities. However, the UK
government together with the HE Academy is currently consulting all UK universities
about the setting of standards for teaching and learning. It is surely only a matter of
time before such standards are in place. It will be up to the management of each
university to develop standards of service for their support services in consultation
Mystery customer programmes in HE 115
with their staff. Only when appropriate standards have been set would the adoption of
mystery student programmes be possible.
Recruitment
Typically there are two options: recruit a professional who poses as a student
customer or select actual students and train them in evaluation techniques. The use
of a professional would not present any problems regarding the evaluation of support
services, but they would ﬁnd it difﬁcult to merge into the general student body in
evaluating a lecture or tutorial. Option two would negate this disadvantage. However,
internal recruitment might present difﬁculties with regard to conﬁdentiality and
anonymity. These issues are addressed below.
Conﬁdentiality
A mystery student would need to refrain from divulging their role to fellow cohort
members and staff. Their ‘term of ofﬁce’ as a mystery student would therefore need
to be limited, perhaps, to only one academic year so as not to detract from their
studies and also to avoid discovery.
Given the tight speciﬁcation for evaluation, a particular lecture on a particular day
at a given time, keeping the identity of staff a secret, would be impossible. However,
the information provided and any actions taken would remain conﬁdential between
the manager and that individual. This puts further emphasis on the setting of
appropriate standards, so that all staff are aware of the standards against which they
would be judged.
Information utilization
University management would need to decide how they would use the ﬁndings of a
mystery student report. To engage with the beneﬁts of such a scheme, alleviate staff
suspicions and promote the use of mystery students to staff, the programme would
need to be linked to staff development, training and a reward and recognition system
rather than to any disciplinary measures. It is important that results, good and not so
good, are fed back to the people at the front line, so that behaviours can be either
changed or recognized (Collins, 2004).
Unions
There are currently two main unions for academic staff in HE: the National
Association of Teachers in Further and Higher Education (NATFHE) and the
Associated Union of Teachers (AUT), as well as Unison for most support staff. Their
position on mystery students may well have an impact on their members’ acceptance,
or not, of such a scheme. However, the use of mystery customers in many service
organizations where there are strong union presences suggests that this problem is not
insurmountable.
116 A. Douglas and J. Douglas
Costs
A cost – beneﬁt analysis should be conducted prior to piloting the use of mystery
students in HE. There will be costs associated with recruitment, payment and
management of the mystery student scheme. The question for university manage-
ment is whether or not the beneﬁts would outweigh the costs.
Staff resistance
In a survey of 40 teaching staff (approximately 25% of the total) within a UK
university business school, as part of a wider research project on peer review, the idea
of introducing mystery students was the most emotive and thought-provoking
question for some interviewees. One interviewee expressed ‘shock and disgust’ that it
could even be considered, with another claiming that it would be an attack on
‘academic freedom’. Another staff member was horriﬁed and explained that when
peer observation of teaching was ﬁrst mooted, staff thought that it was a way for
management to measure performance and that it would lead to penalties in some way.
He felt that mystery students would be perceived by staff as threatening and would
remove academic freedom and control from the lecturer, something he thought had
been already eroded in many other ways. Other (mainly new) staff were either
apathetic regarding the concept of using mystery students or happy for them to be
used. Those who did not feel threatened by the concept of mystery students thought it
was a good idea, provided that the standards against which they would be judged were
clearly deﬁned. Berta (2004) argues that those against the idea of mystery customers
were the ones most likely to need it. However, staff participation in the standard
setting process could engender acceptance and reduce resistance (Erstad, 1998).
Conclusion
There are numerous academic texts on the collection of reliable and valid data (see
e.g. Bell, 1987; Creswell, 1993; Denzin & Lincoln, 1994). Almost all of these extol
the virtues of ‘triangulation’—the use of multiple (at least three) data collection
methods in order to corroborate ﬁndings. The same criteria should be applied to
student feedback data. In this case, the mystery student process would be supported
by more traditional student feedback methods such as module and institutional
questionnaires and peer observation. In any case, the outcomes should not be
about disciplinary action on the grounds of incompetence, but rather be linked to
staff development and individual improvement. This will only be the case in
those universities where the blame culture has been removed or superseded by a
culture of constructive criticism. Where processes or systems are identiﬁed as
constituting the problem, it is usually only management who have the authority to
change them (Deming, 1982).
The use of mystery students is a controversial subject with the staff interviewed
here split almost evenly as regards those in favour and those (vehemently) against,
and indeed their introduction seems a long way off. Apart from overcoming staff fears
Mystery customer programmes in HE 117
about how the results of such a survey will be used, there are a number of issues with
regard to the recruitment and management of such students. Longer-serving staff will
recall that, when ﬁrst mooted a number of years ago, peer review was met with the
same uncertainty and fear that the idea of mystery students is today. However, it is
now accepted as a valid method of appraising teaching performance that is not
misused by local and central management. Mystery student reports can both conﬁrm
ﬁndings from other sources of data collection and ﬁll the gaps in management
information. For example, Ramsden (2000) states there is little evidence to provide a
link between peer review and improved teaching due to a reluctance on the part of
peers to give negative feedback to colleagues. There will be no such reluctance on the
part of mystery students.
This proposal is deliberately provocative and controversial; however, given the
status of ‘the student as customer’, the use of mystery students to appraise service
quality at the point of delivery should not be lightly dismissed. They can be used to
appraise academic, administrative and general support staff, as well as the systems
and processes used to support service delivery. If linked to the identiﬁcation of areas
for staff development and continuous improvement, the concept can over time be
viewed as non-threatening. The ultimate scenario is that HE institutions should
appraise teaching in particular, using a triangulation of methods—i.e. peer appraisal,
feedback questionnaires and mystery student reports. Senior managers can also
develop a set of measures that evaluates university service performances with regard
to attaining service standards, student satisfaction via surveys and complaints, student
retention and student success rates.
References
Bell, J. (1987) Doing your research project (Milton Keynes, Open University Press).
Berta, D. (2004) Mystery shopper aims for smaller ops, National Restaurant News, July, 24.
Bingham, R. & Ottewill, R. (2001) Whatever happened to peer review? Revitalising the contribution
of tutors to course evaluation, Quality Assurance in Education, 9, 22 – 39.
Blackmore, J. A., Douglas, A. & Barnes, B. (2004) Measuring student satisfaction at a UK
university, in: Proceedings from the 7th International Quality Management Organisation and
Development Conference, Monterrey, Mexico (Naucalpan, Mexico, Innovacion Editorial Lagares
de Mexico), 97 – 112.
Bromage, N. (2000) Mystery shopping—it’s research, but not as we know it, Managing Accounting,
78, 30.
Calvert, P. (2005) It’s a mystery: mystery shopping in New Zealand’s public libraries, Library
Review, 54, 24 – 35.
Collins, A. B. (2004) Teacher performance evaluation: a stressful experience from a private
secondary school, Educational Research, 46, 43 – 54.
Constanti, P. & Gibbs, P. (2004) Higher education teachers and emotional labour, International
Journal of Educational Management, 18, 243 – 249.
Crawford, F. (1991) Total quality management: Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals
Occasional Paper, London, December 1991, cited in: F. M. Hill (1995), Managing service
quality in higher education: the role of the student as primary consumer, Quality Assurance in
Education, 3, 10 – 21.
Creswell, J. W. (1994) Research design: qualitative and quantitative approaches (London, Sage).
Deming, W. E. (1982) Out of the crisis (Cambridge, MA, MIT Press).
118 A. Douglas and J. Douglas
Denzin, N. K. & Lincoln, Y. S. (Eds) (1994) Handbook of qualitative research (London, Sage).
Emery, C., Kramer, T. & Tian, R. (2001) Customers vs products: adopting an effective approach to
business students, Quality Assurance in Education, 9, 110 – 115.
Erstad, M. (1998) Mystery shopping programmes and human resource management, International
Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, 10, 34 – 38.
Finn, A. & Kayende, U. (1999) Unmasking a phantom: a psychometric assessment of mystery
shopping, Journal of Retailing, 75, 195 – 217.
Fitzsimmons, J. A. & Fitzsimmons, M. J. (2004) Service management: operations, strategy and
information technology (New York, McGraw-Hill).
Great Britain. Cabinet Ofﬁce. Regulatory Impact Unit (2004) Code of practice on consultation
(London, HMSO).
Greguras, G. J., Robie, C. & Born, M. P. (2001) Applying the social relations model to self and peer
evaluations, Journal of Management Development, 20, 508 – 525.
Harvey, J. (1998) Service quality: a tutorial, Journal of Operations Management, 16, 583 – 597.
Harvey, L. (1995) Student satisfaction, New Review of Academic Librarianship, 1, 161 – 173.
King, M., Morison, I., Reed, G. & Stachow, G. (1999) Student feedback systems in the business
school: a departmental model, Quality Assurance in Education, 7, 90 – 100.
Landy, F. J. & Farr, J. (1983) The measurement of work performance: methods, theory and applications
(New York, Academic Press).
Leech, P. (1995) The importance of positive customer service to Ansells,Managing Service Quality,
5, 31 – 34.
Market Research Society (2003) MRS code and guidelines on mystery customer research. Available
online at: http://www.mrs.org.uk (accessed 6 September 2004).
Morrison, L. J., Colman, A. M. & Preston, C. C. (1997) Mystery customer research: cognitive
processes affecting accuracy, Journal of the Market Research Society, 39, 349 – 361.
Murphy, K. R. & Cleveland, J. N. (1995) Understanding performance appraisal: social, organizational,
and goal-based perspectives (Thousand Oaks, CA, Sage).
Palacio, A. B., Meneses, G. D. & Perez, P. J. (2002) The conﬁguration of the university image and
its relationship with the satisfaction of students, Journal of Educational Administration, 40,
486 – 505.
Ramsden, P. (2000) Learning to teach in higher education (London, Routledge).
Rowley, J. (2003) Designing student feedback questionnaires, Quality Assurance in Education, 11,
142 – 149.
University of Central Lancashire (2004) Mystery shopper scheme. Available online at: http://
www.uclan.ac.uk/other/hs/catering/mystery.htm (accessed 7 March 2004).
Watson, G. & Crossley, M. (2001) Beyond the rational: the strategic management process, cultural
change and post-incorporation further education, Educational Management and Administration,
29, 123.
Wilson, A. (2000) The use of performance information in the management of service delivery,
Marketing Intelligence and Planning, 18, 127 – 134.
Wilson, A. M. (1998) The role of mystery shopping in the measurement of service performance,
Managing Service Quality, 8, 414 – 420.
Zeldis, N. (1988) The phantom shoppers strike again and again,Management Review, June, 10 – 11.
Mystery customer programmes in HE 119

