Matthew T. Drake, Sudha K. Shenoy and Robert J. Lefkowitz
Coupled Receptors−Trafficking of G Protein
Print ISSN: 0009-7330. Online ISSN: 1524-4571 
Copyright © 2006 American Heart Association, Inc. All rights reserved.
is published by the American Heart Association, 7272 Greenville Avenue, Dallas, TX 75231Circulation Research 
doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000242563.47507.ce
2006;99:570-582Circ Res. 
 http://circres.ahajournals.org/content/99/6/570
World Wide Web at: 
The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is located on the
  
 http://circres.ahajournals.org//subscriptions/
is online at: Circulation Research  Information about subscribing to Subscriptions:
  
 http://www.lww.com/reprints
 Information about reprints can be found online at: Reprints:
  
document. Permissions and Rights Question and Answer about this process is available in the
located, click Request Permissions in the middle column of the Web page under Services. Further information
Editorial Office. Once the online version of the published article for which permission is being requested is 
 can be obtained via RightsLink, a service of the Copyright Clearance Center, not theCirculation Researchin
 Requests for permissions to reproduce figures, tables, or portions of articles originally publishedPermissions:
 by guest on February 21, 2013http://circres.ahajournals.org/Downloaded from 
This Review is part of a thematic series on Microdomains in Cardiovascular Signaling, which includes the
following articles:
Caveolae and Caveolins in the Cardiovascular System
Focal Adhesion: Paradigm for a Signaling Nexus
Vesicular Trafficking of Tyrosine Kinase Receptors and Associated Proteins in the Regulation of Signaling and
Vascular Function
Compartmentation of Cyclic Nucleotide Signaling in the Heart: The Role of A-Kinase Anchoring Proteins
Trafficking of G Protein–Coupled Receptors
Compartmentation of Cyclic Nucleotide Signaling in the Heart: The Role of Cyclic Nucleotide Phosphodiesterases
Kathy K. Griendling and David A. Kass, Editors
Trafficking of G Protein–Coupled Receptors
Matthew T. Drake, Sudha K. Shenoy, Robert J. Lefkowitz
Abstract—G protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs) play an integral role in the signal transduction of an enormous array of
biological phenomena, thereby serving to modulate at a molecular level almost all components of human biology. This
role is nowhere more evident than in cardiovascular biology, where GPCRs regulate such core measures of
cardiovascular function as heart rate, contractility, and vascular tone. GPCR/ligand interaction initiates signal
transduction cascades, and requires the presence of the receptor at the plasma membrane. Plasma membrane localization
is in turn a function of the delivery of a receptor to and removal from the cell surface, a concept defined most broadly
as receptor trafficking. This review illuminates our current view of GPCR trafficking, particularly within the
cardiovascular system, as well as highlights the recent and provocative finding that components of the GPCR trafficking
machinery can facilitate GPCR signaling independent of G protein activation. (Circ Res. 2006;99:570-582.)
Key Words: GPCR  trafficking  GPCR kinase (GRK)  -arrestin  7-transmembrane receptors
G protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs) are central media-tors of nearly all aspects of cardiovascular biology.
GPCRs were originally identified as receptors capable of
coupling to specific guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G
proteins), thereby transducing an extracellular signal to an
intracellular effector, although more recently, several GPCRs
have been demonstrated to signal via G protein–independent
mechanisms both in vitro and in vivo.1 As a family of
proteins, GPCRs share common structural features, including
seven membrane-spanning domains, and thus are alterna-
tively referred to as 7-transmembrane receptors. GPCRs are
the largest superfamily of cell-surface receptors, accounting
for approximately 2% of the human genome.2 Further, li-
gands directed at GPCRs (primarily agonists and antagonists)
represent the largest family of pharmacological agents, ac-
counting for nearly 30% of current clinical pharmaceutical
agents available.3 Both hormones and neurotransmitters exert
their effects on the cardiovascular system via GPCRs. Exam-
ples of GPCRs with well-ascribed roles in cardiovascular
biology include the 1- and 2-adrenergic receptors (ARs),
the 1- and 2-ARs, the M2- and M3-muscarinic acetylcholine
receptors, the angiotensin II (Ang II) receptors, the endothelin
receptors, the adenosine receptor, the thrombin receptor, and
the vasopressin receptor.
Over the past nearly 3 decades, a wealth of information has
revealed much about the signaling properties of this family of
seven membrane-spanning receptors. Much work has focused
on revealing the ways in which the GPCRs regulate discrete
effector molecules including adenylyl cyclase, phospho-
lipases, and ion channels. Still further work has shed light on
Original received June 30, 2006; revision received August 10, 2006; accepted August 11, 2006.
From the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Departments of Medicine and Biochemistry, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC.
Correspondence to Robert Lefkowitz, Box 3821, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710. E-mail lefko001@receptor-biol.duke.edu
© 2006 American Heart Association, Inc.
Circulation Research is available at http://circres.ahajournals.org DOI: 10.1161/01.RES.0000242563.47507.ce
570
Review
 by guest on February 21, 2013http://circres.ahajournals.org/Downloaded from 
mechanisms by which GPCR signaling is regulated and has led
to the discovery of additional proteins including the GPCR
kinases (GRKs)4,5 and -arrestin proteins,6,7 which respectively
phosphorylate agonist-activated GPCRs and bind phosphorylat-
ed GPCRs to physically disrupt the receptor/G protein interac-
tion, thereby leading to desensitization of receptor-mediated G
protein activation. In addition to its role in GPCR desensitiza-
tion, -arrestin binding also promotes the cytosol to cell surface
translocation of components of the endocytic machinery, namely
adaptor protein-2 (AP-2)8 and clathrin,9 thereby facilitating
receptor removal from the plasma membrane.
Although still substantial, comparatively less work has
focused on GPCR trafficking, much of it related to mecha-
nisms regulating endocytosis of GPCRs from the cellular
surface, including the role of -arrestin in facilitating GPCR
endocytosis as above. Indeed, the appropriate delivery of
GPCRs to the cell surface to permit receptor/ligand interac-
tions, and their subsequent retrieval from the plasma mem-
brane, are of fundamental importance for the regulation of
GPCR activity. This review highlights our current under-
standing of GPCR movement from synthesis onward, with
special emphasis on studies of GPCRs from the cardiovascu-
lar system. Lastly, we discuss the importance of the newly
recognized role that GPCR trafficking itself can have on
cellular signaling, including the recently recognized and
expanding role for -arrestins in GPCR signaling indepen-
dent of G proteins.
GPCR Trafficking: Posttranslation
Both during and subsequent to synthesis, membrane proteins
including GPCRs undergo a continual process of maturation
before reaching residence at the plasma membrane. They
must be properly inserted into the membrane (a process
believed to occur cotranslationally for most membrane pro-
teins), achieve proper folding while still resident in the
endoplasmic reticulum, traverse from the cis- to the trans-
Golgi while undergoing modification, and finally be targeted
to the plasma membrane where they attain residence as
mature proteins. This section will discuss various aspects of
this maturational process that have been determined for
GPCRs (Figure, A).
Folding and Chaperones
Strict quality-control mechanisms within cells ensure that
improperly or incompletely folded proteins are targeted for
degradation, usually via the proteasome pathway. For most
nascent proteins studied, folding into a proper/functional
conformation requires the presence of endogenous accessory
chaperone proteins.10 GPCRs are no exception to this quality-
control process. As example, the human DnaJ protein HSJ1b,
a member of the heat shock protein (HSP) family of cyto-
plasmic cochaperones, regulates trafficking of rhodopsin
from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to the cell surface.11
Alternatively, single-membrane–spanning chaperone proteins
can facilitate GPCR exit from the ER, as recently demon-
strated for the calcitonin receptor-like receptor, which must
form a heterodimeric complex with the receptor activity
modifying protein (RAMP) before ER egress (reviewed by
Tan et al12). Whether these or similar endogenous chaperone
proteins regulate the folding of GPCRs important to some
aspects of cardiovascular biology is currently unknown, but
certainly possible given the structural conservation across this
large protein family.
Despite such checks to ensure proper protein folding errors
do, however, occur. As such, a variety of human diseases
have been identified in which naturally occurring mutations
result in the misfolding and/or mistargeting of a mutant
protein. Such “protein conformational” diseases are thus
considered to result from mutations that do not affect the
functional domain(s) of the mutant protein, but rather inter-
fere with the normal cellular trafficking of the protein
(reviewed by Bernier et al13). Such misfolded proteins typi-
cally either form aggregates that are deleterious to the cell or
are recognized as improperly folded and therefore targeted
for degradation by the cellular quality-control mechanisms
noted above (reviewed by Sitia and Braakman14). Interest-
ingly, recent work has demonstrated that in some instances,
chemical or pharmacological manipulation can rescue mis-
folded proteins and lead to their proper translocation to the
plasma membrane where the proteins are functionally active.
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI) is an X-linked dis-
order15 with an incidence in the population of approximately
1 per 250 000. NDI is characterized by renal resistance to the
posterior pituitary-derived antidiuretic hormone (also called
arginine vasopressin), an octapeptide which normally acts at
the vasopressin 2 receptor (V2R) present on renal epithelial
cells to allow for normal urinary concentration.15 In patients
with NDI and the complete absence of renal epithelial V2R
cell surface expression, daily urinary volume can exceed 15 L
and lead to rapid death. More than 150 different mutations in
the V2R have been described, the majority of which (70%)
impair V2R cell surface trafficking (reviewed by Bernier et
al13). The addition of a cell-permeable V2R antagonist to a
subset of mutant V2Rs previously shown to accumulate in the
ER resulted in the proper folding, ER exit, correct targeting to
the cell surface, and functional rescue of receptor activity of
the mutant proteins.16 This is presumably attributable to the
ability of the small molecule ligand to stabilize the native
state of the protein, thereby facilitating the proper trafficking
of the receptor. Additional mutant 7-transmembrane receptors
known to have altered trafficking properties that result in
human disease, and for which molecular chaperones have
been identified, include rhodopsin, the sulfonylurea receptor
1 (SUR1), smoothened, and the gonadotropin-releasing hor-
mone receptor (reviewed by Bernier et al13). It remains to be
seen, however, whether pharmacological treatment of the
mistrafficked receptor targets identified above in cellular
systems will translate to amelioration of human disease.
Oligomerization
Early studies using rhodopsin,17,18 muscarinic,19 and
-adrenergic20 receptors as model GPCRs suggested that
GPCRs exist primarily as monomers, although modification
of the detergent extraction systems used for protein purifica-
tion led early investigators to suggest that a varying fraction
of GPCRs may also be present in oligomeric form.19,20 Much
recent work using coimmunoprecipitation and resonance
energy-transfer techniques have convincingly demonstrated
Drake et al Trafficking of G Protein–Coupled Receptors 571
 by guest on February 21, 2013http://circres.ahajournals.org/Downloaded from 
that dimeric GPCR structures are present at the plasma
membrane and are the topic of several recent reviews.21–24
Indeed, it has been postulated that homo- and heterodimeric
GPCRs may represent the basic functional unit necessary for
most, if not all, GPCR signaling (reviewed by Park et al25).
Whether higher-order oligomeric complexes can form at the
plasma membrane has not, however, been clearly demon-
strated, although the M2-muscarinic receptor has been sug-
gested to be capable of forming a trimer.26
Not well appreciated nor understood, however, is the likely
important role that oligomerization of GPCRs plays in the
biosynthesis and trafficking of nascent GPCRs to the cellular
surface. Indeed, multiple GPCRs including the 2-AR27 and
vasopressin receptors28 undergo constitutive homodimeriza-
tion early in the biosynthetic pathway, likely occurring in the
ER. Expression of mutant 2-ARs constructed to either lack
an ER-export motif or to contain a heterologous ER-retention
signal led to entrapment of wild-type 2-AR in the ER, likely
because of receptor dimerization.27 Importantly, addition of a
peptide corresponding to the putative glycophorin-like dimer-
ization motif in the sixth-transmembrane domain of the
2-AR inhibited both receptor dimerization and transit to the
cell surface.29 Similar results in which mutants of the V2R30
or the D2 dopamine receptor31 act as dominant negatives for
plasma membrane expression of their respective wild-type
receptors suggest that receptor oligomerization before cell
surface delivery may be a general mechanism by which
multiple members of the GPCR family are regulated.
General model of GPCR trafficking. A, Following synthesis, GPCRs initially reside in the ER, where they undergo processing and folding
guided by chaperone and quality-control proteins. Within the ER, many GPCRs likely form either homo- or heterodimeric structures.
Following ER exit, GPCRs transit through the Golgi apparatus, where they may undergo additional modifications such as oligosaccha-
ride processing. On the distal edge of the Golgi, GPCRs are packaged in exocytic transport vesicles and enter the endosomal system,
where they are subsequently targeted to the plasma membrane. Multiple proteins, as listed, have been identified that affect GPCR sta-
bility at the cell surface. ERAD indicates ER-associated degradation. B, Although variations have been described, GPCR endocytosis
from the plasma membrane most commonly occurs in a GRK- and -arrestin–dependent manner. Ligand binding promotes GRK-
mediated phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic surface of GPCR and subsequent -arrestin translocation and binding to the receptor.
-Arrestin binding, in turn, facilitates the subsequent recruitment of AP-2 and clathrin and GPCR inclusion in CCPs before endocytosis
via CCVs. C, Following endocytosis, GPCRs may be either recycled to the plasma membrane or sorted for lysosomal degradation. The
Rab family of small GTPases is integral in determining the fate of a GPCR, whereas SNX1 has more recently been shown to play a role
in endosomal to lysosomal GPCR sorting. Receptor ubiquitination also plays a role in receptor degradation via lysosomes. D, More
recently, several GPCRs have been shown to be capable of signaling via -arrestin–dependent pathways. Well-characterized -arres-
tin–dependent signaling cascades that have been described include agonist-dependent nonreceptor tyrosine kinase activation as well
as activation of the MAPK signaling pathway.
572 Circulation Research September 15, 2006
 by guest on February 21, 2013http://circres.ahajournals.org/Downloaded from 
In addition to homodimerization, early heterodimerization
is also like to play an important role in the proper targeting of
some GPCRs, as recently demonstrated for the 1D-AR,
which required heterodimerization with the closely related
1B-AR for cell surface expression.32 Immunoprecipitation
studies in which epitope-tagged 2-AR and Ang II type 1
(AT1) receptors (AT1Rs) were coexpressed suggested that the
receptors are able to form oligomers before their localization
on the plasma membrane, as the amount of immunoprecipi-
tated receptor complex was unaffected by exposure to either
agonist or antagonist.33 Further studies have demonstrated the
unanticipated finding that heterodimerization between the
2-AR and either an olfactory receptor34 or the 1D-AR35
facilitates receptor ER export and cell surface expression.
Finally, expression of the 2-AR along with the  and 
opioid receptors in cultured cells leads to heterooligomeriza-
tion of the 2-AR with either the  or  opioid receptor at the
plasma membrane.36 Interestingly, this association did not
affect ligand binding or functional properties of the receptors
but did alter the trafficking properties. In the -2 cells, 
receptors underwent 2-AR agonist-stimulated internalization
and 2-AR underwent opioid-mediated endocytosis, whereas
in -2-AR cells, the 2-AR did not internalize in response to
either 2-AR agonist or opioid.36 Although this is a single
example, such results suggest that GPCR heterooligomeriza-
tion may be an important way of modulating GPCR traffick-
ing and signaling. It is important to note, however, that in
each oligomerization study described above, overexpression
of the receptor(s) of interest was performed and that such
alterations in cellular receptor content may modify the en-
dogenous molecular interactions that occur in the absence of
receptor overexpression.
Thus, in addition to the important role that endogenous
molecular chaperones such as the HSP and RAMP family
proteins play in protein folding and ER export of GPCRs,
homo- and heteroreceptor oligomerization also likely play a
critical step in the pathway used by at least some GPCRs for
cellular trafficking, although it is at present unclear whether
oligomerization following protein synthesis is a general
pathway used by all GPCRs.
Cell Surface Stability
In order for a GPCR to transduce an extracellular signal, it
must both traffic correctly to and be retained at the cellular
surface to allow for receptor/ligand interaction. Multiple
proteins not directly involved in the signal transduction
cascade have been identified which stabilize receptor surface
expression. These include spinophilin, Homer, actin-binding
protein 280/filamin A, protein 4.1N, muskelin, and postsyn-
aptic density-95 (PSD-95) (reviewed by Tan et al12). Of these,
PSD-95, a multiple PDZ domain–containing scaffolding
protein, has been most conclusively shown to specifically
interact with a GPCR fundamental to cardiovascular biology,
namely the 1-AR. This interaction occurs via the third PDZ
domain of PSD-95, which interacts with the carboxyl termi-
nus of the 1-AR. Interestingly, overexpression of PSD-95
decreased 1-AR internalization but did not affect agonist-
stimulated cAMP production or receptor desensitization,
suggesting a role for PSD-95 in maintaining the 1-AR at the
cellular surface.37
GPCR Trafficking: Endocytosis
Much work over the past several decades has illuminated our
current understanding of the molecular mechanisms underly-
ing GPCR removal from the cell surface. Fundamental to this
process are 2 families of proteins, the GPCR kinases (GRKs)
and the -arrestins, both of which were initially identified in
studies of GPCR desensitization and which are involved in
removal of ligand-activated GPCRs from the plasma mem-
brane. Additional work has identified an ensemble of acces-
sory proteins, which interact with the GRK and -arrestin
classes of proteins, and much recent effort has been devoted
to delineating the details of these multiple interactions that
are inherent to the process of GPCR endocytosis. Further-
more, as will be described below, the agonist-induced post-
translational ubiquitination of both receptor and -arrestin
play definitive and discrete roles in regulating the life cycle of
GPCRs (Figure, B).
Role of the Lipid Microenvironment in
GPCR Trafficking
Understanding of the importance of the membrane lipid
microenvironment for GPCR signaling and trafficking is
rapidly evolving. As example, it has recently been demon-
strated that following translation, the AT1R requires caveolin
as an intracellular molecular chaperone for trafficking to the
plasma membrane.38 Moreover, once at the cell surface, it is
clear that some subsets of GPCRs are preferentially segre-
gated to discrete regions of the membrane defined as lipid
rafts.39–41 GPCRs of fundamental importance to cardiovas-
cular biology that have been localized to lipid rafts and/or
caveolae include the adenosine A1, 1-AR, 1-AR, 2-AR,
AT1R, the endothelin (ETA-A and ET-B) receptors, and the
M2-muscarinic receptors.42
Caveolae, a specific type of lipid microdomain, represent
for some GPCRs the preferred microenvironment for certain
events such as signaling. However, a receptor’s maintenance
within a specific microenvironment may be subject to dy-
namic regulation. Indeed, reversible GPCR modifications
have been described, including both covalent attachment of a
lipid to the GPCR or GPCR phosphorylation, which can shift
the GPCR between different membrane milieus. For example,
a reversible lipid modification (eg, palmitoylation/depalmi-
toylation of cysteine residues) has been demonstrated to
target GPCRs such as the 5-HT1a receptor to lipid rafts.43
Interestingly, agonist-induced endocytosis of the 1-AR via
clathrin-coated pits (CCPs) in human embryonic kidney
(HEK) 293 cells requires GRK phosphorylation of the recep-
tor, whereas endocytosis of the 1-AR in lipid rafts/caveolae
is dependent on the receptor undergoing protein kinase A
phosphorylation.44 Further evidence supporting the impor-
tance of GPCR membrane microdomain restriction is that
confinement of the 2-AR to caveolae has been reported to be
of critical importance for regulation of the intrinsic contrac-
tion rate in neonatal cardiac myocyte membrane prepara-
tions.45 The importance of the lipid microenvironment for the
assemblage of signaling scaffolds beneath the GPCR/mem-
Drake et al Trafficking of G Protein–Coupled Receptors 573
 by guest on February 21, 2013http://circres.ahajournals.org/Downloaded from 
brane interface is also an area of active investigation and may
play a role in multiple aspects of GPCR trafficking but is
beyond the scope of this review. For a more complete review
of the role of the lipid microenvironment on both GPCR
signaling and trafficking, refer to several recent excellent
reviews.39,42
Agonist-Dependent Versus Agonist-Independent
GPCR Internalization
Receptor internalization following agonist exposure is a
well-documented response for a wide variety of GPCRs
important for cardiovascular biology. As example, the proto-
typic GPCR, the 2-AR, was initially shown to internalize
following exposure to agonist, as demonstrated by loss of
surface binding of a nonpermeable membrane ligand.46 Use
of a membrane permeant ligand, however, demonstrated that
the 2-AR was still ligand accessible, suggesting that the
receptor was sequestered in an intracellular compartment
following agonist treatment.46 Alternatively, whereas expo-
sure of the AT1R to Ang II leads to receptor internalization
and endosomal sequestration, the Ang II type 2 receptor
(AT2R) does not undergo endocytosis with Ang II addition,
demonstrating that subtype-specific receptor sorting and in-
ternalization can occur within the cardiovascular GPCR
system.47
Internalization for most GPCRs occurs on the order of
minutes and correlates with receptor phosphorylation by the
GRKs and subsequent -arrestin translocation, as will be
discussed below. Indeed, agonist-induced 2-AR receptor
internalization can be inhibited either by mutations of the
2-AR, which inhibit agonist-induced GRK phosphoryla-
tion48 or by mutations in the -arrestin proteins.49 Following
internalization, receptors may be either recycled to the cell
surface or targeted for lysosomal degradation (reviewed by
Bohm et al50).
Internalization of GPCRs in the absence of agonist has also
been examined. Although mean rates of internalization vary
between receptors assayed, rates are in general substantially
slowed in the absence relative to the presence of the cognate
ligand of a GPCR. The 2-AR, as example, undergoes
sequestration from the cell surface with a half-life of approx-
imately 10 minutes in the presence of agonist but remains on
the cell surface for greater than 1 hour in the absence of
agonist.51
The Role of Accessory Proteins in the Endocytosis
of GPCRs
Endocytosis of GPCRs can occur via caveolae, clathrin-
coated vesicles, or uncoated vesicles.52 Although short linear
amino acid stretches in the cytoplasmic domains of GPCRs
likely play a role in their endocytosis, the majority of work to
date has demonstrated that much of GPCR endocytosis is
primarily regulated by GRK and -arrestin–dependent pro-
cesses involving clathrin-coated pits.
GPCR Kinases
As shown for multiple GPCRs, the serine/threonine-specific
GPCR kinases (GRKs) are recruited following agonist bind-
ing to the cytoplasmic surface of the activated receptor,
leading to receptor phosphorylation. The phosphorylated
surface of the GPCR is then competent to serve as a platform
for the cytosol to membrane translocation of the -arrestin
proteins (reviewed by Shenoy and Lefkowitz 53).
The GRK family of kinases is composed of 7 members that
share significant amino acid and structural homology (re-
viewed previously54,55). Within this family, 4 kinases (GRKs
2, 3, 5, and 6) are expressed broadly and are believed to play
a role in GPCR phosphorylation within the cardiovascular
system. GRK2 and GRK3 reside in the cytosol in the absence
of agonist and translocate to the membrane following GPCR
stimulation. GRK2/3 translocation and membrane localiza-
tion are mediated in part by their binding to heterotrimeric G
protein  subunits.56 GRK5 and GRK6, on the other hand,
are constitutively localized to the plasma membrane. Whereas
GRK6 palmitoylation is essential for membrane associa-
tion,57 localization of GRK5 to the plasma membrane is
believed to be attributable to an electrostatic interaction
between the highly basic carboxyl terminus of GRK5 and
phospholipids at the plasma membrane.58,59
Although GRK-specific phosphorylation of the cytoplas-
mic surface of agonist-occupied GPCRs mediates -arrestin
recruitment, the structural features common to activated
receptors that are recognized by the GRKs remain largely
unknown. Indeed, it is a question of fundamental importance
as to how members of this limited group of broadly expressed
GRKs are able to phosphorylate such a diverse array of
activated GPCRs and thereby lead to -arrestin recruitment.
Functionally, 2 classes of GPCRs, denoted “class A” and
“class B,” can be defined, based on the relative stability of the
GPCR/-arrestin interaction. For the 2-AR (a class A
receptor) and the vasopressin receptor (a class B receptor),
these determinants appear to be present within the carboxyl
termini of the receptors, as the stability of their interaction
with -arrestin, as well as their ability to be dephosphory-
lated, recycled, and resensitized was completely reversed in
mutant receptors in which their carboxyl-terminal tails were
switched.60
Interestingly, whereas in vitro studies have localized
GRK2- and GRK5-mediated phosphorylation sites of the
2-AR to distal portion of the cytoplasmic tail of the recep-
tor,61 more recent studies in intact cells have suggested that
agonist induced 2-AR phosphorylation occurs in the proxi-
mal portion of the carboxyl terminus of the receptor.62
Although the observed 2-AR proximal tail phosphorylation
was believed to be mediated by GRK rather than protein
kinase A, this was not confirmed. Thus although GRK-
mediated phosphorylation of agonist-stimulated GPCRs un-
derlies -arrestin recruitment and thereby initiates GPCR
endocytosis in CCPs, many of the molecular details remain to
be determined. Notably, a recent study using high-throughput
RNA interference implicated GRKs as playing a more gen-
eral role in the process of clathrin-mediated endocytosis
itself.63
-Arrestin As an Endocytic Adaptor Protein
Within humans, there exist 2 isoforms of the nonvisual
-arrestin proteins, namely -arrestin1 and -arrestin2, both
574 Circulation Research September 15, 2006
 by guest on February 21, 2013http://circres.ahajournals.org/Downloaded from 
of which show ubiquitous tissue distribution. In addition to
their well-described role in limiting receptor-G protein inter-
action, the -arrestin proteins also serve to both recruit and
physically bridge the receptor to the endocytic machinery.
Experimentally, receptor mutations that impair agonist-
induced GPCR phosphorylation limit -arrestin recruitment
and lead to poor receptor internalization, as demonstrated for
a 2-AR in which all of the GRK phosphorylation sites had
been altered.48 Further, expression of “dominant-negative”
mutant -arrestin proteins (such as -arrestin1 V53D or
-arrestin2 V54D) inhibit 2-AR internalization.64 In addi-
tion, the -arrestin proteins themselves are able to interact
directly with the essential components of the clathrin-coated
vesicle (CCV) coat machinery, namely the heterotetrameric
AP-2 complex,8 as well as clathrin,9 and these interactions are
critical both for recruitment of the 2-AR into clathrin-coated
pits as well as for receptor internalization. Studies with other
GPCRs, including the 2-AR65 and the A2B adenosine recep-
tor66 have also shown important roles for the -arrestins in
receptor endocytosis.
Interestingly, although the 2 -arrestin isoforms exhibit
nearly 80% amino acid identity,6 they do not appear to
perform redundant biologic roles and, indeed, exhibit differ-
ences in their regulation. Whereas -arrestin1 is phosphory-
lated by extracellular signal regulated kinase (ERK) en-
zymes,67 -arrestin2 is phosphorylated by casein kinase II.68
For both -arrestin proteins, however, the phosphorylation/
dephosphorylation status appears to regulate the ability of the
-arrestin protein to promote internalization of the 2-AR via
clathrin-coated vesicles.
As noted above, analysis of agonist-stimulated -arrestin
translocation for a variety of GPCRs suggests there exist 2
largely distinct classes receptors with which the -arrestins
associate, denoted class A and class B GPCRs. Following
agonist exposure, class A receptors including the 2-AR,
endothelin A receptor, and 1b-AR preferentially recruit
-arrestin2.69 In contrast, class B receptors, including the
AT1aR and V2 receptor, are able to bind both -arrestin
isoforms with nearly equal affinity.70 Whereas the -arres-
tin1/2–class A receptor interactions occur solely at the
plasma membrane and are lost following GPCR internaliza-
tion, -arrestin1/2 interactions with class B receptors are
much more stable and can be detected on endosomal struc-
tures following receptor endocytosis (reviewed by Pierce and
Lefkowitz71). Further, class A receptors generally recycle to
the plasma membrane rapidly, whereas class B GPCRs
recycle more slowly. The role of ubiquitination in modulating
GPCR/arrestin interaction is likely important and is discussed
below. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts generated to lack both
-arrestin isoforms showed a marked impairment of agonist-
stimulated internalization of either the class A 2-AR or the
class B AT1aR, whereas only 2-AR internalization was
affected by the single deletion of the -arrestin2 isoform.69
Studies using RNA interference technology to selectively
ablate the -arrestin proteins have shown similar results with
respect to internalization of the 2-AR and AT1-AR as model
class A and B receptors, respectively.72
Agonist-Induced GPCR Ubiquitination
and Sorting
Posttranslational modification of substrate proteins by the
covalent attachment of ubiquitin (ubiquitination), originally
discovered in the context of cellular protein degradation, has
recently been shown to play a noncanonical role in regulating
the postendocytic sorting of several membrane proteins in-
cluding GPCRs.73,74 Protein ubiquitination is mediated by the
concerted action of 3 enzymes. The first 2 enzymes (E1 and
E2) are responsible, respectively, for activating ubiquitin and
escorting the activated ubiquitin. The third enzyme, E3
ubiquitin ligase (E3), recognizes and modifies the substrate in
a timely fashion.75 For the 2-AR, both GRK-mediated
phosphorylation and -arrestin binding are essential for
receptor ubiquitination to occur.76 Importantly, this agonist-
stimulated 2-AR ubiquitination modification is necessary for
the receptor to undergo degradation in lysosomes. Further,
ubiquitin-dependent lysosomal degradation is applicable to
other GPCRs such as V2R and the protease-activated recep-
tor2 (PAR2).77,78 For both the 2-AR and V2R, receptor
ubiquitination requires the -arrestin proteins. Although the
nature of this requirement is not entirely clear, 1 supposition
is that the -arrestins may serve as adaptors to bring as yet
unidentified E3 ligase(s) to the receptors in a stimulus
dependent fashion. In the case of the PAR2 and the CXCR4
receptors, ubiquitination is mediated by the E3 ligases c-Cbl78
and AIP4,79 respectively, but no involvement of the
-arrestins has as yet been demonstrated.
For the above mammalian GPCRs, as well as for others
such as the chemokine receptor CXCR4,80 receptor ubiquiti-
nation is not required for internalization per se but is crucial
for the sorting of ubiquitinated receptors to lysosomes. A
recent study of the 1-AR in a heterologous cellular system
reported the resistance of the receptor protein to ubiquitina-
tion as well as agonist-mediated degradation, suggesting a
strong relationship between this receptor modification and
downregulation pathways.81
Whereas the degradation of GPCRs and other membrane
proteins is known to occur in lysosomes, that of some
membrane receptors such as the single-membrane spanning
erythropoietin receptor involve both lysosomes and 26S
proteasomes, the megaprotease complexes that degrade most
cellular proteins.82 Interestingly, however, a recent report
suggests that ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of
newly synthesized intracellular A2A adenosine receptors
serves as a method of ER quality control (Figure, A).
Importantly, this degradation could be overcome by the
coexpression of USP4, a deubiquitinating enzyme belonging
to a family of enzymes that catalyze removal of ubiquitin
from the modified substrates.83 USP4 expression led to more
robust functional expression of the A2A receptor at the plasma
membrane, suggesting that deubiquitination can facilitate
cell-surface targeting of membrane proteins (Figure, A).
On the other hand, GPCR internalization can be regulated
by the agonist-dependent ubiquitination of -arrestin by the
E3 ligase Mdm2, as demonstrated for the 2-AR.76 Moreover,
the stability of -arrestin/GPCR binding that defines GPCRs
as class A or B (as described above) also correlates with the
ubiquitination status of the -arrestin proteins. The separation
Drake et al Trafficking of G Protein–Coupled Receptors 575
 by guest on February 21, 2013http://circres.ahajournals.org/Downloaded from 
of -arrestin from class A GPCRs results from rapid
-arrestin deubiquitination, whereas the more stable
-arrestin interaction with class B receptors is caused by the
sustained ubiquitination of -arrestin.84 As will be described
below, ubiquitination of -arrestin appears to not only be
capable of regulating GPCR trafficking properties but also
likely plays an important role in directing downstream sig-
naling events.
Sorting Signals Used for GPCR Intracellular
Trafficking and Endocytosis
The identification of short, linear amino acid signals present
in the intracellular domains of transmembrane proteins re-
sponsible for mediating the intracellular sorting and endocy-
tosis of a transmembrane protein from the plasma membrane
has been the focus of much work over the past 2 decades.
Such sequences are believed to act as recognition sites for
components of the cellular adaptor protein machinery neces-
sary for intracellular protein trafficking. The importance of
such signals contained within the intracellular domains of
GPCRs, however, is less well described than that for other
transmembrane proteins. Albeit limited in number, excep-
tions to the general paradigm of GRK/-arrestin–mediated
endocytosis have been delineated for 7-membrane-spanning
receptors important to the cardiovascular system. Interest-
ingly, the best-described motifs are analogous to those used
by non-GPCR transmembrane receptors and include di-
leucine–based (LL or LXL) and tyrosine-based (NPXY or
NPXXY, or YXXO) motifs.
As a prototypic GPCR, the 2-AR contains a di-leucine
motif within its carboxyl terminus, alteration of which does
not affect the ability of the receptor to traffic correctly to the
cell surface, bind agonist, or to activate adenylyl cyclase.
Agonist addition, however, does not lead to internalization of
this mutant 2-AR,85 demonstrating a role for di-leucine motif
of the 2-AR in agonist-induced receptor endocytosis. Simi-
larly, mutations introduced into the di-leucine motif in the
cytoplasmic tail of the vasopressin 1a receptor (V1aR) signif-
icantly impaired agonist-induced receptor internalization.86
Interestingly, however, mutation of the analogous di-leucine
motif in the V2R resulted in a receptor that was unable to
escape from the ER, suggesting a role for this motif in V2R
maturation.87
Tyrosine-based sorting signals have also been shown to be
necessary in the trafficking of the 2-AR. Mutation of Y326
in the human 2-AR, located at the proposed junction of the
seventh-transmembrane domain and the proximal portion of
the carboxyl terminus and conserved in position across many
members of the large superfamily of GPCRs, does not affect
the ability of the receptor to traffic correctly to the cell
surface, bind agonist, or to activate adenylyl cyclase when the
receptor is overexpressed.88 The mutation, however, did
completely abolish 2-AR agonist-induced internalization.
Complicating this interpretation, however, was the finding
that lower expression levels of mutant 2-AR resulted in the
loss of ligand binding and adenylyl cyclase coupling, likely
because of intracellular retention of the mutant receptor.89
More recently, a highly conserved tyrosine-based motif
(YXXO) in the cytoplasmic tail of the protease-activated
receptor-1 (PAR1), a GPCR for thrombin, which has previ-
ously been shown to undergo -arrestin–independent inter-
nalization, was shown to be necessary for agonist-mediated
but not constitutive internalization.90 Finally, more recent
studies have shown a direct interaction between a stretch of 8
arginines contained in the carboxyl terminus of the 1b-AR
and the AP-2  subunit.91 Whether the alternative tyrosine-
based motif found in PAR1 or the nonclassical arginine motif
identified in the 1b-AR plays a role in the endocytosis and
intracellular trafficking of other GPCRs classically identified
as fundamentally important to the cardiovascular system
remains to be determined.
Role for Additional Proteins in the Endocytosis
of GPCRs
In addition to the well-recognized roles of the GRK and
-arrestin proteins in GPCR internalization, multiple other
proteins have been demonstrated to be important in the
endocytic process. A partial list and description of the role
these proteins play in GPCR endocytosis is discussed below.
ADP-Ribosylation Factor 6
ADP-ribosylation factor 6 (ARF6) is 1 member of the ARF
family of small GTP-binding proteins known to be key
players in vesicular trafficking events. In addition to its role
in binding AP-2 and clathrin, -arrestin is also able to directly
bind to ARF6 and modulate its activity. ARF6 activation
requires the exchange of GTP for GDP, a reaction that is
catalyzed by the ARF guanine nucleotide exchange factor
(GEF) ARNO (ARF Nucleotide-binding site Opener). Impor-
tantly, ARNO is constitutively associated with -arrestin2.92
As shown for the 2-AR, expression of mutant ARF6 proteins
containing single amino acid substitutions rendering them
deficient in their ability to either bind (T27N) or hydrolyze
(Q67L) GTP inhibited agonist-induced 2-AR internaliza-
tion.92 Overexpression of ARNO alone, however, increases
2-AR internalization by stimulating GTP nucleotide ex-
change on ARF. Thus, agonist-promoted recruitment of
-arrestin to an activated receptor leads to the local regulation
of endocytosis by -arrestin attributable to its inherent ability
to bind both ARNO and ARF6.
In addition to requiring a GEF protein, ARF proteins also
require a GTPase-activating protein (GAP) to accelerate
hydrolysis of bound GTP. Initially identified as GRK-
interacting proteins (GITs), GIT1 and GIT2 are zinc finger–
containing proteins that function as GAPs for ARF6.93,94
GIT1 overexpression reduces the internalization of trans-
membrane receptors in CCPs and CCVs, including the 1-
and 2-ARs, the adenosine 2B receptor, and the M1-
muscarinic receptor.95 Importantly, ARF-GAP activity of the
GIT proteins is stimulated by phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-
trisphosphate, whereas other ARF-GAPs, such as ARF-
GAP1, are stimulated by phosphatidylinositol 4,5-
bisphosphate and diacylglycerol.94 This raises the interesting
possibility that GIT regulation of ARF6 activity may be
integrated through activation of the phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase signaling pathway.
576 Circulation Research September 15, 2006
 by guest on February 21, 2013http://circres.ahajournals.org/Downloaded from 
Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinase
Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases (PI3Ks) are a conserved fam-
ily of kinases with both lipid and protein kinase activity
which can be activated in response to GPCR stimulation. As
a family, they have been shown to play important roles in an
array of cellular functions as divergent as cell survival, cell
motility, and receptor endocytosis. Within the cytosol, PI3K
is constitutively complexed with GRK2.96 As demonstrated
for the 2-AR, agonist binding induces translocation of the
GRK/P13K complex to the activated receptor, formation of
phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate, and subsequent re-
cruitment of AP-2 and clathrin, leading to receptor endocy-
tosis. Importantly, receptor internalization is blocked by
overexpression of the portion of PI3K that mediates its
interaction with GRK2, as well as by the specific 3,4,5
trisphosphate lipid phosphatase PTEN, demonstrating the
importance of the lipid kinase activity of PI3K for the
localized production of D-3 phosphoinositides in regulating
ligand-induced endocytosis of the 2-AR.97
As noted above, in addition to possessing lipid kinase
activity, PI3K family members are also able to function as
protein kinases, although the importance of this activity has
remained largely obscure given the limited number of protein
substrates recognized by PI3Ks.98 Recently, however, the
importance of PI3K protein kinase activity in the regulation
of 2-AR endocytosis has been illuminated. In an elegant
study, Naga Prasad et al identified the cytoskeletal protein
nonmuscle tropomyosin (an actin filament binding protein) as
a substrate for the  isoform of PI3K and further demon-
strated that PI3K can selectively phosphorylate a single site
(S61) within tropomyosin.99 Alteration of this site within
tropomyosin to mimic constitutive phosphorylation (S61D)
leads to complementation of a protein kinase defective PI3K,
whereas change to a phospho-deficient residue (S61A)
blocked agonist-induced 2-AR internalization. Thus,
through both its lipid and kinase activity, PI3K plays a central
role in the agonist-induced removal of the 2-AR, the
prototypic model cardiovascular GPCR, from the cell surface.
Whether this paradigm will extend to other members of the
cardiovascular GPCR family is at present unknown but seems
likely, given that endocytosis via AP-2 containing CCVs is
the predominant mechanism of internalization for most
ligand-activated GPCRs.
Intracellular Trafficking:
Sorting/Recycling/Degradation
Once internalized from the cell surface, GPCRs can be sorted
along multiple pathways (Figure, C). They may undergo
dephosphorylation, resensitization, and be recycled back to
the plasma membrane. Alternatively, GPCRs may be targeted
for degradation via the endosomal/lysosomal pathway. Fi-
nally, multiple GPCRs have more recently been shown to
initiate G protein–independent intracellular signaling path-
ways following endocytosis, as is discussed below. These
multiple trafficking fates for internalized GPCRs are the
subject of an excellent recent review.100 We would like to
highlight a few proteins important for these processes.
Na/H-Exchanger Regulatory Factor
Following adrenergic receptor stimulation, it has long been
recognized that G protein–dependent changes in cellular
metabolism, excitability, and growth occur.101 Likewise,
cellular changes apparently independent of G protein activa-
tion have been demonstrated, including alterations in cellular
pH via regulation of the Na/H exchanger. Recent work has
established that agonist stimulation of the 2-AR promotes
direct association of the extreme carboxyl terminus of the
receptor with the first PDZ domain within Na/H-exchanger
regulatory factor-1 (NHERF1).102 Similar associations have
been shown to occur for other GPCRs containing sequences
conforming to the consensus motif D-S/T-x-L, including the
purinergic P2Y1 receptor and the CFTR,103 whereas other
GPCRs such as the parathyroid hormone receptor104 have
been shown to interact with both PDZ domains of both
NHERF1 and NHERF2 via a slightly different (ETVM) PDZ
consensus motif. For the 2-AR, disruption of this interaction
markedly impairs agonist-induced changes in intracellular
pH.
NHERF is also of critical importance for proper intracel-
lular sorting of the 2-AR. In addition to its ability to bind the
extreme carboxyl terminus of the 2-AR via its PDZ domain,
NHERF is able via its ezrin–radixin–moesin (ERM) domain
to bind to the actin cytoskeleton through association with
ERM proteins. Importantly, mutations generated to disrupt
the interaction of NHERF with either the 2-AR carboxyl
terminus or with ERM proteins lead to significant agonist-
induced lysosomal degradation of the 2-AR following endo-
cytosis, rather than recycling.105 As noted above, multiple
additional GPCRs have been shown to interact with the
NHERF proteins. Although NHERF has been shown to play
a role in the recycling of other GPCRs such as the  opioid
receptor (reviewed by Liu-Chen106), the generalizability of
the role that NHERF plays in the recycling of other GPCRs,
particularly in the cardiovascular system, remains to be
determined.
N-Ethylmaleimide-Sensitive Fusion Protein
In a study to identify -arrestin binding partners, -arrestin1
was found to interact in both yeast 2-hybrid and in vitro
assays with N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive fusion protein (NSF),
an ATPase essential for many intracellular transport func-
tions.107 Furthermore, overexpression of NSF in HEK293
cells led to enhanced agonist-induced 2-AR internalization
and could rescue the effects of a -arrestin1 mutant (S412D)
previously shown to function as a dominant negative for
2-AR internalization. Interestingly, the 2-AR is also able,
via its extreme carboxyl terminus, to bind directly to NSF.108
The 2-AR/NSF interaction is agonist dependent and requi-
site for efficient agonist-mediated 2-AR internalization.
Importantly, whereas wild-type 2-ARs recycle to the cell
surface following exposure to the antagonist propranolol,
2-ARs containing mutations in their distal carboxyl termini
remain sequestered intracellularly, demonstrating the impor-
tance of the 2-AR/NSF interaction for proper 2-AR recy-
cling. Thus, although it is clear that proteins that bind to the
extreme carboxyl termini of GPCRs, such as NHERF and
NSF, serve to regulate the intracellular sorting of the recep-
Drake et al Trafficking of G Protein–Coupled Receptors 577
 by guest on February 21, 2013http://circres.ahajournals.org/Downloaded from 
tors such as the 2-AR, the extent to which the trafficking of
other GPCRs is modulated by these or similar as yet uniden-
tified proteins remains to be elucidated.
Sorting Nexin 1
Following internalization, GPCRs may be either recycled to
the plasma membrane or undergo sorting to the endosomal/
lysosomal pathway for degradation. Although fundamentally
important as a mechanism for downregulation of certain
GPCRs, such as the PAR1, which recognizes the coagulant
protease thrombin, comparatively less is known about the
molecular components that direct postendosomal sorting and
recycling of the receptors.
Although sorting nexin 1 (SNX1) was originally identified
as a membrane-associated protein that interacts with the
receptor tyrosine kinase, epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) and functions in EGFR sorting to lysosomes,109
SNX1 has also been demonstrated to interact with PAR1 in
an agonist-dependent manner.110 Overexpression of a SNX1
carboxyl terminal–deletion mutant did not significantly im-
pair agonist-induced PAR1 internalization and accumulation
in early endosomes but was able to impede endosome to
lysosome sorting of PAR1 and thus markedly inhibit PAR1
degradation.110 Additional studies, in which depletion of
endogenous SNX1 in HeLa cells via small interfering RNA
technology markedly impaired agonist-induced PAR1 degra-
dation, buttress the suggestion that SNX1 plays a role in the
intracellular trafficking of PAR1 from endosomes to lyso-
somes.111 Whether SNX1 or other SNX proteins can mediate
the endosomal to lysosomal sorting of GPCRs other than
PAR1 remains to be determined but is certainly possible
given the general conservation of trafficking themes shared
across members of this large protein family.
Rab GTPases
A second class of proteins shown to regulate the movement of
GPCRs both during and subsequent to endocytosis are the
Rab proteins, a family of Ras-like small GTP binding
proteins. Importantly, different Rab GTPase family members
selectively associate with specific intracellular structures
including both recycling and sorting endosomes, where they
mediate multiple steps of vesicular membrane trafficking
including vesicle budding, docking, and fusion (reviewed by
Seachrist and Ferguson112).
Within the cardiovascular system, Rab5 plays a central role
in the agonist-dependent CCV-mediated internalization and
early endosomal localization of some GPCRs, including the
2-AR.113 Expression of a dominant negative Rab5 (S34N)
blocked 2-AR internalization, whereas a constitutively ac-
tive Rab5 (Q79L) did not significantly alter 2-AR internal-
ization. Interestingly, whereas the 2-AR is not able to
directly associate with Rab5, the AT1R does bind Rab5
directly via the carboxyl terminus of the receptor and local-
izes to Rab5-containing endosomal structures following en-
docytosis.114 Furthermore, the interaction of Rab5 with the
AT1R on endosomes appears to be necessary for preventing
sorting of the internalized receptor to lysosomes.115 Unlike
internalization of the 2-AR, however, endocytosis of the
AT1R does not appear to be dependent on Rab5,114 demon-
strating the intracellular diversity in GPCR trafficking roles
played by even single members of the Rab protein family.
Whereas Rab5 plays a role in GPCR trafficking events
associated with GPCR internalization and/or early endosomal
formation, multiple additional Rab family members have
been implicated in other GPCR-trafficking events, including
Rab4 and Rab11 in receptor recycling, and Rab7 in endoso-
mal to lysosomal sorting.115 In a transgenic mouse model in
which a dominant-negative Rab4 (S27N) was overexpressed
in the heart, mice had impaired responsiveness to both
endogenous and exogenous catecholamines.116 Furthermore,
when these mice were crossbred with mice also overexpress-
ing a cardiac-specific human 2-AR, the resultant mice had an
abnormal intracellular vesicular 2-AR accumulation, as well
as significantly reduced cardiac contractility. Such results
suggest that proper Rab4-mediated regulation of 2-AR
receptor recycling is necessary for maintenance of normal
catecholamine responsiveness and receptor resensitization.
Whether Rab4 also plays a similar role in vivo in the
recycling of other GPCRs within the cardiovascular system is
currently unknown. For a more complete review of the
diverse roles that members of the Rab protein family play
throughout nearly all aspects of GPCR trafficking, refer to
several recent excellent reviews.100,112
Other Proteins With Roles in GPCR Endocytosis
and Postendocytotic Trafficking
Many additional proteins have been identified and character-
ized that play fundamental roles in the endocytosis and
postendocytic trafficking of GPCRs. These include, but are
not limited to, proteins involved in CCV formation and
membrane scission such as AP-2, clathrin, dynamin, Hrs, and
GASP,117–119 as well as multiple scaffolding proteins that
have been demonstrated to interact with the 1-AR including
postsynaptic density 95 (PSD95),120 membrane-associated
guanylate kinase inverted-2 (MAGI-2),121 and the endophil-
ins.122 Because of the limited scope of this review, we have
chosen to highlight only selected proteins as above.
Internalization/Trafficking and Signaling
Although internalization mechanisms leading to receptor
sequestration away from the source of stimulus have been
primarily considered as signal desensitization pathways, a
large body of research now exists in support of continued
signaling that is coupled with GPCR endocytosis.123 More-
over, although it is generally believed that endocytic “ad-
dresses” determine the extent of signaling, continued signal-
ing mechanisms during the trafficking of proteins may
actually determine the exact endocytic route by regulating
processes such as vesicle fusion and cargo transfer. As such,
it is increasingly evident that the 2 processes, trafficking and
signaling, are not only connected but likely inextricably
intertwined (Figure, D).
In the case of GPCRs, -arrestin has been clearly demon-
strated to play an essential role in the desensitization of G
protein–mediated second messenger signaling. More re-
cently, however, the -arrestin proteins have also been shown
to facilitate both receptor internalization via CCVs, as well as
to couple the receptors to and activate nonreceptor tyrosine
578 Circulation Research September 15, 2006
 by guest on February 21, 2013http://circres.ahajournals.org/Downloaded from 
kinases (eg, members of the c-Src family), thereby mediating
a second wave of signaling.124,125 In addition, on binding to
activated GPCRs such as the AT1aR, -arrestin has also been
shown to be capable of sequestering and scaffolding signaling
kinases, as well as targeting active signaling complexes into
cytoplasmic endosomal microcompartments.125,126 Impor-
tantly, chemical or molecular inhibition of receptor endocy-
tosis (or, alternatively, expression of -arrestin mutants that
impair receptor internalization), can lead to a decline in such
downstream signaling, demonstrating a coupling between
endocytosis and signaling.124,127
In addition to c-Src activation, -arrestin has been shown
in multiple studies to function as a signaling intermediate in
GPCR signal transduction to mitogen-activated protein ki-
nase (MAPK) pathways, under conditions where G protein
coupling is virtually absent.125,128,129 Although this -arres-
tin–dependent signaling has been most well characterized for
ERK activation, it may also apply to other signaling kinases
and appears to play roles in a variety of cellular responses
including chemotaxis and antiapoptosis. Although it has not
yet been conclusively determined that receptor endocytosis is
required for this -arrestin pathway, recent data suggest that
the trafficking patterns of -arrestin/receptor complexes may
play a significant role.130,131 Interestingly, -arrestin ubiquiti-
nation at specific acceptor sites (eg, Ang II–induced ubiquiti-
nation of lysines 11 and 12 in -arrestin2) is crucial for stable
-arrestin/AT1R interaction as well as the formation and
endosomal localization of AT1R-MAPK signalosomes.
Whether this observation may be broadly applicable to other
GPCRs relevant to cardiovascular biology is currently un-
known and is an area of active investigation.
Conclusions
Within the cardiovascular system, regulation of GPCR traf-
ficking is of fundamental importance both for physiological
homeostasis and the molecular response to physiological
perturbation. There is efficient and coordinated movement of
GPCRs from synthesis to the cellular surface, where they can
interact with components of the extracellular milieu to trans-
duce signals to intracellular effectors and subsequent GPCR
retrieval from the cell surface. These processes highlight the
intricate cellular balance that has developed to exquisitely
regulate hormonal responsiveness at the tissue level. Indeed,
much has been learned about GPCR trafficking within the
cardiovascular system over the past 2 decades, as evidenced
by the ever-expanding ensemble of identified proteins crucial
to this process. The recent recognition that GPCR signaling
may occur within the cardiovascular system via G protein–
independent/-arrestin-dependent pathways raises the fasci-
nating possibility that pharmacologically relevant cardiovas-
cular ligands may be developed that allow for selective
GPCR signaling via the activation of proteins initially be-
lieved only to have a role in limiting GPCR signaling and
promoting GPCR removal from the cell surface.
Acknowledgments
We thank Donna Addison and Elizabeth Hall for excellent
secretarial assistance.
Sources of Funding
This work was supported by NIH grants HL 16037 and HL 70631 (to
R.J.L.) and HL080525 and American Heart Association grant
0530014N (to S.K.S.). M.T.D. is supported by NIH training grant
T32-DK-00701. R.J.L. is an investigator with the Howard Hughes
Medical Institute.
Disclosures
None.
References
1. Rajagopal K, Lefkowitz RJ, Rockman HA. When 7 transmembrane
receptors are not G protein-coupled receptors. J Clin Invest. 2005;115:
2971–2974.
2. Vassilatis DK, Hohmann JG, Zeng H, Li F, Ranchalis JE, Mortrud MT,
Brown A, Rodriguez SS, Weller JR, Wright AC, Bergmann JE,
Gaitanaris GA. The G protein-coupled receptor repertoires of human and
mouse. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003;100:4903–4908.
3. Wise A, Gearing K, Rees S. Target validation of G-protein coupled
receptors. Drug Discov Today. 2002;7:235–246.
4. Benovic JL, Mayor F Jr, Staniszewski C, Lefkowitz RJ, Caron MG.
Purification and characterization of the beta-adrenergic receptor kinase.
J Biol Chem. 1987;262:9026–9032.
5. Pitcher JA, Freedman NJ, Lefkowitz RJ. G protein-coupled receptor
kinases. Annu Rev Biochem. 1998;67:653–692.
6. Attramadal H, Arriza JL, Aoki C, Dawson TM, Codina J, Kwatra MM,
Snyder SH, Caron MG, Lefkowitz RJ. Beta-arrestin2, a novel member
of the arrestin/beta-arrestin gene family. J Biol Chem. 1992;267:
17882–17890.
7. Lohse MJ, Benovic JL, Codina J, Caron MG, Lefkowitz RJ. beta-
Arrestin: a protein that regulates beta-adrenergic receptor function.
Science. 1990;248:1547–1550.
8. Laporte SA, Oakley RH, Zhang J, Holt JA, Ferguson SS, Caron MG,
Barak LS. The beta2-adrenergic receptor/betaarrestin complex recruits
the clathrin adaptor AP-2 during endocytosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
1999;96:3712–3717.
9. Goodman OB Jr, Krupnick JG, Santini F, Gurevich VV, Penn RB,
Gagnon AW, Keen JH, Benovic JL. Beta-arrestin acts as a clathrin
adaptor in endocytosis of the beta2-adrenergic receptor. Nature. 1996;
383:447–450.
10. Ellgaard L, Helenius A. Quality control in the endoplasmic reticulum.
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2003;4:181–191.
11. Chapple JP, Cheetham ME. The chaperone environment at the cyto-
plasmic face of the endoplasmic reticulum can modulate rhodopsin
processing and inclusion formation. J Biol Chem. 2003;278:
19087–19094.
12. Tan CM, Brady AE, Nickols HH, Wang Q, Limbird LE. Membrane
trafficking of G protein-coupled receptors. Annu Rev Pharmacol
Toxicol. 2004;44:559–609.
13. Bernier V, Lagace M, Bichet DG, Bouvier M. Pharmacological chap-
erones: potential treatment for conformational diseases. Trends Endo-
crinol Metab. 2004;15:222–228.
14. Sitia R, Braakman I. Quality control in the endoplasmic reticulum
protein factory. Nature. 2003;426:891–894.
15. Pan Y, Metzenberg A, Das S, Jing B, Gitschier J. Mutations in the V2
vasopressin receptor gene are associated with X-linked nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus. Nat Genet. 1992;2:103–106.
16. Morello JP, Salahpour A, Laperriere A, Bernier V, Arthus MF,
Lonergan M, Petaja-Repo U, Angers S, Morin D, Bichet DG, Bouvier
M. Pharmacological chaperones rescue cell-surface expression and
function of misfolded V2 vasopressin receptor mutants. J Clin Invest.
2000;105:887–895.
17. Liebman PA, Entine G. Lateral diffusion of visual pigment in pho-
torecptor disk membranes. Science. 1974;185:457–459.
18. Downer NW, Cone RA. Transient dichroism in photoreceptor mem-
branes indicates that stable oligomers of rhodopsin do not form during
excitation. Biophys J. 1985;47:277–284.
19. Dadi HK, Morris RJ. Muscarinic cholinergic receptor of rat brain.
Factors influencing migration in electrophoresis and gel filtration in
sodium dodecyl sulphate. Eur J Biochem. 1984;144:617–628.
20. Lefkowitz RJ, Haber E, O’Hara D. Identification of the cardiac beta-
adrenergic receptor protein: solubilization and purification by affinity
chromatography. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1972;69:2828–2832.
Drake et al Trafficking of G Protein–Coupled Receptors 579
 by guest on February 21, 2013http://circres.ahajournals.org/Downloaded from 
21. George SR, O’Dowd BF, Lee SP. G-protein-coupled receptor oligomer-
ization and its potential for drug discovery. Nat Rev Drug Discov.
2002;1:808–820.
22. Lee SP, O’Dowd BF, George SR. Homo- and hetero-oligomerization of
G protein-coupled receptors. Life Sci. 2003;74:173–180.
23. Bulenger S, Marullo S, Bouvier M. Emerging role of homo- and het-
erodimerization in G-protein-coupled receptor biosynthesis and matu-
ration. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2005;26:131–137.
24. Angers S, Salahpour A, Bouvier M. Dimerization: an emerging concept
for G protein-coupled receptor ontogeny and function. Annu Rev
Pharmacol Toxicol. 2002;42:409–435.
25. Park PS, Filipek S, Wells JW, Palczewski K. Oligomerization of G
protein-coupled receptors: past, present, and future. Biochemistry. 2004;
43:15643–15656.
26. Park PS, Wells JW. Oligomeric potential of the M2 muscarinic cho-
linergic receptor. J Neurochem. 2004;90:537–548.
27. Salahpour A, Angers S, Mercier JF, Lagace M, Marullo S, Bouvier M.
Homodimerization of the beta2-adrenergic receptor as a prerequisite for
cell surface targeting. J Biol Chem. 2004;279:33390–33397.
28. Terrillon S, Durroux T, Mouillac B, Breit A, Ayoub MA, Taulan M,
Jockers R, Barberis C, Bouvier M. Oxytocin and vasopressin V1a and
V2 receptors form constitutive homo- and heterodimers during biosyn-
thesis. Mol Endocrinol. 2003;17:677–691.
29. Hebert TE, Moffett S, Morello JP, Loisel TP, Bichet DG, Barret C,
Bouvier M. A peptide derived from a beta2-adrenergic receptor trans-
membrane domain inhibits both receptor dimerization and activation.
J Biol Chem. 1996;271:16384–16392.
30. Zhu X, Wess J. Truncated V2 vasopressin receptors as negative regu-
lators of wild-type V2 receptor function. Biochemistry. 1998;37:
15773–15784.
31. Lee SP, O’Dowd BF, Ng GY, Varghese G, Akil H, Mansour A, Nguyen
T, George SR. Inhibition of cell surface expression by mutant receptors
demonstrates that D2 dopamine receptors exist as oligomers in the cell.
Mol Pharmacol. 2000;58:120–128.
32. Hague C, Uberti MA, Chen Z, Hall RA, Minneman KP. Cell surface
expression of alpha1D-adrenergic receptors is controlled by het-
erodimerization with alpha1B-adrenergic receptors. J Biol Chem. 2004;
279:15541–15549.
33. Barki-Harrington L, Luttrell LM, Rockman HA. Dual inhibition of
beta-adrenergic and angiotensin II receptors by a single antagonist: a
functional role for receptor-receptor interaction in vivo. Circulation.
2003;108:1611–1618.
34. Hague C, Uberti MA, Chen Z, Bush CF, Jones SV, Ressler KJ, Hall RA,
Minneman KP. Olfactory receptor surface expression is driven by asso-
ciation with the beta2-adrenergic receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2004;101:13672–13676.
35. Uberti MA, Hague C, Oller H, Minneman KP, Hall RA. Heterodimer-
ization with beta2-adrenergic receptors promotes surface expression and
functional activity of alpha1D-adrenergic receptors. J Pharmacol Exp
Ther. 2005;313:16–23.
36. Jordan BA, Trapaidze N, Gomes I, Nivarthi R, Devi LA. Oligomer-
ization of opioid receptors with beta 2-adrenergic receptors: a role in
trafficking and mitogen-activated protein kinase activation. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2001;98:343–348.
37. Xiang Y, Devic E, Kobilka B. The PDZ binding motif of the beta 1
adrenergic receptor modulates receptor trafficking and signaling in
cardiac myocytes. J Biol Chem. 2002;277:33783–33790.
38. Wyse BD, Prior IA, Qian H, Morrow IC, Nixon S, Muncke C,
Kurzchalia TV, Thomas WG, Parton RG, Hancock JF. Caveolin
interacts with the angiotensin II type 1 receptor during exocytic transport
but not at the plasma membrane. J Biol Chem. 2003;278:23738–23746.
39. Barnett-Norris J, Lynch D, Reggio PH. Lipids, lipid rafts and caveolae:
their importance for GPCR signaling and their centrality to the endo-
cannabinoid system. Life Sci. 2005;77:1625–1639.
40. Insel PA, Head BP, Ostrom RS, Patel HH, Swaney JS, Tang CM, Roth
DM. Caveolae and lipid rafts: G protein-coupled receptor signaling
microdomains in cardiac myocytes. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005;1047:
166–172.
41. Insel PA, Head BP, Patel HH, Roth DM, Bundey RA, Swaney JS.
Compartmentation of G-protein-coupled receptors and their signalling
components in lipid rafts and caveolae. Biochem Soc Trans. 2005;33:
1131–1134.
42. Chini B, Parenti M. G-protein coupled receptors in lipid rafts and
caveolae: how, when and why do they go there? J Mol Endocrinol.
2004;32:325–338.
43. Papoucheva E, Dumuis A, Sebben M, Richter DW, Ponimaskin EG. The
5-hydroxytryptamine(1A) receptor is stably palmitoylated, and acylation
is critical for communication of receptor with Gi protein. J Biol Chem.
2004;279:3280–3291.
44. Rapacciuolo A, Suvarna S, Barki-Harrington L, Luttrell LM, Cong M,
Lefkowitz RJ, Rockman HA. Protein kinase A and G protein-coupled
receptor kinase phosphorylation mediates beta-1 adrenergic receptor
endocytosis through different pathways. J Biol Chem. 2003;278:
35403–35411.
45. Xiang Y, Rybin VO, Steinberg SF, Kobilka B. Caveolar localization
dictates physiologic signaling of beta 2-adrenoceptors in neonatal
cardiac myocytes. J Biol Chem. 2002;277:34280–34286.
46. Chuang DM, Costa E. Evidence for internalization of the recognition
site of beta-adrenergic receptors during receptor subsensitivity induced
by (-)-isoproterenol. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1979;76:3024–3028.
47. Hein L, Meinel L, Pratt RE, Dzau VJ, Kobilka BK. Intracellular traf-
ficking of angiotensin II and its AT1 and AT2 receptors: evidence for
selective sorting of receptor and ligand. Mol Endocrinol. 1997;11:
1266–1277.
48. Hausdorff WP, Campbell PT, Ostrowski J, Yu SS, Caron MG,
Lefkowitz RJ. A small region of the beta-adrenergic receptor is selec-
tively involved in its rapid regulation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991;
88:2979–2983.
49. Luttrell LM, Lefkowitz RJ. The role of beta-arrestins in the termination
and transduction of G-protein-coupled receptor signals. J Cell Sci. 2002;
115:455–465.
50. Bohm SK, Grady EF, Bunnett NW. Regulatory mechanisms that
modulate signalling by G-protein-coupled receptors. Biochem J. 1997;
322(pt 1):1–18.
51. von Zastrow M, Kobilka BK. Antagonist-dependent and -independent
steps in the mechanism of adrenergic receptor internalization. J Biol
Chem. 1994;269:18448–18452.
52. Claing A, Laporte SA, Caron MG, Lefkowitz RJ. Endocytosis of G
protein-coupled receptors: roles of G protein-coupled receptor kinases
and beta-arrestin proteins. Prog Neurobiol. 2002;66:61–79.
53. Shenoy SK, Lefkowitz RJ. Multifaceted roles of beta-arrestins in the
regulation of seven-membrane-spanning receptor trafficking and sig-
nalling. Biochem J. 2003;375:503–515.
54. Ferguson SS. Evolving concepts in G protein-coupled receptor endo-
cytosis: the role in receptor desensitization and signaling. Pharmacol
Rev. 2001;53:1–24.
55. Penela P, Murga C, Ribas C, Tutor AS, Peregrin S, Mayor F Jr.
Mechanisms of regulation of G protein-coupled receptor kinases
(GRKs) and cardiovascular disease. Cardiovasc Res. 2006;69:46–56.
56. Pitcher JA, Inglese J, Higgins JB, Arriza JL, Casey PJ, Kim C, Benovic
JL, Kwatra MM, Caron MG, Lefkowitz RJ. Role of beta gamma
subunits of G proteins in targeting the beta-adrenergic receptor kinase to
membrane-bound receptors. Science. 1992;257:1264–1267.
57. Stoffel RH, Randall RR, Premont RT, Lefkowitz RJ, Inglese J. Palmi-
toylation of G protein-coupled receptor kinase, GRK6. Lipid modifi-
cation diversity in the GRK family. J Biol Chem. 1994;269:
27791–27794.
58. Kunapuli P, Gurevich VV, Benovic JL. Phospholipid-stimulated auto-
phosphorylation activates the G protein-coupled receptor kinase GRK5.
J Biol Chem. 1994;269:10209–10212.
59. Premont RT, Koch WJ, Inglese J, Lefkowitz RJ. Identification, purifi-
cation, and characterization of GRK5, a member of the family of G
protein-coupled receptor kinases. J Biol Chem. 1994;269:6832–6841.
60. Oakley RH, Laporte SA, Holt JA, Barak LS, Caron MG. Association of
beta-arrestin with G protein-coupled receptors during clathrin-mediated
endocytosis dictates the profile of receptor resensitization. J Biol Chem.
1999;274:32248–32257.
61. Fredericks ZL, Pitcher JA, Lefkowitz RJ. Identification of the G protein-
coupled receptor kinase phosphorylation sites in the human beta2-
adrenergic receptor. J Biol Chem. 1996;271:13796–13803.
62. Trester-Zedlitz M, Burlingame A, Kobilka B, von Zastrow M. Mass
spectrometric analysis of agonist effects on posttranslational modifi-
cations of the beta-2 adrenoceptor in mammalian cells. Biochemistry.
2005;44:6133–6143.
63. Pelkmans L, Fava E, Grabner H, Hannus M, Habermann B, Krausz E,
Zerial M. Genome-wide analysis of human kinases in clathrin- and
caveolae/raft-mediated endocytosis. Nature. 2005;436:78–86.
64. Ferguson SS, Downey WE 3rd, Colapietro AM, Barak LS, Menard L,
Caron MG. Role of beta-arrestin in mediating agonist-promoted G
protein-coupled receptor internalization. Science. 1996;271:363–366.
580 Circulation Research September 15, 2006
 by guest on February 21, 2013http://circres.ahajournals.org/Downloaded from 
65. DeGraff JL, Gagnon AW, Benovic JL, Orsini MJ. Role of arrestins in
endocytosis and signaling of alpha2-adrenergic receptor subtypes. J Biol
Chem. 1999;274:11253–11259.
66. Mundell SJ, Matharu AL, Kelly E, Benovic JL. Arrestin isoforms dictate
differential kinetics of A2B adenosine receptor trafficking. Bio-
chemistry. 2000;39:12828–12836.
67. Lin FT, Miller WE, Luttrell LM, Lefkowitz RJ. Feedback regulation of
beta-arrestin1 function by extracellular signal-regulated kinases. J Biol
Chem. 1999;274:15971–15974.
68. Lin FT, Chen W, Shenoy S, Cong M, Exum ST, Lefkowitz RJ. Phos-
phorylation of beta-arrestin2 regulates its function in internalization of
beta(2)-adrenergic receptors. Biochemistry. 2002;41:10692–10699.
69. Kohout TA, Lin FS, Perry SJ, Conner DA, Lefkowitz RJ. beta-Arrestin
1 and 2 differentially regulate heptahelical receptor signaling and traf-
ficking. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001;98:1601–1606.
70. Oakley RH, Laporte SA, Holt JA, Caron MG, Barak LS. Differential
affinities of visual arrestin, beta arrestin1, and beta arrestin2 for G
protein-coupled receptors delineate two major classes of receptors.
J Biol Chem. 2000;275:17201–17210.
71. Pierce KL, Lefkowitz RJ. Classical and new roles of beta-arrestins in the
regulation of G-protein-coupled receptors. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2001;2:
727–733.
72. Ahn S, Nelson CD, Garrison TR, Miller WE, Lefkowitz RJ. Desensiti-
zation, internalization, and signaling functions of beta-arrestins demon-
strated by RNA interference. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003;100:
1740–1744.
73. Wojcikiewicz RJ. Regulated ubiquitination of proteins in GPCR-
initiated signaling pathways. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2004;25:35–41.
74. Hicke L, Dunn R. Regulation of membrane protein transport by
ubiquitin and ubiquitin-binding proteins. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2003;
19:141–172.
75. Hershko A, Ciechanover A. The ubiquitin system. Annu Rev Biochem.
1998;67:425–479.
76. Shenoy SK, McDonald PH, Kohout TA, Lefkowitz RJ. Regulation of
receptor fate by ubiquitination of activated beta 2-adrenergic receptor
and beta-arrestin. Science. 2001;294:1307–1313.
77. Martin NP, Lefkowitz RJ, Shenoy SK. Regulation of V2 vasopressin
receptor degradation by agonist-promoted ubiquitination. J Biol Chem.
2003;278:45954–45959.
78. Jacob C, Cottrell GS, Gehringer D, Schmidlin F, Grady EF, Bunnett
NW. c-Cbl mediates ubiquitination, degradation, and down-regulation of
human protease-activated receptor 2. J Biol Chem. 2005;280:
16076–16087.
79. Marchese A, Raiborg C, Santini F, Keen JH, Stenmark H, Benovic JL.
The E3 ubiquitin ligase AIP4 mediates ubiquitination and sorting of the
G protein-coupled receptor CXCR4. Dev Cell. 2003;5:709–722.
80. Marchese A, Benovic JL. Agonist-promoted ubiquitination of the G
protein-coupled receptor CXCR4 mediates lysosomal sorting. J Biol
Chem. 2001;276:45509–45512.
81. Liang W, Fishman PH. Resistance of the human beta1-adrenergic
receptor to agonist-induced ubiquitination: a mechanism for impaired
receptor degradation. J Biol Chem. 2004;279:46882–46889.
82. Walrafen P, Verdier F, Kadri Z, Chretien S, Lacombe C, Mayeux P.
Both proteasomes and lysosomes degrade the activated erythropoietin
receptor. Blood. 2005;105:600–608.
83. Milojevic T, Reiterer V, Stefan E, Korkhov VM, Dorostkar MM, Ducza
E, Ogris E, Boehm S, Freissmuth M, Nanoff C. The ubiquitin-specific
protease Usp4 regulates the cell surface level of the A2A receptor. Mol
Pharmacol. 2006;69:1083–1094.
84. Shenoy SK, Lefkowitz RJ. Trafficking patterns of beta-arrestin and G
protein-coupled receptors determined by the kinetics of beta-arrestin
deubiquitination. J Biol Chem. 2003;278:14498–14506.
85. Gabilondo AM, Hegler J, Krasel C, Boivin-Jahns V, Hein L, Lohse MJ.
A dileucine motif in the C terminus of the beta2-adrenergic receptor is
involved in receptor internalization. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997;
94:12285–12290.
86. Preisser L, Ancellin N, Michaelis L, Creminon C, Morel A, Corman B.
Role of the carboxyl-terminal region, di-leucine motif and cysteine
residues in signalling and internalization of vasopressin V1a receptor.
FEBS Lett. 1999;460:303–308.
87. Schulein R, Hermosilla R, Oksche A, Dehe M, Wiesner B, Krause G,
Rosenthal W. A dileucine sequence and an upstream glutamate residue
in the intracellular carboxyl terminus of the vasopressin V2 receptor are
essential for cell surface transport in COS.M6 cells. Mol Pharmacol.
1998;54:525–535.
88. Barak LS, Tiberi M, Freedman NJ, Kwatra MM, Lefkowitz RJ, Caron
MG. A highly conserved tyrosine residue in G protein-coupled receptors
is required for agonist-mediated beta 2-adrenergic receptor seques-
tration. J Biol Chem. 1994;269:2790–2795.
89. Gabilondo AM, Krasel C, Lohse MJ. Mutations of Tyr326 in the beta
2-adrenoceptor disrupt multiple receptor functions. Eur J Pharmacol.
1996;307:243–250.
90. Paing MM, Temple BR, Trejo J. A tyrosine-based sorting signal reg-
ulates intracellular trafficking of protease-activated receptor-1: multiple
regulatory mechanisms for agonist-induced G protein-coupled receptor
internalization. J Biol Chem. 2004;279:21938–21947.
91. Diviani D, Lattion AL, Abuin L, Staub O, Cotecchia S. The adaptor
complex 2 directly interacts with the alpha 1b-adrenergic receptor and
plays a role in receptor endocytosis. J Biol Chem. 2003;278:
19331–19340.
92. Claing A, Chen W, Miller WE, Vitale N, Moss J, Premont RT,
Lefkowitz RJ. beta-Arrestin-mediated ADP-ribosylation factor 6 acti-
vation and beta 2-adrenergic receptor endocytosis. J Biol Chem. 2001;
276:42509–42513.
93. Premont RT, Claing A, Vitale N, Freeman JL, Pitcher JA, Patton WA,
Moss J, Vaughan M, Lefkowitz RJ. beta2-Adrenergic receptor regu-
lation by GIT1, a G protein-coupled receptor kinase-associated ADP
ribosylation factor GTPase-activating protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
1998;95:14082–14087.
94. Vitale N, Patton WA, Moss J, Vaughan M, Lefkowitz RJ, Premont RT.
GIT proteins, A novel family of phosphatidylinositol 3,4,
5-trisphosphate-stimulated GTPase-activating proteins for ARF6. J Biol
Chem. 2000;275:13901–13906.
95. Claing A, Perry SJ, Achiriloaie M, Walker JK, Albanesi JP, Lefkowitz
RJ, Premont RT. Multiple endocytic pathways of G protein-coupled
receptors delineated by GIT1 sensitivity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2000;97:1119–1124.
96. Naga Prasad SV, Barak LS, Rapacciuolo A, Caron MG, Rockman HA.
Agonist-dependent recruitment of phosphoinositide 3-kinase to the
membrane by beta-adrenergic receptor kinase 1. A role in receptor
sequestration. J Biol Chem. 2001;276:18953–18959.
97. Naga Prasad SV, Laporte SA, Chamberlain D, Caron MG, Barak L,
Rockman HA. Phosphoinositide 3-kinase regulates beta2-adrenergic
receptor endocytosis by AP-2 recruitment to the receptor/beta-arrestin
complex. J Cell Biol. 2002;158:563–575.
98. Backer JM. Substrate specificity: PI(3)Kgamma has it both ways. Nat
Cell Biol. 2005;7:773–774.
99. Naga Prasad SV, Jayatilleke A, Madamanchi A, Rockman HA. Protein
kinase activity of phosphoinositide 3-kinase regulates beta-adrenergic
receptor endocytosis. Nat Cell Biol. 2005;7:785–796.
100. Gaborik Z, Hunyady L. Intracellular trafficking of hormone receptors.
Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2004;15:286–293.
101. Dohlman HG, Thorner J, Caron MG, Lefkowitz RJ. Model systems for
the study of seven-transmembrane-segment receptors. Annu Rev
Biochem. 1991;60:653–688.
102. Hall RA, Premont RT, Chow CW, Blitzer JT, Pitcher JA, Claing A,
Stoffel RH, Barak LS, Shenolikar S, Weinman EJ, Grinstein S,
Lefkowitz RJ. The beta2-adrenergic receptor interacts with the Na/
H-exchanger regulatory factor to control Na/H exchange. Nature.
1998;392:626–630.
103. Hall RA, Ostedgaard LS, Premont RT, Blitzer JT, Rahman N, Welsh
MJ, Lefkowitz RJ. A C-terminal motif found in the beta2-adrenergic
receptor, P2Y1 receptor and cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance
regulator determines binding to the Na/H exchanger regulatory
factor family of PDZ proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998;95:
8496–8501.
104. Mahon MJ, Donowitz M, Yun CC, Segre GV. Na()/H() exchanger
regulatory factor 2 directs parathyroid hormone 1 receptor signalling.
Nature. 2002;417:858–861.
105. Cao TT, Deacon HW, Reczek D, Bretscher A, von Zastrow M. A
kinase-regulated PDZ-domain interaction controls endocytic sorting of
the beta2-adrenergic receptor. Nature. 1999;401:286–290.
106. Liu-Chen LY. Agonist-induced regulation and trafficking of kappa
opioid receptors. Life Sci. 2004;75:511–536.
107. McDonald PH, Cote NL, Lin FT, Premont RT, Pitcher JA, Lefkowitz
RJ. Identification of NSF as a beta-arrestin1-binding protein. Impli-
cations for beta2-adrenergic receptor regulation. J Biol Chem. 1999;274:
10677–10680.
Drake et al Trafficking of G Protein–Coupled Receptors 581
 by guest on February 21, 2013http://circres.ahajournals.org/Downloaded from 
108. Cong M, Perry SJ, Hu LA, Hanson PI, Claing A, Lefkowitz RJ. Binding
of the beta2 adrenergic receptor to N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor
regulates receptor recycling. J Biol Chem. 2001;276:45145–45152.
109. Kurten RC, Cadena DL, Gill GN. Enhanced degradation of EGF
receptors by a sorting nexin, SNX1. Science. 1996;272:1008–1010.
110. Wang Y, Zhou Y, Szabo K, Haft CR, Trejo J. Down-regulation of
protease-activated receptor-1 is regulated by sorting nexin 1. Mol Biol
Cell. 2002;13:1965–1976.
111. Gullapalli A, Wolfe BL, Griffin CT, Magnuson T, Trejo J. An essential
role for SNX1 in lysosomal sorting of protease-activated receptor-1:
evidence for retromer-, Hrs-, and Tsg101-independent functions of
sorting nexins. Mol Biol Cell. 2006;17:1228–1238.
112. Seachrist JL, Ferguson SS. Regulation of G protein-coupled receptor
endocytosis and trafficking by Rab GTPases. Life Sci. 2003;74:225–235.
113. Seachrist JL, Anborgh PH, Ferguson SS. beta 2-adrenergic receptor
internalization, endosomal sorting, and plasma membrane recycling are
regulated by rab GTPases. J Biol Chem. 2000;275:27221–27228.
114. Seachrist JL, Laporte SA, Dale LB, Babwah AV, Caron MG, Anborgh
PH, Ferguson SS. Rab5 association with the angiotensin II type 1A
receptor promotes Rab5 GTP binding and vesicular fusion. J Biol Chem.
2002;277:679–685.
115. Dale LB, Seachrist JL, Babwah AV, Ferguson SS. Regulation of angio-
tensin II type 1A receptor intracellular retention, degradation, and
recycling by Rab5, Rab7, and Rab11 GTPases. J Biol Chem. 2004;279:
13110–13118.
116. Odley A, Hahn HS, Lynch RA, Marreez Y, Osinska H, Robbins J, Dorn
GW 2nd. Regulation of cardiac contractility by Rab4-modulated beta2-
adrenergic receptor recycling. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004;101:
7082–7087.
117. Hislop JN, Marley A, Von Zastrow M. Role of mammalian vacuolar
protein-sorting proteins in endocytic trafficking of a nonubiquitinated G
protein-coupled receptor to lysosomes. J Biol Chem. 2004;279:
22522–22531.
118. Whistler JL, Enquist J, Marley A, Fong J, Gladher F, Tsuruda P, Murray
SR, Von Zastrow M. Modulation of postendocytic sorting of G protein-
coupled receptors. Science. 2002;297:615–620.
119. Zhang J, Ferguson SS, Barak LS, Menard L, Caron MG. Dynamin and
beta-arrestin reveal distinct mechanisms for G protein-coupled receptor
internalization. J Biol Chem. 1996;271:18302–18305.
120. Hu LA, Tang Y, Miller WE, Cong M, Lau AG, Lefkowitz RJ, Hall RA.
beta 1-adrenergic receptor association with PSD-95. Inhibition of
receptor internalization and facilitation of beta 1-adrenergic receptor
interaction with N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors. J Biol Chem. 2000;
275:38659–38666.
121. Xu J, Paquet M, Lau AG, Wood JD, Ross CA, Hall RA. beta
1-adrenergic receptor association with the synaptic scaffolding protein
membrane-associated guanylate kinase inverted-2 (MAGI-2). Differ-
ential regulation of receptor internalization by MAGI-2 and PSD-95.
J Biol Chem. 2001;276:41310–41317.
122. Tang Y, Hu LA, Miller WE, Ringstad N, Hall RA, Pitcher JA,
DeCamilli P, Lefkowitz RJ. Identification of the endophilins (SH3p4/
p8/p13) as novel binding partners for the beta1-adrenergic receptor.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999;96:12559–12564.
123. Gonzalez-Gaitan M, Stenmark H. Endocytosis and signaling: a rela-
tionship under development. Cell. 2003;115:513–521.
124. Luttrell LM, Ferguson SS, Daaka Y, Miller WE, Maudsley S, Della
Rocca GJ, Lin F, Kawakatsu H, Owada K, Luttrell DK, Caron MG,
Lefkowitz RJ. Beta-arrestin-dependent formation of beta2 adrenergic
receptor-Src protein kinase complexes. Science. 1999;283:655–661.
125. Lefkowitz RJ, Shenoy SK. Transduction of receptor signals by beta-
arrestins. Science. 2005;308:512–517.
126. Shenoy SK, Lefkowitz RJ Angiotensin II-stimulated signaling through
G proteins and beta-arrestin. Sci STKE. 2005;2005:cm14.
127. DeFea KA, Zalevsky J, Thoma MS, Dery O, Mullins RD, Bunnett NW.
beta-arrestin-dependent endocytosis of proteinase-activated receptor 2 is
required for intracellular targeting of activated ERK1/2. J Cell Biol.
2000;148:1267–1281.
128. Shenoy SK, Drake MT, Nelson CD, Houtz DA, Xiao K, Madabushi S,
Reiter E, Premont RT, Lichtarge O, Lefkowitz RJ. beta-arrestin-
dependent, G protein-independent ERK1/2 activation by the beta2
adrenergic receptor. J Biol Chem. 2006;281:1261–1273.
129. Gesty-Palmer D, Chen M, Reiter E, Ahn S, Nelson CD, Wang S,
Eckhardt AE, Cowan CL, Spurney RF, Luttrell LM, Lefkowitz RJ.
Distinct beta-arrestin- and G protein-dependent pathways for para-
thyroid hormone receptor-stimulated ERK1/2 activation. J Biol Chem.
2006;281:10856–10864.
130. Wei H, Ahn S, Barnes WG, Lefkowitz RJ. Stable interaction between
beta-arrestin 2 and angiotensin type 1A receptor is required for beta-
arrestin 2-mediated activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1
and 2. J Biol Chem. 2004;279:48255–48261.
131. Shenoy SK, Lefkowitz RJ. Receptor-specific ubiquitination of beta-
arrestin directs assembly and targeting of seven-transmembrane receptor
signalosomes. J Biol Chem. 2005;280:15315–15324.
582 Circulation Research September 15, 2006
 by guest on February 21, 2013http://circres.ahajournals.org/Downloaded from 
