Therapeutic Targeting of the Hedgehog-GLI Pathway
in Prostate Cancer
Pilar Sanchez, Virginie Clement, and Ariel Ruiz i Altaba
Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland
Abstract
The Hedgehog-GLI signaling pathway is important in animal
development and tumorigenesis. Recent findings indicate that
the growth and survival of human prostate cancer cells rely
upon sustained signaling from the Hedgehog-GLI pathway.
These findings have prompted a novel rational strategy for
therapeutic treatment of prostate tumors, including meta-
static tumors. (Cancer Res 2005; 65(8): 2990-2)
Hedgehog signaling has been implicated in the control of many
aspects of vertebrate development. The three Hedgehog proteins of
humans and mice—Sonic, Indian, and Desert—are expressed in
specific, largely nonoverlapping regions and cell types. All three
Hedgehog proteins act through the transmembrane proteins
Patched1 (PTCH1) and Smoothened (SMOH), which regulate the
transcriptional activity of three GLI zinc-finger transcription factors
(Fig. 1A ; refs. 1, 2). In the male reproductive tract, Sonic Hedgehog
(SHH) signaling is necessary for the formation of the external
genitalia and for the development of the prostate (3, 4). Although
prostate organogenesis in the mouse is SHH independent, SHH is
expressed in the developing prostatic epithelium and inhibition of
SHH signaling causes defects in ductal patterning (5) and a
reduction of epithelial cell proliferation (6).
In adult humans, we and others have shown that deregulation of
the SHH-GLI pathway is involved in a number of tumors, such as
basal skin cell carcinomas, medulloblastomas, and pancreatic and
lung cancers (1, 7, 8). Based on our initial finding that sporadic
human prostate tumors express GLI1 (9), a very reliable marker of
SHH signaling, we hypothesized that SHH-GLI function is involved
in prostate cancer.
To test this hypothesis, we first analyzed the expression of SHH
pathway components in prostate cancer and normal adult tissue.
In situ hybridization showed that GLI1 , PTCH1 , and SHH are
normally coexpressed in adult prostate epithelial cells as well as
in prostate carcinomas (10). This is consistent with the idea that
tumor cells derive from the expansion of normal SHH-expressing
prostatic epithelium. In our study, we did not detect GLI1
expression in the surrounding normal or tumor stroma, raising
the possibility that SHH acts in an autocrine fashion in adult
prostate epithelial cells. The levels of expression of SHH, PTCH1,
GLI1, GLI2 , and GLI3 are variable but were often up-regulated in
tumor versus matched control samples of the same patients.
Similarly, SHH protein levels are elevated in tumors where it is
present as a secreted protein in the glandular lumen. A significant
correlation between high SHH expression, tumor presence, and
high cell proliferation was detected, but no correlation was found
with Gleason score or other clinical parameters.
To test the relevance of sustained SHH-GLI signaling for prostate
tumor cell growth, we first used the plant alkaloid cyclopamine, a
selective inhibitor of SMOH (Fig. 1A ; ref. 11), on three established
prostate cancer cell lines derived from metastatic lesions that are
commonly used to study prostate cancer (LNCaP from a prostate
cancer lymph node metastasis and PC3 and DU145 from bone
metastases). Cyclopamine treatment for 48 hours greatly inhibited
the proliferation of LNCaP cells (>80% reduction in BrdUrd
incorporation), reduced the proliferation of PC3 cells by 30%, but
did not affect the proliferation of DU145 cells (10). In addition, we
cultured primary prostate carcinomas that express prostate-
specific antigen PSA , SHH , PTCH1 , and GLI1 . The growth of all
primary cultures was dependent on SHH pathway activity as
cyclopamine treatment led to a major (>70%) decrease in BrdUrd
incorporation (10).
Expression of ligand (SHH) and final mediator (GLI1) in the
prostatic epithelia suggested autocrine signaling as in the case of
lung and digestive tract tumors (12, 13). We observed that addition
of blocking anti-SHH antibody inhibited the proliferation of three
of four tumors. Moreover, addition of recombinant SHH protein
increased the proliferation in two of four tumors (10). Treatment of
LNCaP, PC3, or DU145 cells with either SHH protein or blocking
antibody did not produce any effects. Thus, whereas autocrine
signaling may take place in prostate tumors in situ , these
metastatic cell lines seem to have lost responsiveness to ligand
and may have activation of the pathway downstream of ligand-
receptor binding.
Activation of the SHH pathway leads to GLI protein function
(Fig. 1A). However, mouse Gli1 is apparently not necessary for
development or tumorigenesis (14). In contrast, GLI1 is the only
GLI gene consistently expressed in the three human cell lines
tested, raising the possibility that it plays a central role in SHH
signaling in the men’s prostate. To test this idea, we used specific
21-nucleotide-long small interfering RNAs (siRNA). Although
siRNAs could not be used on primary cells due to low levels of
lipofection, GLI1 siRNA treatment produced a 60% reduction in
BrdUrd incorporation in transfected LNCaP cells (10). This is the
first demonstration of the requirement of GLI1 in human cells
and suggests that the point of activation in LNCaP occurs at the
level of SMOH or upstream (because cyclopamine inhibited
proliferation), but downstream of SHH (as the blocking antibody
produced no effect). More interestingly, GLI1 siRNA led to a 30%
reduction in cell proliferation of DU145 cells. Because these cells
are not sensitive to cyclopamine, the siRNA results suggest
activation of the pathway downstream of SMOH and upstream or
at the level of GLI1 function. GLI1 siRNA produced a smaller
effect on PC3 cells, likely due to the low efficiency of lipofection,
which is always incomplete, or to the compensation mechanisms
Note: Present address for P. Sanchez is Department of Cell Biology, University of
Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
Requests for reprints: Ariel Ruiz i Altaba, Department of Genetic Medicine and
Development, University of Geneva Medical School, 8242 CMU, 1 rue Michel Servet,
CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. Phone: 41-22-379-5646; Fax: 41-22-379-5962; E-mail:
Ariel.RuizAltaba@medecine.unige.ch.
I2005 American Association for Cancer Research.
Cancer Res 2005; 65: (8). April 15, 2005 2990 www.aacrjournals.org
Review Article
mediated by other GLI proteins (as they express GLI2 and this
gene can share some functions with GLI1 ; refs. 15, 16). Taken
together, our results show the dependence of prostate cancer cell
proliferation on SHH-GLI pathway activity and suggest activation
of the SHH-GLI pathway at different levels in different tumors
(10). Moreover, they show the requirement of GLI1 in human
cancer. Considering the role of this pathway in normal prostate
development and its potential involvement in adult prostate
homeostasis, we suggest that the normal patterning role of SHH-
GLI signaling is deregulated in prostate tumors, perhaps acting on
epithelial stem cells.
In parallel with our research, a second study proposed that SHH
induces GLI1 in the stroma of prostate tumors (17), suggesting that
SHH-GLI signaling might play a role in critical tumor-stromal
interactions, although these finding have not been reproduced (10).
SHH was also shown to increase LNCaP cell growth in mouse
xenografts (17); in a third study, SHH was shown to induce
angiogenesis and facilitate the growth of PC3 cell xenografts (18).
A fourth study also showed the existence of autocrine signaling by
SHH in the adult prostate and in prostate cancer (19). This study
showed that cyclopamine is an effective inhibitor of cell prolifer-
ation for prostate tumor cultures and s.c. xenografts, that GLI1
overexpression can bypass the inhibitory effect of cyclopamine as
expected, and that it can enhance the transformation and
tumorigenesis of prostate cells. These data, together with the effect
of GLI1 siRNA described above (10), confirm that GLI1 is necessary
and sufficient for prostate cancer and underline its potential for
diagnosis as well as a therapeutic target, as first shown for basal cell
carcinomas (20). Moreover, an analysis of fresh metastastic lesions
as well as localized tumors and adjacent normal tissue showed that
normal and tumorigenic tissue express SHH and IHH (Indian
Hedgehog) with no correlation with tumor aggressiveness, although
a clear up-regulation of PTCH1 and GLI1 in metastatic samples was
observed when compared with benign prostate tumors or normal
tissue (19). Two discrepancies with our data need to be resolved as
the DU145 and PC3 cell subcultures used (19) were sensitive to
cyclopamine and blocking anti-SHH antibodies, respectively.
A fifth study shows that PTCH1 and HIP1 (Hedgehog interacting
protein 1) are highly expressed in a number of metastatic and high-
grade prostate tumors (21). It is also shown that tumors with low
Gleason scores express SUFUH (a negative regulator of the pathway),
whereas most tumors with high Gleason scores do not, or instead
express high levels of SHH. These data suggest that prostate cancer
progression correlates with activation of the SHH-GLI pathway
Figure 1. A, schematic representation of key components of the Hedgehog-GLI pathway. The ligand Hedgehog (HH ) binds to and blocks the activity of the
transmembrane protein Patched1 (PTCH1 ), thereby releasing the inhibition of Smoothened (SMOH ) and activating GLI1 function. The diagram also represents
the site of action of different types of inhibitors used on prostate cancer cells (10): a blocking antibody (Ab ) against SHH, the SMOH inhibitor cyclopamine, and
siRNA targeting GLI1 . B, proposed model of prostate cancer development from normal epithelia to metastasis. Inappropriate maintenance/elevation of SHH-GLI
pathway activity leads to enhanced/sustained GLI1 function in epithelial cells, triggering an increase in cell proliferation and tumor formation. Elevated levels of GLI1
function are proposed to underlie and be required for metastasis.
Hedgehog-GLI Signaling in Prostate Cancer
www.aacrjournals.org 2991 Cancer Res 2005; 65: (8). April 15, 2005
either by loss of a repressor component like SUFUH (which acts
downstream of SMOH) or by overexpression of the ligand. Finally,
this work confirmed that prostate cancer cell lines are sensitive to
cyclopamine and, interestingly, that cyclopamine-treated PC3 cells
have reduced invasiveness, suggesting that SHH signaling regulates
not only proliferation and progression but also tumor invasiveness.
In summary, the findings from our work and those from other
studies taken together suggest a simple conceptual model for
prostate cancer initiation, progression, and metastasis (Fig. 1B),
which may be applicable to many, if not all, Hedgehog-GLI–
dependent tumors (1). Under normal conditions, activity of the
SHH-GLI pathway is involved in the homeostasis of the prostatic
epithelium, perhaps acting on prostate stem cells and in
regeneration when required. Epigenetic events, hormonally-related
changes, direct or indirect alterations in pathway components, or
other causes leading to enhanced GLI1 function result in tumor
initiation and cancer development. Other factors may then alter the
character of the tumor. Metastases are proposed to arise due to the
acquisition of elevated cell-intrinsic signaling or to an overall
ligand-dependent increase in signaling (10, 18), all cases leading to
enhanced GLI1 function (10). More experiments are clearly needed
to understand the complexity and variability of prostate cancer, to
define the role of the SHH-GLI signal in the cross-talk between
prostate tumor cells and their surrounding stroma, and to
determine the interaction with other signaling pathways previously
implicated in prostate cancer. Nevertheless, the new data confirm
our hypothesis (9), but they are otherwise surprising and
unexpected as no other role for SHH signaling in prostate cancer
had been suggested previously.
Practically, we suggest that monitoring SHH-GLI pathway
activity would be a good routine diagnostic for a number of cancers,
including those of the prostate, and that pathway inhibitors, with
emphasis on interfering with GLI1 function, will provide new
therapeutics for prostate cancers and other lethal cancers.
Acknowledgments
Received 2/8/2005; accepted 2/8/2005.
Grant support: American Brain Tumor Foundation (P. Sanchez); National Cancer
Institute, National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Stroke, NIH; and the Jeantet
Foundation (A. Ruiz i Altaba).
We thank Barbara Stecca and Nadia Dahmane for discussion, and Barbara Stecca,
Suma Datta (Texas A&M University, College Station, TX) and Milt Datta (Emory
University, Atlanta, GA) for collaborating with us on the prostate cancer project.
Cancer Research
Cancer Res 2005; 65: (8). April 15, 2005 2992 www.aacrjournals.org
References
1. Ruiz i Altaba A, Palma V, Dahmane N. Gli and
Hedgehog in cancer: tumors, embryos and stem cells.
Nat Rev Neurosci 2002;3:24–33.
2. Lum L, Beachy PA. The Hedgehog response network:
sensors, switches, and routers. Science 2004;304:1755–9.
3. Podlasek CA, Barnett DH, Clemens JQ, Bak PM,
Bushman W. Prostate development requires Sonic
Hedgehog expressed by the urogenital sinus epithelium.
Dev Biol 1999;209:28–9.
4. Lamm ML, Catbagan WS, Laciak RJ, et al. Sonic
hedgehog activates mesenchymal Gli1 expression during
prostate ductal bud formation. Dev Biol 2002;249:349–66.
5. Berman DM, Desai N, Wang X, et al. Roles for Hedgehog
signaling in androgen production and prostate ductal
morphogenesis. Dev Biol 2004;267:387–98.
6. Freestone SH,Marker P, Grace OC, et al. Sonic hedgehog
regulates prostatic growth and epithelia differentiation.
Dev Biol 2003;264:352–62.
7. Ruiz i Altaba A, Stecca B, Sanchez P. Hedgehog–Gli
signaling in brain tumors: stem cells and paradevelop-
mental programs in cancer. Cancer Lett 2004;204:145–57.
8. Pasca di Magliano M, Hebrok M. Hedgehog signalling
in cancer formation and maintenance. Nat Rev Cancer
2003;3:903–11.
9. Dahmane N, Sanchez P, Gitton Y, et al. The Sonic
Hedgehog-Gli pathway regulates dorsal brain growth
and tumorigenesis. Development 2001;128:5201–12.
10. Sanchez P, Hernandez AM, Stecca B, et al. Inhibition of
prostate cancer proliferation by interference with SONIC
HEDGEHOG-GLI1 signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2004;101:12561–6.
11. Chen JK, Taipale J, Cooper MK, Beachy PA. Inhibition
of Hedgehog signaling by direct binding of cyclopamine
to Smoothened. Genes Dev 2002;16:2743–8.
12. Watkins DN, Berman DM, Burkholder SG, Wang B,
Beachy PA, Baylin SB. Hedgehog signaling within airway
epithelial progenitors and in small-cell lung cancer.
Nature 2003;422:313–7.
13. Berman DM, Karhadkar SS, Maitra A, et al.
Widespread requirement for Hedgehog ligand stimu-
lation in growth of digestive tract tumours. Nature
2003;425:846–51.
14. Weiner HL, Bakst R, Hurlbert MS, et al. Induction of
medulloblastomas in mice by sonic hedgehog, indepen-
dent of Gli1. Cancer Res 2002;62:6385–9.
15. Ruiz i Altaba A. Gli proteins encode context-
dependent positive and negative functions: implications
for development and disease. Development 1999;126:
3205–16.
16. Bai CB, Joyner AL. Gli1 can rescue the in vivo function
of Gli2. Development 2001;128:5161–72.
17. Fan L, Pepicelli CV, Dibble CC, et al. Hedgehog
signaling promotes bprostate xenograft tumor growth.
Endocrinology 2004;145:3961–70.
18. Olsen CL, Hsu PP, Glienke J, Rubanyi GM, Brooks AR.
Hedgehog-interacting protein is highly expressed in
endothelial cells but down-regulated during angiogene-
sis and in several human tumors. BMC Cancer 2004;4:43.
19. Karhadkar SS, Bova GS, Abdallah N, et al. Hedgehog
signalling in prostate regeneration, neoplasia and
metastasis. Nature 2004;431:707–12.
20. Dahmane N, Lee J, Robins P, Heller P, Ruiz i Altaba A.
Activation of the transcription factor Gli1 and the Sonic
hedgehog signalling pathway in skin tumours. Nature
1997;389:876–81.
21. Sheng T, Li C, Zhang X, et al. Activation of the
hedgehog pathway in advanced prostate cancer. Mol
Cancer 2004;3:29.
