Real-time observation of DNA looping dynamics of
Type IIE restriction enzymes NaeI and NarI
Bram van den Broek, Francesco Vanzi1, Davide Normanno1, Francesco S. Pavone1
and Gijs J.L. Wuite*
Faculty of Sciences, Department of Physics and Astronomy and Laser Centre, De Boelelaan 1081, Vrije Universiteit,
Amsterdam, 1081 HV, The Netherlands and 1European Laboratory for Non-linear Spectroscopy (LENS),
Via Nello Carrara 1, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino (Firenze), Italy
Received October 3, 2005; Revised December 7, 2005; Accepted December 21, 2005
ABSTRACT
Many restriction enzymes require binding of two
copies of a recognition sequence for DNA cleavage,
thereby introducing a loop in the DNA. We investi-
gated looping dynamics of Type IIE restriction
enzymes NaeI and NarI by tracking the Brownian
motion of single tethered DNA molecules. DNA con-
taining two endonuclease recognition sites spaced a
few 100 bp apart connect small polystyrene beads
to a glass surface. The position of a bead is tracked
through video microscopy. Protein-mediated loop-
ing and unlooping is then observed as a sudden
specific change in Brownian motion of the bead.
With this method we are able to directly follow DNA
looping kinetics of single protein–DNA complexes
to obtain loop stability and loop formation times.
We show that, in the absence of divalent cations,
NaeI induces DNA loops of specific size. In contrast,
under these conditions NarI mainly creates non-
specific loops, resulting in effective DNA compac-
tion for higher enzyme concentrations. Addition of
Ca21 increases the NaeI-DNA loop lifetime by two
orders of magnitude and stimulates specific bind-
ing by NarI. Finally, for both enzymes we observe
exponentially distributed loop formation times, indi-
cating that looping is dominated by (re)binding the
second recognition site.
INTRODUCTION
In many genetic processes, proteins bind simultaneously
to two separate DNA sites large distances apart, creating a
DNA loop. These processes include DNA replication and
repair (1,2), site-specific recombination (3,4) and transcription
regulation (5–7). Recently, it has become increasingly appar-
ent that many restriction enzymes also need to interact with
two identical copies of the recognition sequence before
cleavage can take place (8–11). In vivo, Type II restriction
endonucleases constitute an important defense mechanism
of bacteria against viral attacks. They do so by catalyzing
double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) breakage at specific recogni-
tion sites using Mg2+ as co-factor. Other divalent cations such
as Mn2+ or Co2+ can function as analogues for this metal ion.
Interestingly, Ca2+ enhances binding to the specific sequence
as well, but at the same time inhibits DNA cleavage (12,13).
In contrast, non-specific binding is generally not affected by
the presence of divalent metal ions (13–15).
DNA loop formation by Type II restriction enzymes has
been demonstrated in several ways (11,16–21). However, in
these types of studies, looping could only be demonstrated
indirectly and little insight in the underlying loop kinetics
was gained. Here we apply a tethered particle motion
(TPM) assay (22–26), to follow in real-time the loop formation
by restriction enzymes within single dsDNA molecules. In
particular we study the dynamics of two similar Type IIE
enzymes, NaeI (from Nocardia aerocolonigenes) and NarI
(from Nocardia argentinensis). Both proteins, presumably
functional as dimers, are known to interact with two DNA
sites before cleavage. Of these two proteins, NaeI is the
best studied. The crystal structure is solved and the enzyme
is considered a prototype Type IIE restriction enzyme
(Figure 1). The dimeric protein has two different DNA-
binding domains. Only one of these domains, the endonucle-
ase or ‘Endo’ domain, is capable of cleaving substrate DNA,
provided that a second copy of the recognition site, the
activator DNA, is bound to the ‘Topo’ domain (27,28).
Single molecule observations have recently provided con-
siderable new insights in the mechanochemistry of restriction
enzymes (29–31). In this study we unambiguously show loop
formation and disruption by these remarkable enzymes.
Moreover, we compare looping kinetics under different
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +31205987987; Fax: +31205987991; Email: gwuite@nat.vu.nl
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34 , No. 1 167–174
doi:10.1093/nar/gkj432
 Published online January 10, 2006
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
conditions (with Mg2+, Ca2+ or no divalent cations) and reveal
unexpected large differences in the stability and specificity of
the loop formation and disruption between the two proteins.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Looping kinetics were studied for restriction enzymes NaeI
(Amersham Biosciences) and NarI (Roche Applied Science)
in a buffer containing 33 mM Tris-acetate, 66 mM K-acetate,
1 mM DTT and 100 mg/ml a-casein (pH 7.0), with or without
any divalent metals. In the latter case 0.1 mM EGTA and
0.1 mM EDTA were present in the buffer. Two different
DNA substrates were used in the experiments (Figure 2a).
DNA #1, a 960 bp substrate prepared by PCR using pCco5
as template, contained two NaeI recognition sites (GCCGGC)
at a distance 455 bp from each other and one site for NarI. It
has been shown for NaeI that the two DNA-binding domains
(see Figure 1) have different affinities for the recognition
sequence, depending on flanking sequence (28). In DNA sub-
strate #1, the two NaeI sites differ in flanking sequence, but
both contain an AT-rich side and a GC-rich side: CAATGC-
CGGCGCCG and TGATGCCGGCCTGG. However, neither
of these sites very closely resemble any of the sequences
tested (28). We cannot tell if there is any preference in binding
of the Endo or Topo domain to either of the sites used here.
DNA substrate #2, created by PCR from pRW490 (32), was
slightly longer (1296 bp) and harbored two NarI sites
(GGCGCC) spaced at 305 bp and no NaeI sites. For both
substrates the primers (MWG Biotech) were labeled with
biotin and digoxigenin (DIG).
Single DNA molecules labeled with DIG on one end and
biotin on the other end were attached to a glass surface (DIG–
anti-DIG binding) and to a 440 nm diameter streptavidin-
coated polystyrene bead (Indicia Biotechnology). Such
constructs were assembled in a flow cell consisting of a
microscope slide and a perpendicularly placed (plasma
cleaned) cover slip, using double stick tape as spacer. Silicon
grease was used to create reservoirs for100 ml buffer on both
sides of the sample chamber, thereby avoiding evaporation
of water in the chamber. The volume of the flow chamber
itself was 20 ml. After assembly the chamber was incubated
for 20 min with 20 mg/ml anti-DIG (Roche Applied Science).
Then the flow chamber was washed extensively with buffer
solution, which included a-casein to passivate glass surfaces.
Next, the labeled DNA, diluted to a few 100 ng/ml, was flown
in. After incubation of 1 h, the chamber was again washed
with several hundreds of microliters of restriction enzyme
buffer before being studied.
Brownian motion of a bead was monitored by tracking the
x and y (in-plane) coordinates of the centroid of the particle
with video microscopy (50 Hz) in a bright-field microscope.
The amplitude of Brownian motion is a direct measure for the
DNA tether length (22,24,26,33). Recorded is the root mean
square (RMS) motion hRi ¼ {[(x  xm)2 + (y  ym)2]/2}1/2,
with xm and ym the mean values of x and y averaged over
100 frames. Doing so automatically corrects the data for ther-
mal drift of the microscope stage. When a protein bridges
two sites on the DNA a loop is introduced in the DNA.
This effectively reduces the DNA tether length and restricts
the movement of the bead (22,23,34) (Figure 2b). The motion
of a specific bead was typically measured for 1 h continu-
ously. The recorded x and y values were smoothed using
a Gaussian filter with s ¼ 1.0 s (NaeI data) and s ¼ 2.0 s
(NarI data) and analyzed using a half-amplitude threshold
method (35) to obtain dwell times. This method allowed us
to reliably detect DNA loops having lifetimes as short as
Figure 1. Dimeric structure of NaeI in complex with two cognate DNA sites
[(48), PDB ID: 1IAW]. The protein comprises two structurally different DNA-
binding domains. Binding of cognate activator DNA to the ‘Topo’ domain
functions as allosteric effector for binding and DNA cleavage by the ‘Endo’
domain (28,48). The two DNAs, shown in red, are bound under a 90 angle.
Figure 2. (a) DNA templates used in the experiments. Template #1 is 960 bp
in length and has two NaeI recognition sites (and one NarI site). Template #2
is slightly longer, 1296 bp and harbors two NarI sites. In the looped state
template #1 is 505 bp and template #2 991 bp in length. (b) Schematic repre-
sentation of the experiment. Small beads are tethered with the DNA molecule
in question to the glass slide. By tracking the x- and y-positions of the bead the
magnitude of the Brownian motion is monitored, which is a measure for the
tether length. Upon DNA loop formation by a restriction enzyme the Brownian
motion of the bead suddenly decreases. This allows following DNA looping
kinetics in real-time.
168 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34 , No. 1
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
1.4 s (NaeI) and 2.7 s (NarI). Events shorter than these limits
were omitted. The NaeI data traces display a better signal-
to-noise ratio than the traces of NarI, because NaeI looping
shortens the DNA by about 50% while NarI only reduces the
tether length by 25%. The less significant length change
between unlooped and looped state for NarI results in a smaller
difference in Brownian motion.
Sometimes a bead momentarily sticks to the cover slip
surface, leading to a ‘fake’ looping transition. Such events
are easily recognized, since in these cases the registered
Brownian motion <R> reduces to a very small value (typically
<20 nm) before returning to its original value. Another pos-
sible cause of fraudulent looping transitions is the transient
adsorption of the DNA tether itself to the glass (either by
itself or via a bound enzyme). Whether an observed transi-
tion truly represents DNA looping was tested by evaluating
the individual x- and y-coordinate traces. False transitions
are generally characterized by a shift in the anchor point
of the tether (36). The amount of such fake transitions in
the analyzed NaeI and NarI data caused by this effect was
found to be negligible with respect to the number of real
events. In control experiments without proteins in the solu-
tion, we did not observe any transitions except for occasional
bead sticking.
RESULTS
DNA cleavage
To examine whether NaeI and NarI restriction enzymes
are active in the TPM assay, we carried out cleavage control
experiments. With Mg2+ present in solution, the DNA is
expected to be cleaved within several seconds after the protein
has induced a DNA loop by binding to both specific sites. For
these experiments we marked the positions of many tethered
beads (20) per sample chamber. Next, enzymes in buffer
containing Mg2+ (2–5 mM) were introduced by flow. This
was done for NaeI and NarI on their specific DNA substrates.
Directly after solution exchange (typically 10–20 s), most of
the previously located beads had already disappeared, while
some of the remaining beads were seen to be released into
solution. These experiments were repeated with DNA tethers
that were first incubated with enzymes in a buffer containing
Ca2+, before the introduction of Mg2+. In this case we observed
that all DNA molecules that were looped by NaeI before
solution exchange were cleaved within seconds after Mg2+
was introduced (interestingly, some of the unlooped tethers
survived for more than 10 min). This result indicates that
divalent metal ions are exchanged quickly in the specific
enzyme–DNA complexes. Exact turnover rates were not
obtained, because most of the cleavage events take place faster
than the dead-time in this particular assay (>10 s). These
experiments demonstrate that both NaeI and NarI are active
in this tethered particle assay and that the DNA templates are
appropriate for their specific enzymes.
DNA looping
In order to observe loop formation and disruption by the
restriction enzymes, the length of the DNA tether needs
to be tracked with no Mg2+ in the solution. We measured
the motion of beads, tethered by DNA template #1, in the
presence of 2 U/ml NaeI (estimated 10–100 pM), but in the
absence of divalent metal ions. A typical data trace is given
in Figure 3a. We observed transitions between two distinct
amplitudes of RMS Brownian motion <R>, which we attri-
bute to DNA loops of specific size formed by NaeI. The
obtained <R> in the unlooped state for both DNA substrates
corresponds very well to predicted values (theory: 149 nm
and 165 nm, experiment: 147 ± 4 nm and 168 ± 5, respec-
tively; D. Segall and R. Phillips, private communication).
The observed value for the looped state of the NaeI–DNA
complex is slightly lower than expected (theory: 117 nm,
experiment: 108 ± 4 nm). This apparent discrepancy presum-
ably is caused by the fact that NaeI binds its two target sites
under a 90 angle (Figure 1). The ‘unlooped part’ of the looped
tether thus comprises a kink, which reduces its average
end-to-end distance (37), resulting in a lower observed mag-
nitude of Brownian motion.
In the looped configuration there are two possible binding
modes for NaeI: the Topo domain is bound to site 1 and the
Endo to site 2, or the reverse. Most likely the stabilities of
the two differ, resulting in a double exponential distribution
for the loop lifetime. However, the data (Figure 3b, left side)
shows only a single exponential, indicating that one of the
two possible loop structures is preferred over the other, or
that the two have equal loop lifetimes. Fitting a double expo-
nential does not give a better fit. The fitted mean lifetime
Figure 3. DNA looping by NaeI in the absence of divalent cations. (a) Typical
data trace showing specific looping by NaeI (2 U/ml). Two distinct levels in
the root mean square (RMS) amplitude of Brownian motion <R> can be recog-
nized. The actual magnitudes of Brownian diffusion for the two states are
estimated for each trace by fitting the histogram of <R> (shown on the right)
to a double Gaussian, which agrees very well with the observed distribution. (b)
Histograms of measured looped and unlooped state durations of NaeI (2 U/ml).
As a result of the Gaussian filtering of the data withs ¼ 1.0 s, DNA loops with a
lifetime shorter than 1.4 s cannot be reliably detected and are not taken
into account. Left: NaeI–DNA looped complex lifetime. The data fits a single
exponential (normalized c2 ¼ 1.0) with lifetime toff ¼ 18 ± 2 s. Right: NaeI-
DNA loop formation. These data are reasonably well fitted by a single expo-
nential (normalized c2 ¼ 2.2), yielding a time constant tformation of 11 ± 2 s.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34 , No. 1 169
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
of the looped state toff is found to be 18 ± 2 s (Figure 3b),
corresponding to a mean loop disruption rate koff of
0.057 ± 0.007 s1. This value is 10 times faster than found
for the Type IIF restriction enzyme SfiI [240 s without
Ca2+ (19)] and approximately comparable to the Lac repressor
(23). The same value for the lifetime of the looped state was
found for a 5-fold higher NaeI concentration (20 ± 4 s),
as would be expected for the unimolecular process of loop
breakdown.
Figure 4a shows a typical data trace of looping of DNA
substrate #2 by NarI (2 U/ml), again in the absence of diva-
lent ions. In contrast to the findings for NaeI, here no discrete
Brownian motion levels that relate to the expected hRi
values for the unlooped and looped state can be distinguished.
Instead, the signal displays a large variation with jumps of
arbitrary size. The measured DNA tether length thus fluc-
tuates heavily in time. A likely explanation for this effect is
that NarI also binds to non-specific or non-cognate DNA sites,
creating loops of random size. If specific DNA loops are
formed in these experiments, they are clouded by many
non-specific events. These findings are strengthened by the
result that is obtained when the same NarI concentration is
added to DNA substrate #1 tethers, containing only one
recognition sequence: the same non-specific looping behavior
is observed (Figure 4b). In contrast, when DNA #2 was used
as template for control experiments with NaeI (no recognition
sites), 2 U/ml NaeI did not cause any change in the magnitude
of Brownian motion over several hours (20 tethers meas-
ured; data not shown), either in the absence or presence of
Ca2+. NaeI thus binds its recognition sequence highly specif-
ically, whereas NarI displays non-specific looping regardless
whether one or two sites are present on the DNA.
Loop formation
The duration of the unlooped state of NaeI represents the
time between subsequent looping events. The data, displayed
in Figure 3b (right panel) for 2 U/ml NaeI, is reasonably well
fitted by a single exponential, resulting in a mean loop forma-
tion time tformation of 11 ± 2 s. A similar value is found for a
NaeI concentration of 10 U/ml (16 ± 5 s). Still higher enzyme
concentrations, however, repress the number of observed
looping occurrences: at 100 U/ml NaeI almost no DNA tethers
show sign of looping, leaving the molecules permanently in
the unlooped state. This result is most likely caused by both
sites being occupied by different enzymes and is described in
more detail in the discussion.
Higher concentrations of NarI result in totally different
behavior (Figure 4c). Upon addition of 10 U/ml NarI to the
tethered DNA molecules (in the absence of divalent metals)
the amplitude of Brownian motion on average decreases by
30–40%. Unlike in the 2 U/ml case, fewer jumps to higher
tether lengths are observed. A further increase in NarI con-
centration to 100 U/ml reduces the effective tether length to
a mere 100 bp in less than a minute. The same results were
obtained when DNA #1 was used, containing only a single
copy of the NarI recognition sequence. From these results
we infer that at these concentrations increasingly more
non-specific DNA loops are created by multiple enzymes,
effectively resulting in a ‘compaction’ of the DNA.
Effect of calcium
In the mechanism of DNA-binding by restriction enzymes,
Ca2+ can function as an analogue for Mg2+. However, it
fails to support DNA cleavage (12–15). In our experiments,
the presence of 2 mM Ca2+ in the buffer results in very stable
specific NaeI-DNA loops. Under these conditions all observed
looped molecules (3 slides, 10–20 tethers per slide) remained
in the looped state for a very long time (more than 100-fold
longer than without divalent ions). This durable looping is
in agreement with numerous binding affinity studies on
NaeI (38), SfiI (19), BamHI (13) and EcoRV (14,15,39).
For the DNA looping Type IIF restriction enzyme SfiI (19),
it was also shown that Ca2+ stabilizes specific DNA loops by
more than two orders of magnitude. Interestingly, we observe
that NarI reacts differently in the presence of 2 mM Ca2+.
Figure 4. DNA looping by NarI in the absence of divalent cations. (a) Black
trace: looping of DNA template #2 (two recognition sites) by NarI (2 U/ml).
Grey trace: signal without protein. The histogram on the right clarifies even
more that, in contrast to NaeI (Figure 3), it is not possible to distinguish two
discrete levels of Brownian motion. (b) Black trace: non-specific looping by
NarI (2 U/ml) on DNA template #1 (one site). The signal is similar to the trace
observed with DNA template #2. Grey trace: signal without protein. (c) Effect
of higher NarI concentrations. Addition of 10 U/ml NarI to DNA substrate #2
tethers results in a drop of Brownian motion from 170 nm to 110 nm over
several minutes, presumably due to non-specific looping of multiple enzymes.
After this initial process the average RMS motion of the bead fluctuates around
this last value and never recovers toward the initial value. Upon addition of a
high NarI concentration (100 U/ml), the Brownian motion is quickly reduced to
a very low level due to non-specific DNA looping of many enzymes. This
happens regardless of whether the DNA substrate has one or two NarI sites.
170 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34 , No. 1
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Instead of the indiscriminate looping seen without Ca2+,
now 2 U/ml NarI does induce specific loops in the DNA
(Figure 5a). These characteristics of binding resemble
those of EcoRV, which binds all DNA sequences with
similar affinity without divalent metal ions present in solution
(40–43). However, Ca2+ greatly enhances specific DNA-
binding. EcoRV binds 104-fold more tightly to the recogni-
tion site, while non-specific binding remains unaffected
(14,15,40,44).
The histograms for the looped state disruption and forma-
tion times of NarI in the presence of calcium (Figure 5b)
are again fitted with single exponentials, resulting in a
mean lifetime toff of 6 ± 1 s for the looped state duration,
while the loop formation time tformation is found to be
43 ± 8 s. These values are more or less similar as observed
for NaeI without calcium. The trace displayed in Figure 5a,
compared to Figure 4a and b demonstrates that Ca2+ favors
specific looping by NarI rather than non-specific looping.
However, occasionally an extra ‘lower state’ of Brownian
motion is observed. The system spends a few percent of the
time in this third state. This behavior was seen for several
traces on different tethers and is presumed to be binding to
a (preferred) non-cognate site on the DNA. Which site on
the target DNA exactly this might be remains unclear.
There are several plausible candidate sequences on DNA
substrate #2 that differ 1 bp from the recognition sequence.
No less than five of these sequences are located in such a
way that looping would induce the observed tether length.
Ca2+ thus promotes specific binding, but its effect on non-
specific binding is presumably much weaker. In any case, high
NarI concentrations (100 U/ml) in the presence of Ca2+ still
lead to a large reduction in Brownian motion, similar to the
results obtained without Ca2+, indicating that non-specific
binding is at least not vastly diminished. We show here that
Ca2+ reduces the relative amount of non-specific looping
events by NarI. The stability of the specific loop in the pres-
ence of Ca2+ is, however, still two orders of magnitude
weaker than observed for NaeI (corresponding to about
5 kbT or 3 kcal/mol binding energy)
DISCUSSION
Many biochemical studies regarding proteins that interact
with two DNA sites have been carried out, greatly enhancing
the knowledge of enzyme-mediated looping. The Type IIE
and IIF restriction enzymes are often considered ideal
examples. DNA cleavage can be readily detected and is
only possible when two specific sites are brought together.
One recent study revealed that NarI, though interacting
with two DNA sites, cuts only one phosphodiester bond before
dissociating from the DNA, leaving the DNA nicked. The
second bond is then cut in a separate, slower reaction (11).
This kinetic scheme differs from the common reaction path-
way of Type IIE and Type IIF restriction enzymes (including
NaeI), where two strands of the same DNA are cleaved con-
certedly in one binding event, creating a double-stranded
break (10,18,20,45). We now begin to appreciate the result
that, even in the presence of divalent metal ions, NarI forms
short-lived loops of only a few seconds. It might very well be
that the reason why NarI acts differently is purely due to this
short-lived binding: the available time for the hydrolysis
reaction is so short that at most one bond is cleaved within
one binding event. Turnover rates of restriction enzymes on
long DNA substrates are generally rate-limited by product
release: both strands are cleaved very fast compared to enzyme
dissociation from the product (on long DNA substrates and
at physiological pH) (38,46). The short binding time of NarI
indicates that for this particular enzyme product release is
not the rate-limiting step.
In another nice study on DNA looping by restriction
enzymes, Milsom et al. (19) ingeniously exploited site-
specific recombination by resolvase (of a plasmid into
catenanes) so as to detect enzyme-mediated looped com-
plexes. DNA looping by a restriction enzyme segregated
the two resolvase sites into isolated topological domains,
which inhibited the recombination reaction. The degree of
recombination reflects the fraction of DNA looping in equi-
librium. Although this method proved to be very successful
for Cfr10I and SfiI, DNA looping in the presence of Ca2+
could not be detected for either NaeI or NgoMIV. The authors
argue that the resolvase method only functions for DNA loops
that are stable for more than 30 s. It was therefore concluded
that NaeI and NgoMIV must produce very short-lived DNA
Figure 5. DNA looping by NarI in the presence of Ca2+ ions. (a) Data trace
showing specific DNA looping by NarI in the presence of 2 mM Ca2+.
The histogram on the right shows two levels of Brownian motion correspond-
ing to the expected values for specific DNA looping. The two Gaussians are
less separated than for NaeI, reflecting the smaller length of the specific NarI-
loop. At times along the trace non-specific loops are formed. The small third
peak at 120 nm presumably represents binding to a non-cognate site on this
DNA template. This extra state was observed for several tethers. From time
to time the bead transiently sticks to the surface (the Brownian motion
drops to almost zero). (b) Histograms of measured looped and unlooped
state durations of NarI (2 U/ml). Data are filtered with s ¼ 2.0 s, giving rise
to a loop detection limit of 2.7 s. Left: distribution of the measured lifetimes
of specific NarI DNA loops in the presence of Ca2+. The exponential fit
gives a mean lifetime of 6 ± 1 s. (normalized c2 ¼ 1.3) Right: distribution
of the measured NarI DNA unlooped state durations in the presence of Ca2+.
Again, the data fits a single exponential (normalized c2 ¼ 0.8), yielding a
mean loop formation time tformation of 43 ± 8 s.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34 , No. 1 171
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
loops, even in the presence of Ca2+. Our results for NaeI,
obtained in a buffer with equal pH, are in contrast with
these observations. In the more direct TPM method utilized
here, loops in the presence of Ca2+ have a lifetime on the
order of thousands of seconds, comparable to the loop life-
time Milsom et al. found for the tetrameric Type IIF restric-
tion enzyme SfiI. Possibly the recombination reaction by
resolvase was not entirely inhibited by NaeI induced DNA
looping.
In DNA cleavage tests with NaeI, we observed some tethers
that stayed unlooped for 10 min or more, whereas most
tethers were cleaved within a few seconds. Such impeded
loop formation also showed up in experiment in the presence
of Ca2+. In a test with high NaeI concentration (100 U/ml)
and 2 mM Ca2+, just 1 out of 15 tethers became looped directly
after flowing in the enzymes. This looped complex then
remained for more than 1 h, while the other tethers all stayed
unlooped for this time period. When a buffer containing
2 mM Mg2+ and NaeI was flown in afterwards, only the pre-
viously looped DNA was cleaved within the dead-time of
buffer exchange (20 s). None of the remaining DNA tethers,
however, got released in 25 min. A feasible explanation for
this resistance of NaeI against looping (and thus cleavage) at
higher concentrations is that two individual NaeI dimers
bind to the two specific sites, blocking the formation of
the loop that is required for cleavage. Diminished cleavage
at high enzyme concentrations was also shown earlier for
SfiI (20,47).
We also tested the cleavage of DNA tethers by the Type IIP
restriction enzyme EcoRV (50 nM) on DNA template #2,
which contained one recognition sequence. In contrast to
NaeI and NarI, EcoRV does not need to interact with two
recognition sites. In this case all tethered beads were released
within seconds after introducing the enzymes.
There are four possible pathways that can lead to specific
loop formation by NaeI on DNA substrate #1 (ignoring a
potential difference between a positively and negatively
twisted loop). In principle, the initial association to the first
site can occur via either the Topo or the Endo domain of
NaeI, at site 1 or site 2. Binding of the second site will
then be to the remaining unfilled domain. Nonetheless, the
distribution of the loop formation time (time in between con-
secutive DNA loops), in the absence of divalent metal ions
for NaeI and with Ca2+ for NarI, is found to fit a single expo-
nential for both NaeI and NarI (Figures 3b and 5b). This result
implies that the process of repetitive loop formation is rate-
limited by a single reaction step. Two plausible candidates
come to mind.
(i) The rate-limiting step is the association of a protein out of
solution to one of the DNA sites. Once this complex is
formed it binds very fast to the second site, producing
the loop. When the complex dissociates, there is a high
probability that NaeI is released from both sites before a
new loop is created.
(ii) After loop disruption the enzyme remains bound to one
of the sites. Further DNA looping/unlooping then occurs
as a unimolecular process, where the rate-limiting step
is the association of the protein–DNA complex to the
second site. In this case the rate of finding the second
site is required to be much slower than in scheme a.
If scheme a is true, the loop formation time tformation should
decrease with enzyme concentration for non-saturating con-
ditions, whereas in scheme b it should be independent.
We measured DNA looping by NaeI at 2 U/ml, 10 U/ml
and 100 U/ml concentrations. The two lowest concentrations
both resulted in an exponentially distributed loop formation
time with similar time constants (11 ± 2 s and 16 ± 5 s,
respectively, see Figure 3b (2 U/ml)). The DNA looping at
100 U/ml was heavily suppressed and yielded too few
events to reliably measure the loop formation time (presum-
ably because the DNA is saturated with enzymes). Moreover,
for the lowest concentration, 2 U/ml, we observed that after
some time, free (unlooped) tethers suddenly started dis-
playing looping dynamics, which then generally continued
for a number of transitions, until finally the DNA remained
unlooped for a much longer time. This suggests that a single
NaeI molecule is responsible for making multiple consecutive
DNA loops. Based on these results we conclude that what
occurs upon loop disruption is the unbinding of the enzyme
from one cognate DNA site, while the other binding domain
of the protein stays bound to the second site (scheme b). The
distribution of the loop formation time we observe thus rep-
resents the association of the protein–DNA complex to this
second site. This concurs with earlier studies of NaeI (28),
where it was found that the two binding domains of NaeI can
have different affinities (up to 14-fold) for the DNA recogni-
tion site (depending on the context flanking the cognate site).
The crystal structure of NaeI (Figure 1) (48) shows that the
two DNA-binding domains, although they recognize the
same nucleotide sequence, are in fact structurally different.
By means of structural comparison between the free and DNA
bound NaeI structures, Huai et al. (48) put forward that initial
DNA-binding occurs via the Topo domain, which then triggers
a conformational change that facilitates binding of substrate
DNA to the Endo domain. The same model was also specu-
lated earlier by Colandene and Topal, based on the character-
istics of the separate DNA-binding domains (49). Our results
further strengthen these assumptions.
The association of restriction enzymes to their substrates
usually is very efficient and limited by diffusion. If the same
is true for NaeI and NarI, the time between consecutive DNA
looping events represents the time it takes to bring the two
DNA sites together (via 3D diffusion). In other words, after the
initial binding of the protein, loop formation becomes entirely
dependent on the dynamics of the DNA molecule. It is inter-
esting to check whether the values we find are realistic for such
a process. Earlier Brownian dynamics simulations revealed
that the typical time for juxtaposition within 10 nm of two
specific DNA sites spaced at 400 bp for relaxed DNA is less
than a second (50,51) (for supercoiled DNA this process is
100-fold faster). However, the DNA tethers in the experiments
are not entirely free to move: one end is fixed to an infinite
glass surface and the other end to a 440 nm bead. These steric
constraints give rise to a volume-exclusion effect, inducing a
small entropic stretching force on the DNA. Due to this force
the rate of juxtaposition of the two recognition sites decreases.
The rate of loop formation changes accordingly. For our
experimental parameters the stretching force is predicted to
be 50–60 fN, resulting in an 10-fold increase in average loop
formation time (D. Segall and R. Phillips, private commun-
ication). Given all the theoretical uncertainties, the values
172 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34 , No. 1
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
we obtain for tformation, 11 ± 2 s for NaeI and 43 ± 8 s for NarI,
seem to correspond to the expected time for juxtaposition of
the two sites in our tethered particle measurements. This result
is in line with our conjecture posed above about the process of
loop formation.
The formation of a relatively short DNA loop, such as
demonstrated here, introduces a certain amount of mechanical
strain to be stored in the DNA. The accompanied bending
energy has to be paid by the protein that produces the loop:
the binding energy is weakened by the strain in the DNA,
affecting the lifetime of the looped complex. In previous
experiments with the Lac repressor, however, the looped com-
plex seemed unperturbed by the DNA bending energy (23).
In our particular case, the loop produced by NaeI is 455 bp, or
about three persistence lengths. However, NarI has to induce
a loop of only two persistence lengths long (305 bp). In the
presence of Ca2+ we observe a 100 to 1000-fold difference in
looped state lifetime between NaeI and NarI. Although the
better part of this difference in stability most likely origina-
tes from a weaker protein–DNA interaction for NarI, the
smaller loop size may contribute to the observed smaller
loop lifetime (estimated max. 10-fold). Even so, it cannot
explain the observed non-specific looping by NarI. Future
experiments could investigate the loop lifetime as a function
of loop length. Single molecule experiments using DNA ten-
sion as a variable can explore the binding strength of NaeI by
pulling on the DNA loop, as well as test the process of loop
formation under tension.
In this paper we have demonstrated that TPM analysis can
be a simple and effective technique to study the looping
kinetics of DNA molecules by Type IIE restriction enzymes.
We discovered a fundamental difference in the way NaeI
and NarI bind and bridge two copies of their specific target
sites. In the absence of divalent metal ions, NaeI produces
only specific loops, while NarI mostly displays non-specific
looping. Higher NarI concentrations effectively result in a
‘condensation’ of the DNA. We show that, in contrast to pre-
vious studies (19), in the presence of Ca2+ NaeI produces
very stable DNA loops. Ca2+ also notably stimulates specific
looping by NarI, although the observed loop lifetime is
much shorter than that of NaeI. The exponential distribu-
tion found for the loop formation time by NaeI and the
concentration-independence of the rate of this process
imply that the enzyme remains bound to one of the DNA
recognition sites upon loop disruption. Finally, real-time
measurements of DNA looping as demonstrated here have
so far only been carried out on specific gene regulators,
such as Lac repressor (23) and Gal repressor (52). Therefore,
the presented results provide an opportunity to compare
mechanisms of DNA looping proteins that are very different
in structure and function.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Darren Segall, Seth Blumberg and Rob Phillips
for sharing results prior to publication, useful comments and
stimulating discussions. B.v.d.B. performed and conceived
research, analyzed data and wrote the paper, F.V. designed
research and analysis tools, D.N. performed research in the
initial stages, F.S.P. designed research, G.J.L.W. conceived
the experiment and wrote the paper. This work was supported
by a Marie Curie fellowship, (human potential, PHD20)
(to F.S.P.), an NWO Vernieuwingsimpuls grant and a grant
from the Dutch Foundation of Fundamental Research on
Matter (FOM) (to G.J.L.W.). Funding to pay the Open
Access publication charges for this article was provided
by FOM.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Dodson,M., Roberts,J., McMacken,R. and Echols,H. (1985) Specialized
nucleoprotein structures at the origin of replication of bacteriophage
lambda: complexes with lambda O protein and with lambda O, lambda P,
and Escherichia coli DnaB proteins. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA,
82, 4678–4682.
2. Allen,D.J., Makhov,A., Grilley,M., Taylor,J., Thresher,R., Modrich,P.
and Griffith,J.D. (1997) MutS mediates heteroduplex loop formation
by a translocation mechanism. EMBO J., 16, 4467–4476.
3. Gellert,M. and Nash,H. (1987) Communication between
segments of DNA during site-specific recombination. Nature,
325, 401–404.
4. Moitoso de Vargas,L., Pargellis,C.A., Hasan,N.M., Bushman,E.W. and
Landy,A. (1988) Autonomous DNA binding domains of lambda
integrase recognize two different sequence families. Cell, 54,
923–929.
5. Mastrangelo,I.A., Courey,A.J., Wall,J.S., Jackson,S.P. and Hough,P.V.
(1991) DNA looping and Sp1 multimer links: a mechanism for
transcriptional synergism and enhancement. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA,
88, 5670–5674.
6. Lewis,M., Chang,G., Horton,N.C., Kercher,M.A., Pace,H.C.,
Schumacher,M.A., Brennan,R.G. and Lu,P. (1996) Crystal structure of
the lactose operon repressor and its complexes with DNA and inducer.
Science, 271, 1247–1254.
7. Lloyd,G., Landini,P. and Busby,S. (2001) Activation and
repression of transcription initiation in bacteria. Essays Biochem.,
37, 17–31.
8. Halford,S.E., Bilcock,D.T., Stanford,N.P., Williams,S.A., Milsom,S.E.,
Gormley,N.A., Watson,M.A., Bath,A.J., Embleton,M.L., Gowers,D.M.
et al. (1999) Restriction endonuclease reactions requiring two
recognition sites. Biochem. Soc. Trans., 27, 696–699.
9. Deibert,M., Grazulis,S., Sasnauskas,G., Siksnys,V. and Huber,R. (2000)
Structure of the tetrameric restriction endonuclease NgoMIV in
complex with cleaved DNA. Nature Struct. Biol., 7, 792–799.
10. Bath,A.J., Milsom,S.E., Gormley,N.A. and Halford,S.E. (2002) Many
type IIs restriction endonucleases interact with two recognition sites
before cleaving DNA. J. Biol. Chem., 277, 4024–4033.
11. Gowers,D.M., Bellamy,S.R.W. and Halford,S.E. (2004) One recognition
sequence, seven restriction enzymes, five reaction mechanisms.
Nucleic Acids Res., 32, 3469–3479.
12. Lagunavicius,A., Grazulis,S., Balciunaite,E., Vainius,D. and Siksnys,V.
(1997) DNA binding specificity of MunI restriction endonuclease is
controlled by pH and calcium ions: involvement of active site carboxylate
residues. Biochemistry, 36, 11093–11099.
13. Engler,L.E., Sapienza,P., Dorner,L.F., Kucera,R., Schildkraut,I. and
Jen-Jacobson,L. (2001) The energetics of the interaction of BamHI
endonuclease with its recognition site GGATCC. J. Mol. Biol.,
307, 619–636.
14. Engler,L.E., Welch,K.K. and Jen-Jacobson,L. (1997) Specific binding
by EcoRV endonuclease to its DNA recognition site GATATC.
J. Mol. Biol., 269, 82–101.
15. Vipond,I.B. and Halford,S.E. (1995) Specific DNA recognition by
EcoRV restriction endonuclease induced by calcium ions.
Biochemistry, 34, 1113–1119.
16. Topal,M.D., Thresher,R.J., Conrad,M. and Griffith,J. (1991) NaeI
endonuclease binding to pBR322 DNA induces looping.
Biochemistry, 30, 2006–2010.
17. Wentzell,L.M. and Halford,S.E. (1998) DNA looping by the Sfi I
restriction endonuclease. J. Mol. Biol., 281, 433–444.
18. Siksnys,V., Skirgaila,R., Sasnauskas,G., Urbanke,C., Cherny,D.,
Grazulis,S. and Huber,R. (1999) The Cfr10I restriction enzyme is
functional as a tetramer. J. Mol. Biol., 291, 1105–1118.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34 , No. 1 173
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
19. Milsom,S.E., Halford,S.E., Embleton,M.L. and Szczelkun,M.D. (2001)
Analysis of DNA looping interactions by type II restriction enzymes
that require two copies of their recognition sites. J. Mol. Biol., 311,
515–527.
20. Embleton,M.L., Siksnys,V. and Halford,S.E. (2001) DNA cleavage
reactions by type II restriction enzymes that require two copies of
their recognition sites. J. Mol. Biol., 311, 503–514.
21. Katiliene,Z., Katilius,E. and Woodbury,N.W. (2003) Single molecule
detection of DNA looping by NgoMIV restriction endonuclease.
Biophys J., 84, 4053–4061.
22. Yin,H., Landick,R. and Gelles,J. (1994) Tethered particle motion
method for studying transcript elongation by a single RNA polymerase
molecule. Biophys J., 67, 2468–2478.
23. Finzi,L. and Gelles,J. (1995) Measurement of lactose repressor-mediated
loop formation and breakdown in single DNA molecules. Science,
267, 378–380.
24. Qian,H. and Elson,E.L. (1999) Quantitative study of polymer
conformation and dynamics by single-particle tracking. Biophys J.,
76, 1598–1605.
25. Qian,H. (2000) A mathematical analysis for the Brownian dynamics of a
DNA tether. J. Math. Biol., 41, 331–340.
26. Pouget,N., Dennis,C., Turlan,C., Grigoriev,M., Chandler,M. and
Salome,L. (2004) Single-particle tracking for DNA tether length
monitoring. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, e73.
27. Conrad,M. and Topal,M.D. (1989) DNA and spermidine provide a
switch mechanism to regulate the activity of restriction enzyme Nae I.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 86, 9707–9711.
28. Yang,C.C. and Topal,M.D. (1992) Nonidentical DNA-binding sites of
endonuclease NaeI recognize different families of sequences flanking
the recognition site. Biochemistry, 31, 9657–9664.
29. Seidel,R., van Noort,J., van der Scheer,C., Bloom,J.G., Dekker,N.H.,
Dutta,C.F., Blundell,A., Robinson,T., Firman,K. and Dekker,C. (2004)
Real-time observation of DNA translocation by the type I restriction
modification enzyme EcoR124I. Nature Struct. Mol. Biol., 11, 838–843.
30. van den Broek,B., Noom,M.C. and Wuite,G.J. (2005) DNA-tension
dependence of restriction enzyme activity reveals mechanochemical
properties of the reaction pathway. Nucleic Acids Res., 33,
2676–2684.
31. Yan,J., Skoko,D. and Marko,J.F. (2004) Near-field-magnetic-tweezer
manipulation of single DNA molecules. Phys. Rev. E. Stat. Nonlin Soft
Matter Phys., 70, 011905.
32. Hsieh,W.T., Whitson,P.A., Matthews,K.S. and Wells,R.D. (1987)
Influence of sequence and distance between two operators on interaction
with the lac repressor. J. Biol. Chem., 262, 14583–14591.
33. Schafer,D.A., Gelles,J., Sheetz,M.P. and Landick,R. (1991) Transcription
by single molecules of RNA polymerase observed by light microscopy.
Nature, 352, 444–448.
34. Tolic-Norrelykke,S.F., Engh,A.M., Landick,R. and Gelles,J. (2004)
Diversity in the rates of transcript elongation by single RNA polymerase
molecules. J. Biol. Chem., 279, 3292–3299.
35. Colquhoun,D. and Sigworth,F.J. (1983) Fitting and statistical analysis of
single-channel records. In Sakmann,B. and Neher,E. (eds), Single
Channel Recording. Plenum Press, NY and London, pp. 191–263.
36. Blumberg,S., Gajraj,A., Pennington,M.W. and Meiners,J.C. (2005)
Three-dimensional characterization of tethered microspheres by
total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy. Biophys J.,
89, 1272–1281.
37. Dame,R.T., van Mameren,J., Luijsterburg,M.S., Mysiak,M.E.,
Janicijevic,A., Pazdzior,G., van der Vliet,P.C., Wyman,C. and Wuite,G.J.
(2005) Analysis of scanning force microscopy images of protein-induced
DNA bending using simulations. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, e68.
38. Yang,C.C., Baxter,B.K. and Topal,M.D. (1994) DNA cleavage by Naei:
protein-purification, rate-limiting step, and accuracy. Biochemistry,
33, 14918–14925.
39. Vipond,I.B., Baldwin,G.S. and Halford,S.E. (1995) Divalent metal
ions at the active sites of the EcoRV and EcoRI restriction
endonucleases. Biochemistry, 34, 697–704.
40. Taylor,J.D., Badcoe,I.G., Clarke,A.R. and Halford,S.E. (1991) EcoRV
restriction endonuclease binds all DNA sequences with equal affinity.
Biochemistry, 30, 8743–8753.
41. Alves,J., Selent,U. and Wolfes,H. (1995) Accuracy of the EcoRV
restriction endonuclease: binding and cleavage studies with
oligodeoxynucleotide substrates containing degenerate recognition
sequences. Biochemistry, 34, 11191–11197.
42. Szczelkun,M.D. and Connolly,B.A. (1995) Sequence-specific
binding of DNA by the EcoRV restriction and modification enzymes
with nucleic acid and cofactor analogues. Biochemistry, 34,
10724–10733.
43. Erskine,S.G. and Halford,S.E. (1998) Reactions of the eco RV restriction
endonuclease with fluorescent oligodeoxynucleotides: identical
equilibrium constants for binding to specific and non-specific DNA.
J. Mol. Biol., 275, 759–772.
44. Hiller,D.A., Fogg,J.M., Martin,A.M., Beechem,J.M., Reich,N.O. and
Perona,J.J. (2003) Simultaneous DNA binding and bending by EcoRV
endonuclease observed by real-time fluorescence. Biochemistry, 42,
14375–14385.
45. Wentzell,L.M., Nobbs,T.J. and Halford,S.E. (1995) The SfiI restriction
endonuclease makes a four-strand DNA break at two copies of its
recognition sequence. J. Mol. Biol., 248, 581–595.
46. Halford,S.E. and Goodall,A.J. (1988) Modes of DNA cleavage by the
EcoRV restriction endonuclease. Biochemistry, 27, 1771–1777.
47. Szczelkun,M.D. and Halford,S.E. (1996) Recombination by resolvase to
analyse DNA communications by the SfiI restriction endonuclease.
EMBO J., 15, 1460–1469.
48. Huai,Q., Colandene,J.D., Topal,M.D. and Ke,H. (2001) Structure of
NaeI-DNA complex reveals dual-mode DNA recognition and
complete dimer rearrangement. Nature Struct. Biol., 8, 665–669.
49. Colandene,J.D. and Topal,M.D. (1998) The domain organization of
NaeI endonuclease: separation of binding and catalysis.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 95, 3531–3536.
50. Jian,H., Schlick,T. and Vologodskii,A. (1998) Internal motion of
supercoiled DNA: brownian dynamics simulations of site
juxtaposition. J. Mol. Biol., 284, 287–296.
51. Vologodskii,A. and Cozzarelli,N.R. (1996) Effect of supercoiling
on the juxtaposition and relative orientation of DNA sites. Biophys J.,
70, 2548–2556.
52. Lia,G., Bensimon,D., Croquette,V., Allemand,J.F., Dunlap,D.,
Lewis,D.E., Adhya,S. and Finzi,L. (2003) Supercoiling and denaturation
in Gal repressor/heat unstable nucleoid protein (HU)-mediated DNA
looping. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 100, 11373–11377.
174 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34 , No. 1
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
