FPT is P-Time Extremal Structure I
VLADIMIR ESTIVILL-CASTRO1 , MICHAEL FELLOWS2 , MICHAEL
LANGSTON3 , FRANCES ROSAMOND
ABSTRACT. We describe a broad program of research in parameterized
complexity, and hows this plays out for the M AX LEAF SPANNING TREE
problem.
1 Introduction
The program we describe here, using M AX LEAF as a case study, is concernedwith
the development of a mathematical monster machine (in the sense of Grothendieck)
for dealing with hard computational problems. In a nutshell, parameterization is
all about structure. In our case study example of M AX LEAF one can pose this as
a question:
What is the structure of graphs that exclude a subgraph with l leaves?
It is relevant to mention Grothendieck, because he had a certain point of view
about mathematical methodology which we adopt, that having the correct point of
view about things is important, and that given the correct point of view, a mathe-
matical project should unroll as a series of small steps in an overall trajectory that
is described by the appropriate “mathematical machine” [Jac04]. That is what we
are exploring here for the design of FPT algorithms: the right way to do it, and the
overall recipe that constitutes the appropriate mathematical machine for this task.
The design of FPT algorithms, in the right way, is only the first of five major in-
dependent deliverables associated to our proposed monster machine for algorithm
design for hard problems. The five objectives, each a worthy goal in its own right,
are listed as follows:
(A) FPT algorithms.
(B) Powerful and efficient pre-processing..
1Research supported by the Australian Research Council.
2This research was supported by the Australian Research Council, by the Australian Centre for
Bioinformatics and by the New Zealand Marsden Fund for Basic Research.
3Research supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation under grant CCR–0075792, by the
U.S. Office of Naval Research under grant N00014–01–1–0608, and by the U.S. Department of Energy
under contract DE–AC05–00OR22725.
2 Vladimir Estivill-Castro, Michael Fellows, Michael Langston, Frances Rosamond
(C) Gradients and transformation rules for local search heuristics.
(D) Polynomial-time approximation algorithms.
(E) Structure to exploit in solving other problems.
We will illustrate all of these objectives for the MAX LEAF problem as a first
case study. Our central concern is with the right way to go after all of these objec-
tives in a unified way described by general recipes of the monster machine.
1.1 Relevant Structure
Of the five objectives listed above, let us focus for a moment on (A) and acknowl-
edge another key source of inspiration for this project.
There are plenty of reasons to be interested in parameterized complexity, and
plenty of good, contemporary sources of introductory material can be found in
the books and surveys [Ra97, DF99, DFS99, Fe01, Fe02, Nie02, Nie04, Fer05,
Nie05], so we will assume that the reader has some basic familiarity with the
subject.
Some background in a nutshell. Parameterized complexity is basically just a
two-dimensional generalization of the familiar classical framework of “P versus
“NP”. Here, however, in addition to the overall input size n we consider the effects
on complexity of a declared secondary “measurement” k (the parameter) that gen-
erally is used to capture some aspect of extra structure of the input or other key
aspect of our computational objective (e.g., k = 1/ turns out to be useful in the
analysis of approximation complexity). The Good is defined to be solvability in
time f(k)nc (termed fixed-parameter tractability, where f is some function (usu-
ally exponential in interesting cases), and c is a constant independent of k. FPT is a
kind of obvious generalization of P . After that, you just follow your nose. Define
a notion of reducibility in a way that respects good behaviour. The Bad (probable
unavailability of FPT) is measured by a strong two-dimensional analog of NP-
hardness, termed W [1]-hardness. A reference problem complete for W [1] is the
k-step halting problem for nondeterministic Turing machines of unlimited nonde-
terminism — obviously solvable by brute force in time O(nO(k)). The entire, by
now rather substantial theory of parameterized complexity and algorithmics, un-
folds in the way one might expect, by analogy with the classical enterprise, from
this small start.
The central motivating fact for parameterized complexity is that in almost all
settings and for almost all purposes of computing, the input has “extra structure”
that we are able to relevantly capture with the mathematical device of the param-
eter. To put the case more sharply, but negatively: When does it happen that you
know nothing about your input apart from the size of the input file? Outside of
cryptography: “Never!”
Historically, a key motivating source for parameterized complexity has been
the monumental graph minors project of Robertson and Seymour. Our realm of
FPT is P-Time Extremal Structure I 3
concern here is with computer science rather than with pure discrete mathemat-
ics, and this leads to the correct way to view the graph minors project within this
realm of concern. The parameterized computational decision problem G RAPH
MINOR takes as input graphs G and H and asks whether H is a minor of G (that
is, whether a subgraph isomorphic to H can be obtained from G by contracting
edges of a subgraph of G). This is clearly a fundamental computational problem
about graphs, naturally parameterized by H. The GRAPH MINOR problem would
inevitably command attention within the realm of theoretical computer science.
The point is: all of the beautiful structure theory of the graph minors project, path-
width, treewidth, etc., is necessary (as far as we know) in order to show that the
GRAPH MINOR problem, parameterized by H, is fixed-parameter tractable.
The point is that within the realm of concern of algorithms and complexity,
the beautiful and deep, many-layered structure theory of the graph minors project
can be viewed as naturally associated to the parameterized G RAPH MINOR prob-
lem. The generalized point for our program is that every sensible parameter (in
the sense of parameterized complexity) should lead to a structure theory project,
naturally associated to the parameterized problem in a “similar” manner. Where
the efforts of algorithm design for fixed-parameter tractability lead, from this point
of view, is to:
One, two, ..., a thousand analogs of the graph minors project: one for every fundamental param-
eterized problem.
The bad news is that this will probably be a lot of work. We will see in the
course of our example of the M AX LEAF problem that the relevant structure the-
ory is a lot of work. It helps to stay organized within the framework of some
general recipes and sense of overall direction, and it helps to know that the effort
of developing the relevant structure theory is rewarded by a variety of practical
deliverables (our list of goals (A)-(E)).
1.2 An Ecology of Relevant Parameters
Before leaving the motivational context of the graph minors project, let’s consider
for a moment the payoff:
(E): Structure to exploit for other problems.
Within the realm of concern of algorithms and complexity it is really quite strik-
ing the extent to which the structure theory uncovered by the graph minors project
has turned out to be of such enormous and diverse relevance to all kinds of comput-
ing. According to Martin Grohe, most naturally occuring databaseshave Gaifmann
graphs of bounded treewidth, a matter of immense significance in the realistic as-
sessment of the complexity of database problems, and of concomitant significance
for the design of algorithms for these generally hard problems [GM99].
A well-used motivating example for parameterized complexity is the problem
of TYPE CHECKING of programs written in high-level logic-based programming
4 Vladimir Estivill-Castro, Michael Fellows, Michael Langston, Frances Rosamond
languages such as ML. This problem has been shown to be complete for EXP, and
thus “extremely” intractable from the classical point of view. Nevertheless, the ML
compilers generally work just fine. The explanation is that most naturally occuring
programs (from the point of view of an ML compiler) have a maximum type-
declaration nesting depth k of no more than 5, and thus the FPT type-checking
algorithm that runs in time O(2kn) is entirely adequate in practice. The reason
why naturally occuring programs have a nesting depth of at most 5 is that beyond
this point, the programs quickly become incomprehensible to the programmer who
is producing them!
A generally valid perspective on this phenomena seems to be the following,
quoted from the survey [DFS99]:
We feel that the parametric complexity notions, with their implicit ultrafinitism, correspond better
to the natural landscape of computational complexity, where we find ourselves overwhelmingly
among hard problems, dependent on identifying and exploiting thin zones of computational vi-
ability. Many natural problem distributions are generated by processes that inhabit such zones
themselves (e.g., computer code that is written in a structured manner so that it can be com-
prehensible to the programmer), and these distributions then inherit limited parameter ranges
because of the computational parameters that implicitly govern the feasibility of the generative
processes, though the relevant parameters may not be immediately obvious. 1
This perspective leads to a programmatic point of view about practical deliver-
able (E). We want to know how all these various parameterized structural notions
interact with all the other computational objectives one might have. In other words,
in this general programmatic perspective, the familiar paradigm of efficiently solv-
ing various problems Π for graphs of bounded treewidth just represents one row of
a matrix of algorithmic questions and concerns that naturally arise from the rele-
vant parameterized structure theories. For example, in our case study of the M AX
LEAF problem, we will ultimately want to investigate how to efficiently solve the
INDEPENDENT SET problem, etc., on graphs bounded “max leaf number”, ex-
ploiting as well as we can the appropriate structure that bounding this parameter
offers.
What we will hope to find is that such a complete “ecological” study of bounded
computational parameters may turn up many more useful surprises akin to the
remarkable algorithmic gold mine of bounded treewidth structure. (One would
expect, of course, that these various structure theories associated to fundamental
parameterized problems will also interact in interesting ways.)
That completes an overall sketch of the FPT monster machine program. In the
next sections we will discuss the five objectives one at a time, in each case describ-
ing a canonical recipe for the objective, and discussing how the recipe unfolds for
the MAX LEAF problem.
1For a philosophically similar discussion see [Gur89].
FPT is P-Time Extremal Structure I 5
2 Objective A: Fixed-Parameter Tractability
Our principal objective here is just to get a better FPT algorithm. After a series of
improvements based on various approaches [FL92, Bod93, DF99, FMRS00], the
current best FPT algorithm for MAX LEAF is due to Bonsma, Brueggemann and
Woeginger, with a running time of O∗(9.49k) to determine whether a graph G onn
vertices has a spanning tree with at least k leaves [BBW03]. The full running time
of the algorithm is O(n3 + 9.4815kk3). In the notation introduced by Woeginger
[Woe03] that ignores polynomial time factors, this is O∗(9.49k).
But what is a better FPT algorithm? A straightforward answer would be that
we mean O∗(f(k)) for a more slowly growing function f(k). We achieve this for
MAX LEAF, but this is not the sense of “better FPT algorithm” for the monster
machine program. There are now two well-established “races” in FPT algorithm
design. There is the “f(k) race”. And there is the “kernelization race” that sets up
in the following completely general way.
LEMMA 1. A parameterized problemΠ is in FPT if and only if there is a polynomial-
time (polynomial in both n and k) transformation that takes (x, k) to (x′, k′) such
that:
(1) (x, k) is a yes-instance of Π if and only if (x′, k′) is a yes-instance of Π,
(2) k′ ≤ k, and
(3) |x′| ≤ g(k) for some fixed function g.
A problem is in FPT if and only if we can pre-process ( kernelize) the input (in
“ordinary” polynomial time) into an instance whose size is bounded by a function
of k only. In the situation described by Lemma 1, we say that we can kernelize to
instances of size at most g(k).
The perspective afforded by the lemma may be interesting, but the proof is
totally trivial. In the more significant direction, suppose Π is solvable by an FPT
algorithm with a running time of f(k)nc. If |x| = n ≥ f(k) then we use the FPT
algorithm to solve the problem in time O(nc+1), that is, in ordinary polynomial
time. If |x| < f(k) then we can take x′ = x and g = f .
Lemma 1 is the charter for our program. If Π is an FPT parameterized problem,
then we are necessarily interested in finding a polynomial-time pre-processing (or
kernelization) algorithm where g(k) is as small as possible. This has a direct pay-
off in terms of program objective (B). In the case of the M AX LEAF problem, the
best previous polynomial-time kernelization bound is 5.75k, due to Elena Prieto
[Pr05], following closely an approach sketched in [FMRS00]. Prior to [Pr05],
the best polynomial-time kernelization bound for the problem was an implicit 34k
kernelization in [BBW03]. We will improve this to 3.75k. This improved kernel-
ization bound yields an FPT algorithm for M AX LEAF with an improved parameter
function f(k), by exploring all k-element subsets of the 3.5k problem kernel. Our
kernelization algorithm employs a number of pre-processing reduction rules that
6 Vladimir Estivill-Castro, Michael Fellows, Michael Langston, Frances Rosamond
simplify and shrink the input. A few of the simpler reduction rules for M AX LEAF
are illustrated in Figure 1.
Figure 1. A sampler of reduction rules for MAX LEAF
Canonically, in the sense of our program, an FPT algorithm has the following
form:
Step 1: Kernelize the input by exhaustively applying some set of data-reduction
rules to obtain a reduced instance of the problem.
Step 2: If the reduced instance is large, then output the answer.
Step 3: If the reduced instance is small, then analyze the kernel by brute force or
table lookup or (preferably) something more clever.
Step 2 is accomplished by means of a Kernelization Lemma. For our example
of MAX LEAF this is stated as follows:
FPT is P-Time Extremal Structure I 7
LEMMA 2. If (G, k) is a reduced instance of MAX LEAF and the graph G has
more than 3.5k vertices, then we can answer YES — G necessarily has a spanning
tree with at least k leaves.
In Step 2, it does not in any general way matter whether the answer that is
output is YES or NO — the main thing is that, one way or another, we do not have
to worry about large reduced instances any further. For example, the V ERTEX
COVER problem (parameterized by the size of the vertex cover) supports a number
of quite surprising reduction rules [DFS99, ACFLSS04, DFRS04, CFJ04]. A large
reduced instance for V ERTEX COVER is automatically a NO instance, providing a
contrasting example to M AX LEAF with regards to the “polarity” of the boundary.
Off-the-shelf results from extremal combinatorics can frequently be used to
construct Kernelization Lemmas that yield pretty good FPT algorithms. In the
case of MAX LEAF a classic extremal combinatorics result of Kleitman and West
[KW91] is the following.
PROPOSITION 3. Every (simple) connected graph G = (V,E) with minimum
degree at least 3 has a spanning tree with at least 14 |V |+ 2 leaves.
Figure 2 shows that this bound is “best possible”.
Figure 2. The Kleitman-West bound is best possible for graphs of minimum degree
at least 3.
The FPT algorithm for MAX LEAF due to Bonsma, Brueggemann and Woeg-
inger makes use of the Kleitman-West extremal result in the following way. First
of all, their FPT algorithm has the 3-step canonical form described above. They
show how to kernelize in polynomial time to an instance (G′, k′) where G′ can be
8 Vladimir Estivill-Castro, Michael Fellows, Michael Langston, Frances Rosamond
described as obtained from a simple graph H of minimum degree at least three,
where edges of H have been replaced by “caterpillar paths” (the details are not
important). In particular, G′ contains a subdivision of H, and therefore if the “un-
derlying” graph H of G′ has more than 4k vertices, then G′ is automatically a
yes-instance by the Kleitman-West result. They analyze the reduced instance ker-
nel by exploring all k-subsets of the vertices of the underlying graph H (which has
at most 4k vertices), and in this way achieve a complexity of
O∗
((
4k
k
))
= O∗(9.49k)
Improving as this does on a long series of disparate approaches to FPT design
for the MAX LEAF problem [FL92, Bod93, DF99, FMRS00], and powered by
a strong result from extremal graph theory, there would seem little to complain
about in this result. But we do complain, because even though this FPT result
has the canonical form justified by Lemma 1, it proves the Kernelization Lemma
in the wrong way. The right way to establish the Kernelization Lemma is to take
up the challenge of proving a kind of extremal theorem native to the realm of
concern of algorithms and complexity. We next describe the canonical recipe of
our monster machine methodology for the right way to do it, after first making a
few observations.
REMARK 4. The reduction rules shown in Figure 1 are some of the main ones
employed by Bonsma, Brueggemann and Woeginger. One can observe that the
graph shown in Figure 2 is irreducible under this set of rules, and therefore we
cannot hope to prove a kernelization bound better than 4k without more powerful
reduction rules than those shown in Figure 1. But this raises an important question:
What is the right way to find and prove reduction rules? One of the subsidiary aims
of the monster machine methodology is to systematize the search for polynomial-
time reduction rules.
REMARK 5. The form of the graph in Figure 2 suggests looking for the reduction
rule shown in Figure 3.
2.1 The Right Way to Prove a Kernelization Lemma
According to our methodology, the right way to prove the Kernelization Lemma
is to “study the boundary between YES and NO”. In general, an instance of a
parameterized problem consists of a pair (x, k), so the boundary we refer to is
located by holding x fixed and varying k and regarding the outcome of the decision
problem. We are interested in what things look like at the “boundary” when x is
reduced (under whatever polynomial-time reduction rules we may be able to find).
Thus the canonical approach is to prove a Boundary Lemma of the form indi-
cated by this example in our study of the M AX LEAF problem:
FPT is P-Time Extremal Structure I 9
Figure 3. The K-W Dissolver Rule.
LEMMA 6. Suppose (G, k) is a reduced instance of MAX LEAF, with (G, k) a
yes-instance of the problem and (G, k + 1) a no-instance. Then |G| ≤ ck. (Here
c is a small constant that we will clarify below.)
When we start off to prove such a Boundary Lemma, we do not initially know
what bound we will eventually succeed in proving and we don’t know exactly
what we mean by reduced. The methodological situation is that in the course of
an attempted proof, both of these details are worked out. The methodology serves
to organize our efforts. As our arguments unfold, we will be confronted with
structural situations that suggest new reduction rules.
There is a canonical way to prove the Boundary Lemma that involves two cru-
cial strategic choices:
(1) A choice of witness structure for the hypothesis that (G, k) is a yes-instance.
(2) A choice of inductive priorities.
The overall structure of the argument is “by minimum counterexample” ac-
cording to the priorities established by (2), which generally make reference to (1).
Given these choices, the proof then proceeds by a series of small steps consisting
of structural claims that lead to a detailed structural picture at the “boundary” —
and thereby to the bound on the size of G that is the conclusion of the lemma.
We will illustrate the recipe with proofs of three increasingly stronger forms
of a Boundary Lemma for the MAX LEAF problem. We will refer to these as
Boundary Lemmas I,II, and III. The point of giving three different proofs is to
illustrate the methodology, and in particular, to illustrate the effects of different
choices of witness structure and inductive priorities.
2.2 Boundary Lemma I
LEMMA 7. Boundary Lemma I. Suppose (G, k) is a reduced instance of MAX
LEAF, with (G, k) a yes-instance of the problem and (G, k + 1) a no-instance.
10 Vladimir Estivill-Castro, Michael Fellows, Michael Langston, Frances Rosamond
Then |G| ≤ 7.75k.
Proof. The proof is by minimum counterexample. If (G, k) is a yes-instance, G =
(V,E), then we can assume we are given as a witness structure a tree subgraph
T = (V ′, E′) of G that has k leaves, and we can also assume that G is connected.
We do not assume that T is a spanning subgraph. (If T is not spanning, then it
clearly extends to a spanning tree T ′ for G that has at least k leaves.)
A counterexample to the lemma would be a graph G = (V,E) such that: (1)
(G, k) is a reduced instance of M AX LEAF, (2) (G, k) is a yes-instance of M AX
LEAF, (3) (G, k+ 1) is a no-instance, and (4) |G| > 7.75k.
Among all such counterexamples, consider one where the witness subgraph tree
T is as small as possible.
Let O = V − V ′ be the set of vertices not in the witness subtree T , which we
will refer to as outsiders. Let L denote the leaves of T , I the internal (non-leaf)
vertices of T , B ⊆ I the branch vertices of T (the non-leaf, internal vertices of
T that have degree at least 3 with respect to T ), and let J denote the subdivider
vertices of T (the non-branch internal vertices of T that have degree 2 with respect
to T ). See Figure 4 for an illustration of these sets of vertices.
Figure 4. The witness tree and various sets of vertices.
We will also need to discuss the structure of T in more detail, so we introduce
the following further terminology. A path 〈b, j1, ..., jr, b′〉 in T where b, b′ ∈ B
are branch vertices of T , and the vertices ji for i = 1, ..., r are subdivider vertices
of T is termed a topological edge or topo-edge of the tree T . In this situation we
will say that b and b′ are topologically adjacent in T , and in order to be able to
FPT is P-Time Extremal Structure I 11
refer to the length of the path 〈b, j1, ..., jr, b′〉, we may say that b and b′ are joined
by an r-topo-edge in T . We will eventually be interested in structures that arise
by considering the subtrees of T induced by 0-topo-edges and 1-topo-edges of T .
(Note that a 0-topo-edge is just an ordinary edge of T .)
Claim 1. No internal vertex of T is adjacent in G to a vertex of O.
Proof of Claim 1. Otherwise, we could augment T to a subgraph tree with k + 1
leaves, contradicting that (G, k + 1) is a no-instance. (See Figure 5.)
Figure 5. No internal vertex of T is adjacent to an outsider, else k + 1 leaves.
Claim 2. A leaf vertex of T is adjacent to at most one outsider.
Proof of Claim 2. Otherwise we contradict that (G, k + 1) is a no-instance.
Claim 3. The subgraph 〈O〉 induced by the outsiders is acyclic.
Proof of Claim 3. Otherwise, since G is connected, we contradict that (G, k + 1)
is a no-instance. See Figure 6.
Claim 4. The subgraph 〈O〉 induced by the outsiders has maximum degree at most
2.
Proof of Claim 4. Otherwise we contradict that (G, k + 1) is a no-instance. See
Figure 7.
By Claims 3 and 4, the subgraph 〈O〉 induced by the outsiders consists of a
union of paths.
Claim 5. A leaf of G cannot be adjacent to an interior vertex of a path of 〈O〉.
Proof of Claim 5. Otherwise we contradict that (G, k + 1) is a no-instance.
12 Vladimir Estivill-Castro, Michael Fellows, Michael Langston, Frances Rosamond
Figure 6. 〈O〉 is acyclic, else k + 1 leaves.
Figure 7. 〈O〉 has maximum degree at most 2, else k + 1 leaves.
Claims 1-5 show that 〈O〉 consists of a disjoint union of paths, and that the
interior vertices of these paths have degree 2 in G. This motivates us to look for a
reduction rule that addresses this structure. The reduction rule shown in Figure 8
(first reported in [FMRS00]) was discovered in this way.
Claim 6. 〈O〉 consists of a union of paths, where each path has at most 3 vertices.
Proof of Claim 6. Otherwise the “Two Adjacent Degree 2” reduction rule applies.
FPT is P-Time Extremal Structure I 13
Figure 8. The “Two Adjacent Degree 2 Rule”.
The evident structure of 〈O〉 suggests looking for a reduction that applies to
vertices of degree 1 in G. Such a reduction rule is shown in Figure 9.
Figure 9. The degree 1 rule.
Claim 7. |O| ≤ .75k
Proof of Claim 7. This follows from the fact that T has k leaves, and from Claims
2,5 and 6, inducting on the number of path components in 〈O〉. The “worst case”
for the induction is where a path component of 〈O〉 has 3 vertices (a path of length
2). In this case each endpoint of the path must be adjacent to at least two leaves of
T , else G is reducible either by the “Degree 1” or the “Two Adjacent Degree 2”
reduction rules. Thus the number of leaves is k ≥ 4|O|/3.
14 Vladimir Estivill-Castro, Michael Fellows, Michael Langston, Frances Rosamond
The picture that has emerged through Claims 1-7 is starting to give us a handle
on how big G can be. Next we must bound the size of T .
Claim 8. |B| ≤ k − 2
Proof of Claim 8. A straightforward induction on the number of leaves.
Claim 9. The subgraph induced by the vertices of a topological edge of T contains
no further edges.
Proof of Claim 9. This is trivially true for an r-topo-edge where r = 0, so suppose
r ≥ 1. But then we can re-engineer T to have k+1 leaves, as shown in Figure 10.
Figure 10. Topo-edges are induced subgraphs.
Claim 10. There are no r-topological edges in T for r ≥ 6.
Proof of Claim 10. Suppose we have a path 〈b, j1, ..., jr, b′〉 in T where b, b′ ∈ B
are branch vertices of T , and the vertices ji for i = 1, ..., r are subdivider vertices
of T , where r ≥ 6. let Tb denote the subtree of T “to the left” of b, and let Tb′
denote the subtree of T “to the right” of b′. The vertex j3 cannot be adjacent
in G to a vertex of Tb, otherwise we can re-engineer T to have k + 1 leaves as
shown in Figure 11. The vertex j3 cannot be adjacent to a vertex of Tb′ for similar
reasons, as shown in Figure 11. By Claim 9, and by symmetry, the vertices j3 and
j4 must have degree 2 in G. But then G is reducible, either by Rule B of Figure 1
(contracting a bridge) or by the “Two Degree 2 Rule” of Figure 8.
Claim 11. Each leaf in T is adjacent in T to a branch vertex.
Proof of Claim 11. Otherwise, we would contradict that T is as small as possible.
See Figure 12.
FPT is P-Time Extremal Structure I 15
Figure 11. Long topo-edges of T have middle vertices of degree 2 in G.
Figure 12. A leaf is adjacent to a branch, else smaller T.
16 Vladimir Estivill-Castro, Michael Fellows, Michael Langston, Frances Rosamond
Claim 12. |J | ≤ 5(k − 3)
Proof of Claim 12. This follows from Claims 9 and 10.
We can now conclude the proof of Boundary Lemma I on the basis of Claims
7,8 and 12. 
2.3 Boundary Lemma II
LEMMA 8. Boundary Lemma II. Suppose (G, k) is a reduced instance of MAX
LEAF, with (G, k) a yes-instance of the problem and (G, k + 1) a no-instance.
Then |G| ≤ 5.75k.
Proof. The proof is by minimum counterexample. Witnessing that (G, k) is a
yes-instance we have a tree T with k leaves, as in the proof of Boundary Lemma
I. Here we will have a little more structure and another inductive priority. We
consider that the tree T is equipped with a root vertex r ∈ V ′. The possible coun-
terexample that we entertain in our argument is one where:
(1) T is as small as possible, and among all counterexamples satisfying this re-
quirement, one where
(2) the sum over all leaves l ∈ L of the distance in T from r to l is minimized.
All of the structural claims from the proof of Boundary Lemma I hold here as
well, since essentially all we have done is add another “further” inductive priority.
This additional priority allows us to establish a strengthening of Claim 10:
Claim 13. T does not have r-topological edges for r ≥ 4.
Proof of Claim 13. Suppose we have a path 〈b, j1, ..., jr, b′〉 in T where b, b′ ∈ B
are branch vertices of T , and the vertices ji for i = 1, ..., r are subdivider vertices
of T , where r ≥ 4. Let Tb denote the subtree of T “to the left” of b, and let Tb′
denote the subtree of T “to the right” of b′. We can suppose that the root of T
lies in Tb′ , without loss of generality. The vertices j1 and j2 cannot be adjacent to
vertices in Tb′ , else we can re-engineer T to have k + 1 leaves, as in the proof of
Claim 10. By Claim 9, and since G is irreducible (in particular, j1 and j2 do not
both have degree 2 in G), at least one of j1 or j2 is adjacent by an ede e to a vertex
x of Tb. But then by adding e to T and removing the edge xu, where xu is the
first edge on the path in T from x to b, we can obtain a modified tree with k leaves
where the priority (2) has been improved.
That concludes the proof of BL II. 
2.4 Boundary Lemma III
LEMMA 9. Boundary Lemma III. Suppose (G, k) is a reduced instance of MAX
LEAF, with (G, k) a yes-instance of the problem and (G, k + 1) a no-instance.
Then |G| ≤ 3.75k.
Proof. The proof is by minimum counterexample. Witnessing that (G, k) is a yes-
instance is the following structure:
FPT is P-Time Extremal Structure I 17
(1) As in the proof of Boundary Lemma I and Boundary Lemma II, we assume a
subgraph tree T of G having k leaves, which we will refer to as the witness tree.
We consider that the sets of vertices O, I, L, B and J (the outsiders, internal
vertices, leaves, branch vertices and subdivider vertices, respectively) are defined
as in the proof of Boundary Lemma I (and pictured in Figure 1).
(2) A collection T 1 = {T 1[i] : i ∈ I} of vertex disjoint subtrees T 1[i] of T
(called the 1-subtrees of T ) where each 1-subtree T 1[i] is a maximal subtree of T
induced by the 1-topo-edges of T together with any adjacent leaves or J-vertices.
(See Figure 12.)
(3) For each 1-subtree T 1[i], a collection T 0i = {T 0[i, j] : i ∈ I, j ∈ Ji}
of edge-disjoint subtrees of T 1[i] (called the 0-subtrees of T 1[i]) where each 0-
subtree T 0[i, j] T 0i is a maximal subtree of T 1[i] induced by the 0-topo-edges of
T . (See Figure 13.)
DEFINITION 10. The global structure tree G(T ) of T is the rooted, vertex-
weighted graph, composed by making one vertex for each 1-subtree of T , weight-
ing each vertex x of G(T ) with the positive integer p(x) according to the size
(number of vertices) of the 1-subtree of T that it corresponds to, and making two
vertices of G(T ) adjacent if they are joined by a topo-path in T . The root rG(T ) of
G(T ) corresponds to the 1-subtree of T containing the root of T .
The Inductive Priorities. The inductive priorities for the argument are listed as
follows, where we include as the zeroth priority the implicit induction on the num-
ber of leaves inherent in the form of the boundary lemma:
(0) The number of leaves of T is maximized.
(1) The number of vertices of T is minimized.
(2) The total number of vertices belonging to the 1-subtrees of T is minimized.
(3) The total number of edges belonging to the 1-subtrees of T is minimized
(equivalently, the number of 1-subtrees of T is maximized.
(4) The total number of 0-subtrees of T is maximized.
(5) The sum
∆ =
∑
x∈V (G(T ))
d(r, x) · p(x)
is minimized.
The rest of the proof proceeds in the following stages. In Part I we assemble
a series of structural claims that describe what we call The Bridge World. In Part
II we set up The Master Inequality that will allow us to draw the conclusion of
Boundary Lemma (a bound on the size of the reduced graph G) by summing over
aspects of the structural situation, where the sum is taken over all of the 1-trees of
the Bridge World. In Part III we use the Master Inequality to complete the proof
by induction. The base case for the induction involves an extensive analysis of the
structural situation for small 1-trees.
18 Vladimir Estivill-Castro, Michael Fellows, Michael Langston, Frances Rosamond
Part I: The Structure of the Bridge World.
We first attempt to give some intuitive picture of the main structure, and how
this structure relates to previous work on graphs that exclude leafy tree subgraphs.
In the structure that is used in the best previous FPT algorithm for M AX LEAF
[BBW03], you basically have 4k vertices (think of these as islands) joined by
“bridges” (caterpillar paths) that have a restricted form. Here we have something
roughly similar, in that we will have “islands” that are 1-trees, joined by “bridges”
that are quite restricted in their possible structure, and of approximately the same
size as the reduced caterpillar paths of [BBW03]. (Caterpillar paths disappear
from our “picture” in some sense, under the force of the polynomial-time reduc-
tion rule for degree 1 vertices shown in Figure 9, which seems to have been un-
known to the authors of [BBW03].) Our “islands”, the 1-subtrees of T , make up a
forest that is exactly the main structure employed in the best current polynomial-
time approximation algorithm for MAX LEAF, due to Solis-Oba [S-Ob98]. We
go deeper, here, however, engaging the internal structure of the “islands” and how
this internal structure interacts with the bridges that link the islands, squaring this
structure off against our inductive priorities and against our expanding arsenal of
polynomial-time reduction rules. (Priority (5), one might note, is akin to priority
(2) in the proof of Boundary Lemma II. Priorities (1-4) here could be viewed as a
finer elaboration of priority (1) in the proof of Boundary Lemma II.)
Considering the proofs of Boundary Lemmas I and II, it is clear that “the main
problem” has to do with bounding the size of the population of subdivider vertices
J . Suppose that we start with our picture of T as it emerges from the proof of
Boundary Lemma I. The subgraph 〈O〉 of G induced by the outsiders O consists
of little paths of at most 3 vertices. Any r-topological edge of T has r ≤ 5. If
r ≤ 1 then the topo-edge becomes part of a 1-tree. If r ≥ 2 then “cut out the
middle”. This cuts T into various subtrees: the 1-trees, together with some left-
over material. The middle parts that are cut out consist of little paths of at most
3 vertices, which remind us of the components of 〈O〉, and in fact it will turn out
the pieces (the components of 〈O〉 and the middle pieces cut out from long topo-
edges) all behave more-or-less the same and constitute the “bridges” between the
“islands” of the Bridge World.
DEFINITION 11. A bridge refers either to an edge between two leaves of differ-
ent 1-trees (called a 0-bridge), or to a connected component of the subgraph of G
induced by the vertices that do not belong to any 1-tree of the witness structure
(these are called serious bridges).
DEFINITION 12. A portal of a 1-tree is a leaf of the 1-tree that is either adjacent
(by a 0-bridge) to a leaf of a different 1-tree (called a 0-portal), or adjacent to a
vertex of a serious bridge (and in this case is called a serious portal.
DEFINITION 13. A link is a path ρ from a portal of a 1-tree to a portal of a
FPT is P-Time Extremal Structure I 19
different 1-tree of the witness structure, where this path is part of T . That is, a
link is part of the means by which the 1-trees of the witness structure are joined to
make the witness tree T .
Figure 13. 1-trees, bridges, and links.
DEFINITION 14. A gateway vertex v of a 1-tree is a vertex that belongs to two
different 0-trees in the 0-tree decomposition of the 1-tree. (Necessarily, v is a leaf
of each of these 0-trees.)
The Bridge World has a huge amount of structure under our indicated inductive
priorities. Space limitations for this abstract allow only a brief summary of some
of the main aspects. Of key importance is that the bridges are neatly separated in
the sense that if p is a portal for a bridge B, then B is the only bridge for which
p is a portal, unless the bridges for which p is a portal are all 0-bridges. In this
case, all of the 0-bridges link p to the same 1-tree. A bridge B connects to at
most two 1-trees. (A bridge B that connects to only one 1-tree is termed a loop
bridge, and its portals are termed loop portals.) The fact that bridges are between at
most two 1-trees establishes a clean global structure that we can model as a graph,
where two 1-trees are adjacent if they have bridges between them. This fact is
crucially used in the “two-sided counting strategies” of the Master Inequality, and
the neat separation of the bridges is used in the induction on portals that establishes
the Master Inequality. The detailed 0-tree substructure of 1-trees is important for
this latter inductive argument, as it is this detailed structure that provides positive
20 Vladimir Estivill-Castro, Michael Fellows, Michael Langston, Frances Rosamond
Figure 14. O-tree structure of 1-trees and gateway vertices.
estimates for the quantities Li(p) and Wi(p) discussed below in the context of this
induction.
Part II: The Master Inequality.
Let t denote the number of 1-trees in the bridge world decomposition of G. We
will ultimately conclude a bound on the size of G by summing over t structural
pictures, one for each 1-tree. We will use N to denote the total number of vertices
in G. Our goal is to obtain a bound N ≤ αk for a small constant α.
DEFINITION 15. In the structural picture of the 1-tree T 1[i] of the bridge world
decomposition of G we have the following elements:
(1) The 1-tree T 1[i] said to be on the left side of the picture.
(2) The other 1-trees of the bridge world decomposition, said to be on the right
side of the picture.
FPT is P-Time Extremal Structure I 21
(3) The serious non loop bridges that link T 1[i] on the left to 1-trees on the right.
The vertices of these serious non loop bridges are said to be in the middle of the
picture.
(4) The serious loop bridges that attach only to T 1[i]. The vertices of these serious
loop bridges are said to be on the left side of the picture.
(5) The 0-bridges that attach vertices of T 1[i] on the left side to vertices of the
other 1-trees on the right side of the picture.
We will use the following variables that inventory aspects of the structure of G
that appear in the ith picture. For the remainder of the discussion of the Master
Inequality, we will use T [i] for short to refer to T 1[i]. (Since we are not here
concerned with the 0-tree structure of T 1[i], we can safely ignore the subscript.)
It is important to note that some of the inventoried quantities are counted on one
side of the picture only, and some are counted on both sides.
DEFINITION 16. Variables for a census of the ith structural picture.
Xi denotes the number of leaves of T [i] (on the left).
Ji denotes the number of internal vertices of T [i] (on the left).
Bi denotes the number of serious non loop bridge vertices (in the middle).
Ci denotes the number of serious loop bridge vertices (on the left).
P (i) denotes the total number of portals of non loop serious bridges (on both
sides).
P←i denotes the number of portals of T [i] of non loop serious bridges (on the left).
P→i denotes the number of portals of non loop serious bridges on the right side.
Qi denotes the number of portals of serious loop bridges (on the left).
Zi denotes the number of portals of 0-bridges (on both sides).
Z←(i) denotes the number of portals of 0-bridges (on the left side only).
Z→(i) denotes the number of portals of 0-bridges (on the right side only).
Li denotes the number of non portal leaves of T [i] (on the left).
DEFINITION 17. Si denotes the number of saved vertices of T [i], defined to be
the difference between the maximum possible number of internal vertices of a 1-
tree with Xi leaves, and the actual number Ji of internal vertices of the ith 1-tree.
Thus Si = (2Xi − 5)− Ji.
DEFINITION 18. The link degree of T [i] denoted ri is defined to be the degree
of the vertex corresponding to T [i] in the global structure graph.
The following variables are used to give the overall inventory of the vertices of
G.
DEFINITION 19. X denotes the total number of leaves of the 1-trees.
J denotes the total number of vertices of the 1-trees.
B denotes the total number of serious non loop bridge vertices.
C denotes the total number of serious loop bridge vertices.
22 Vladimir Estivill-Castro, Michael Fellows, Michael Langston, Frances Rosamond
P denotes the total number of portals of non loop serious bridges.
Q denotes the total number of portals of serious loop bridges.
Z denotes the total number of portals of 0-bridges.
L denotes the total number of non portal leaves of the 1-trees.
LEMMA 20. Suppose:
t∑
i=1
(Bi +Ci + 2Xi + 2Ji) ≤
t∑
i=1
α (Pi + 2Qi + Zi + 2Li − 2ri)
then N ≤ αk.
Proof. By the definition of the total quantities, and noting that in summing over
all structural pictures, vertices of bridges are counted twice (relevant to the sum
on the left side of the inequality) and portals of 0-bridges and non loop serious
bridges are counted twice (relevant to the sum on the right side of the inequality),
we have
2B + 2C + 2X + 2J ≤ α (2P + 2Q+ 2Z + 2L− 4(t− 1))
Since
N = B + C +X + J
and
X = P +Q+ Z + L
this can be rewritten as
2N ≤ α(2X − 4(t − 1)) = 2αk
using the fact that while the total number of leaves of the 1-trees is X, 2(t− 1) of
these are used up in linking the 1-trees together to form T . 
LEMMA 21. The inequality of Lemma 7 holds if
t∑
i=1
Bi + 2Ci ≤
t∑
i=1
(α− 3)
(
Pi + Zi −
(
4 +
2
α− 3
))
+(2α− 6) (Qi + Li) + 2Si
Proof. Arguing backwards, the inequality of Lemma 7 is true if:
t∑
i=1
(Bi + 2Ci + 2Xi + +4Xi − 10− 2Si)
≤
t∑
i=1
α (Pi + 2Qi + Zi + 2Li − 2ri)
FPT is P-Time Extremal Structure I 23
where we rewrite the left side using the fact that the maximum number of internal
vertices of a 1-tree with Xi leaves is (Xi − 2) + (Xi − 3) = 2Xi − 5, and using
the definition of the savings Si as the difference between Ji and the maximum
possible. This inequality holds the sum
t∑
i=1
(Bi + 2Ci + 6P←i + 6Qi + 6Li + 6Z
←(i))
is bounded
≤
t∑
i=1
[2Si + 10 + α(P←i + P
→
i + 2Qi + Z
←(i) + Z→(i) + 2Li − 2ri)]
using the fact that
Xi = P←i +Qi + Li + Z
←(i)
and breaking up Pi and Zi into left side and right side populations in the ith struc-
tural picture. This bound holds if the sum
t∑
i=1
(Bi + 2Ci + (6 − α)P←i + (6− α)Z→(i))
is
≤
t∑
i=1
((2α− 6)(Qi + Li) + α(P→i + Z→(i)) + 2Si + 10+ 2αri)
where terms have simply been rearranged. This is true if:
t∑
i=1
Bi+2Ci ≤
t∑
i=1
(α−3)
(
Pi + Zi −
(
4 +
2
α− 3
))
+(2α−6)(Qi+Li)+2Si
The last step is justified by two small arguments. The first is that∑
i
(αP→i +(α−6)P←i ) =
(∑
i
P→i
)
+
(∑
i
(α− 6)P←i
)
= αP +(α−6)P
and
(2α− 6)P =
∑
i
(α− 3)Pi
and similarly for the Zi terms. The second justification is that
t∑
i=1
ri = 2(t− 1)

24 Vladimir Estivill-Castro, Michael Fellows, Michael Langston, Frances Rosamond
Our ultimate goal in Boundary Lemma III is to prove: N ≤ αk for a small
constant α, given as α = 3.75k in the statement of BL III. For convenience in
handling the Master Inequality for 1-trees, define
δ = 8 +
2
α− 3
LEMMA 22. If the inequality:
t∑
i=1
Bi + 2Ci ≤
t∑
i=1
(α− 3) (Pi + Zi + 2ri − δ) + +(2α− 6) (Qi + Li) + 2Si
holds, then N ≤ αk.
Proof. By the previous lemmas, and a small rearrangement, noting that
t∑
i
(2ri − 4) = (2
t∑
i
ri)− (
t∑
i
4) = 4(t− 1) − 4t = −4

Our basic approach will be to prove the required inequality separately for each
i. And for the ith structural picture, we will use the well-behaved structure of
the Bridge World to prove the ith inequality by induction on the serious portals
of the ith 1-tree T 1[i]. The case analysis for this induction will use the local
structure in the vicinity of the portal, and it becomes important to “credit” the
local contribution to the quantities on the right side of the inequality. The quantity
of the savings Si of the ith 1-tree is defined “globally” for the 1-tree. We next
describe a crediting system that indexes the savings of a 1-tree to local structure.
The Bookkeeping for 1-Tree Savings Si.
The ith 1-tree T 1[i] has an internal structure consisting of 0-subtrees. These
are adjacent if they share a gateway, and according to this notion of adjacency,
the 0-subtrees are naturally organized into a tree (of the 0-subtrees of T 1[i]). We
describe an assignment of a savings value v(l) to each leaf l of the 1-tree. This
assignment has the property that ∑
l
v(l) = Si
This assignment is calculated in four phases:
(1) The first phase consists of calculating an initial net savings value for each 0-
tree.
(2) The second phase consists in transferring net savings value between 0-trees. At
FPT is P-Time Extremal Structure I 25
the end of the second phase, only 0-trees that have at least one leaf of T 1[i] retain
positive net savings value.
(3) In the third phase, the net savings value of each 0-tree is divided and assigned
equally to the leaves of the 0-tree that are leaves of T 1[i].
(4) In the fourth phase, some of the assigned leaf values are transfered from non-
portal leaves of T 1[i] to portal leaves of T 1[i].
Due to space limitations for this extended abstract, details of the savings assign-
ment scheme are omitted.
DEFINITION 23. The total amount of savings value assigned to portals (of T 1[i])
on the left side of the ith structural picture is denoted W←i . The total amount of
savings value assigned to portals on the right side of the ith structural picture is
denoted W→i . We define Wi = W←i +W→i . The difference Si −W←i is denoted
Ui.
LEMMA 24. The Master Inequality for 1-Trees. If for each i we have:
Bi + 2Ci ≤ (α− 3)(Pi + Zi + 2ri − δ) + (2α− 6)(Qi + Li) + 2Ui +Wi
then N ≤ αk.
The Master Inequality is proved for small 1-trees by carefully analyzing their
(entire) structure. This provides a base step. For large 1-trees we can essentially
amortize the δ term (which can be thought of as a kind of “startup cost”). Note
that the left side of the Master Inequality can be indexed as contributed by bridges
connected to serious portals p. The structure of the Bridge World allows us to
straightforwardly define these contributions as Bi(p) and Ci(p). On the left side,
these quantities provide a complete breakdown of Bi and Ci. For the quantities on
the right side of the Master Inequality, we can define contributions Pi(p), Zi(p),
Qi(p), Li(p) and from the savings assignment scheme we have Wi(p). In defining
these, it is of course important that for portals p 6= p′ the credited contributions
are disjoint. Because our goal is an inequality, it is not necessary that these contri-
butions credited to portals p provide a complete breakdown of the total quantities.
These credit assignments are defined in terms of local structure. The details have
to be omitted from this extended abstract.
Supposing that the base step holds for all 1-trees having fewer than m leaves,
we prove the following lemma that gives us the inductive approach.
LEMMA 25. The Portal Inequality. Suppose that the 1-tree has at least m
leaves, and that for every serious portal p
Bi(p) + 2Ci(p) ≤ (α− 3)(1− (δ/m))(Pi(p) + Zi(p))
+(2α− 6)(Qi(p) + Li(p)) +Wi(p)
then the Master Inequality holds.
26 Vladimir Estivill-Castro, Michael Fellows, Michael Langston, Frances Rosamond
Part III: The Induction. The induction is completed by making a generic analysis
according to cases that address the various ways that a leaf of the 1-tree can serve as
a serious portal. However, based on structural Claim ??? of the proof of BL I (this
carries over) and making very pessimistic assumptions about the p-contributions
to the more difficult terms to “see” of the right side (e.g., assume Li(p) = 0,
etc.), it is relatively easy to verify that the Portal Inequality holds for α = 3.8, for
moderate m. Many details must here be omitted.
2.5 A Summary of the Recipe for Objective A
The monster machine recipe for the objective of designing an FPT algorithm in-
volves the following steps:
(1) Determine the polarity of the boundary, and set up the boundary lemma.
(2) Choose a witness structure.
(3) Set inductive priorities.
(4) Develop a series of structural claims that describe the situation at the boundary.
(5) Discover reduction rules that can act in polynomial time on relevant structural
situations at the boundary.
(6) As the structure at the boundary becomes clear, fill in the blank regarding the
kernelization bound.
We have to emphasize that while this recipe is the right way to design an FPT
algorithm, and it is necessary in the sense that a parameterized problem is FPT if
and only if it is polynomial-time kernelizable to a problem kernel of size bounded
by a function of k, which inevitably leads to the challenge of developing extremal
structure theory (modulo polynomial time data-reduction and pre-processing), this
is not the only way to develop FPT algorithms. In particular, the above recipe
is silent on what to do with the kernel. We say nothing here about how to de-
velop efficient branching strategies, although it is conceivable that general recipes
for employing “parameter-appropriate structure theory” in branching strategies for
sophisticated problem kernel analysis may be possible.
One can point to at least three other important issues at the level of general
methodology that would lead beyond what we offer here:
1. Turing kernelizability. The charter for the monster machine program is Lemma
1, that tells us that a parameterized problem is fixed-parameter tractable if and
only if it is polynomial-time kernelizable. The notion of instance reduction that
is operative in this lemma, the polynomial-time transformation of (x, k) to the
simpler reduced instance (x′, k′) is a many:1 transformation. One can generalize
the notion of many:1 reduction to Turing reduction, and this actually turns up
quite importantly in the practice of FPT algorithm design, for example in [RSV04,
DFRS04, Ma04, DFLRS05, GGHNW05]. How should the quest for polynomial-
time extremal structure theory unfold under this “more generous” characterization
of FPT?
FPT is P-Time Extremal Structure I 27
2. Problem annotation. Combinatorial problems ought to become more complex
when the inputs are annotated. For example, we might consider a generalized M AX
LEAF problem where vertices and edges have various annotations as to whether
they must be leaves (or internal vertices) in a solution, etc. Such a generalized form
of the problem would generally be expected to be “more difficult” than the vanilla
form of the problem. It is striking, however, that several of the “best known” FPT
algorithms for various problems, are based on these generalized, annotated forms
of the problems. Examples include P LANAR DOMINATING SET [AFFFNRS04]
and FEEDBACK VERTEX SET [DFLRS05]. Should annotation be part of the recipe
for the best possible polynomial-time kernelization?
3. Algorithmic forms of the boundary lemma approach. The hypothesis of the
Boundary Lemma that (G, k) is a yes-instance implies that there exists (according
to our strategic choice of what this means) a witness structure to this fact. There
is no assumption that we have algorithmic access to this structure, and when we
discover reduction rules, these have to be transformations that can be applied to
(G, k) and structure that can be discovered in (G, k) in polynomial time. In other
words, reduction rules cannot be defined with respect to the witness structure. Can
we describe more general approaches to kernelization where the witness structure
used in the proof of the Boundary Lemma is polynomial-time computable, and this
structure provides a conditional context for some reduction rules? How would this
change the monster machine recipe?
3 Objective B: Powerful Pre-processing and Data-Reduction
Routines
Three important points:
• Pre-processing can have a very powerful effect on natural input distributions.
The “gold standard” successes in software development for hard problems (e.g.,
CPLEX for integer linear programming) depend heavily on sophisticated pre-
processing routines.
• Pre-processing routines have a permanent and universal significance for practical
computing. In practical computing you will always pre-process your input (and
generally re-kernelize on every branch of a backtracking effort). You will pre-
process your input even if your main strategy is simulated annealing or roaming
ants, and regardless of whether relevant parameters are small.
• Pre-processing reduction rules can be entirely nontrivial and surprising.
In the area of algorithms and complexity there has been a kind of myth that
we design good algorithms, and then others will come along and implement what
we have designed. Generally, what practitioners will do, if they even read theory
papers at all, is ransack them for ideas that they might be able to use in designing
practical algorithms. The work of algorithm theorists is destined for the most part
28 Vladimir Estivill-Castro, Michael Fellows, Michael Langston, Frances Rosamond
to be digested and deconstructed, not implemented. Algorithm theorists should
think ahead about this and make it easy. Our goal, after all, is to serve those
who want to compute. Reduction rules are clearly a ready-to-go deliverable to
implementors with practical concerns.
3.1 The Unexpected Power of Pre-processing
A crucial question is: What are the actual inputs that practical computing im-
plementations have to deal with? Karsten Weihe has given a thought-provoking
account in [Wei00] concerning a real-world input distribution for an NP-hard prob-
lem.
Weihe’s Train Problem. Weihe describes a problem concerning the train systems
of Europe [Wei98]. Consider a bipartite graph G = (V,E) where V is biparti-
tioned into two sets S (stations) and T (trains), and where an edge represents that
a train t stops at a station s. The relevant graphs are huge, on the order of 10,000
vertices. The problem is to compute a minimum number of stations S′ ⊆ S such
that every train stops at a station in S′. It is easy to see that this is a special case
of the HITTING SET problem, and is therefore NP-complete. Moreover, it is also
W [1]-hard [DF99], so the straightforward application of the parameterized com-
plexity program seems to fail as well.
However, the following two reduction rules can be applied to simplify (pre-
process) the input to the problem. In describing these rules, let N (s) denote the
set of trains that stop at station s, and let N (t) denote the set of stations at which
the train t stops.
1. If N (s) ⊆ N (s′) then delete s.
2. If N (t) ⊆ N (t′) then delete t′.
Applications of these reduction rules cascade, preserving at each step enough in-
formation to obtain an optimal solution. Weihe found that, remarkably, these two
simple reduction rules were strong enough to “digest” the original, huge input
graph into a problem kernel consisting of disjoint components of size at most 50
— small enough to allow the problem to be solved optimally by brute force.
Note that we also have here a polynomial-time constant factor approximation
algorithm, getting us a solution within a factor of 50 of optimal in O(n2) time by
taking all the station vertices in the kernel components.
The surprising power of cascading data-reduction rules on real input distribu-
tions is why our deliverable (B) is probably, in the grand scheme of things, more
important than deliverable (A).
3.2 Polynomial-Time Pre-processing Is Mathematically Nontrivial
Kernelization rules are frequently surprising in character, laborious to prove, and
nontrivial to discover. Once found, they are small gems of data reduction that
FPT is P-Time Extremal Structure I 29
remain permanently in the heuristic design file for hard problems.
With a moment’s thought the reader can easily observe a reduction rule for the
VERTEX COVER problem that eliminates vertices of degree 1. It has to be regarded
as quite surprising, however, that in polynomial time it is possible to kernelize, for
the VERTEX COVER problem, to to graphs of minimum degree 4, and “almost” to
minimum degree 5!
The following is one of the reduction rules for V ERTEX COVER that can be used
to eliminate vertices of degree 3, taken from [DFS99]. Suppose G has a vertex x
of degree 3 that has three mutually nonadjacent neighbors a, b, c. Then G can be
simplified by: (1) deleting x, (2) adding edges from c to all the vertices in N (a),
(3) adding edges from a to all the vertices in N (b), (3) adding edges from b to all
the vertices in N (c), and (4) adding the edges ab and bc. The resulting (smaller)
graph G′ has a vertex cover of size k if and only if G has a vertex cover of size k.
Moreover, an optimal or good approximate solution for G′ lifts constructively to
an optimal or good approximate solution for G. This reduction rule is illustrated
in Figure 15 below. Note that this transformation is not even symmetric!
Crown type reduction rules provide another recent example of highly nontrivial
polynomial-time reduction rules that are of great practical value (see for example
[ACFLSS04]) as well as being a significant development in terms of FPT theory.
For examples of crown-type kernelizations see [DFRS04, FHRST04, PS04, Pr05].
(As an historical aside, crown reductions were first discovered in an attempt to
better understand the monster machine methodology by trying it out on the classic
FPT example of the VERTEX COVER problem [ACFLSS04, CFJ04].)
3.3 A general perspective on reduction rules
To date, reduction rules have been treated in the FPT literature in an ad hoc way.
Because of their importance both theoretically and in practical terms, the subject
deserves to be better organized. What exactly is a reduction rule? (What differ-
ent kinds of reduction rules are there?) Can they be systematically computed or
mechanically verified?
In keeping with the monster machine mission to articulate the right way to de-
sign FPT algorithms, we report here on a very general perspective that one can
take on reduction rules that we term “the oplus perspective” based on the alge-
braic Myhill-Nerode machinery adapted to graph theory. (For basic references
and exposition of this somewhat technical area see [FL89, AF93, MP94, BEF96,
DF99, CDDFL00].)
First of all, we can make a few observations that point to a variety of mathemat-
ical phenomena in the matter of reduction rules:
• Some reduction rules that transform (G, k) to (G′, k′) depend for their definition
on the specific value of k, and some do not. For example, the degree 1 reduction
rule for VERTEX COVER, for which k′ = k − 1 is defined on G in the same way
30 Vladimir Estivill-Castro, Michael Fellows, Michael Langston, Frances Rosamond
Figure 15. One of the Vertex Cover rules for degree 3.
regardless of the value of k. The high degree reduction rule, on the other hand,
says to take into the solution any vertex of degree greater than k, and thus the effect
on G is sensitive to the specific value of k.
• Some reduction rules, such as the K-W Dissolver Rule for MAX LEAF depicted
in Figure 3, have a fixed “boundary size” (in this case: 2), whereas crown type
reduction rules [ACFLSS04, CFJ04] do not have a fixed boundary size. (Crown
decompositions of a specified boundary size are in fact NP-hard to compute! [ ?].)
• The usual decision criterion for the soundness of a reduction rule is that (G, k)
is a yes-instance if and only if (G′, k′) is a yes-instance. For the purposes of con-
structing polynomial-time approximation algorithms, or in using reduction rules
in the context of the iterative compression strategy for FPT algorithm design (see
[RSV04, DFRS04, DFLRS05, GGHNW05, Ma04] for recent examples of this) it
FPT is P-Time Extremal Structure I 31
is necessary that a k′-solution for G′ can be constructively lifted to a k-solution
for G in polynomial time.
Our Myhill-Nerode perspective does not capture all of these issues.
DEFINITION 26. A t-boundaried graph, is just a graph with t distinguished ver-
tices labeled 1, ..., t.
DEFINITION 27. If X and Y are t-boundaried graphs, then X ⊕ Y is defined
to be the graph obtained from X and Y by identifying the boundaries. (For more
detailed definitions see [DF99].
A key point of a mathematical machine in the sense of Grothendieck is to break
things down into systematic series of small steps. The “oplus perspective” on
reduction rules allows us to do this for the error-prone and tedious matter of prov-
ing correctness of reduction rules, and it also allows us to describe algorithms for
computing “all” reduction rules (although we do not pursue this here). The table
below records information that shows correctness for the “K-W Dissolver Rule”
for MAX LEAF. This reduction rule can be thought of a specifying the replacement
of a boundaried subgraph (denoted A), of boundary size 2, by a smaller subgraph
(denoted B) and adjusting the parameter to k′ = k − 1. What is important is that
for any 2-boundaried graph X and for any l, X ⊕ A has an l-leaf spanning tree if
and only if X ⊕ B has a spanning tree with l − 1 leaves.
The table records, for each possible boundary state for a possible solution, the
maximum number of leaves that can be arranged (respecting that state information)
inside of A (respectively, B). Because both A and B are symmetric with respect
to the boundary vertices, it is only necessary to inventory the possible boundary
states up to symmetry. The boundary state notation “SR” denotes that the first
boundary vertex is a non-leaf, and that the second boundary vertex is connected
“on the right” to an internal vertex of the spanning tree. (The state notation “L”
indicates similarly “on the left”.) The asterisk indicates that the boundary vertices,
which are specified to be internal vertices of the tree, are also to be connected in
the tree by a path “on the right”.
state A leaves B leaves
SR 1 0
SL 2 1
SS 2 1
SS* 1 0
Table 1. Data for the K-W Dissolver Rule
32 Vladimir Estivill-Castro, Michael Fellows, Michael Langston, Frances Rosamond
4 Objective C: Gradients and Solution Transformations for
Local Search
This deliverable of the structure theory associated to the parameterization is more
speculative than the other objectives, but still seems worth exploring and may have
significant potential.
We use MAX LEAF, with the structure theory of Boundary Lemma II to illus-
trate the idea.
The typical form that a local search heuristic for the M AX LEAF problem would
take would have the following core elements:
(1) A current solution consisting of a spanning tree T for G would be maintained.
(2) The value of T would be defined as the number of leaves of T , as per the
definition of the optimization form of the problem.
The local search routine would consist of repeated rounds of:
• For every possible way of removing r edges from T (where r is a small fixed
number typically r ≤ 3), and for every possible way of using r edges to link the
fragments to form a new spanning tree T ′, see if the value of T ′ is greater than the
value of T . If so, update the current solution to T ′.
The search would continue until no r-change of the current solution T yields an
improved solution T ′.
The proof of Boundary Lemma II essentially employs a more refined notion of
a representation of a solution (or maybe we should say proto-solution). That is,
the proof works with a witness structure that is not a spanning tree of G with k
leaves, but rather a (possibly non spanning) tree subgraph that has k leaves. It is
a witness to the fact that (G, k) is a yes-instance because it can be extended to
a spanning tree having at least k leaves. The first idea, then, is that local search
might be conducted based on maintaining a “current witness structure” rather than
a full solution (spanning tree).
Moreover, the improved kernelization outcome of Boundary Lemma II (over
Boundary Lemma I, and with Boundary Lemma III being even stronger) is essen-
tially due to the fact that the argument employs a more refined notion of “better
solution”, where “more leaves” is only the zeroth priority. The second idea is to
use the list of inductive priorities to define a “better solution” gradient for the local
search. Most structural claims (as in the proof of Boundary Lemma I) essentially
describe situations where a solution (represented as a witness structure) can be
transformed into a better one.
This generalization of the usual setup for local search is suggested by the math-
ematical power of the more complicated gradient in obtaining superior kerneliza-
tion bounds. Whether this leads to something useful in local search heuristics
seems worthy of exploration, but remains to be seen. It could be that the best
practical results might come from using some of the priorities to refine the local
search gradient, but not all of them, just as in practice some reduction rules ap-
FPT is P-Time Extremal Structure I 33
pear to worth implementing, and some introduce too much overhead to actually
be worthwhile. For some discussion of such issues in FPT implementations, see
[ACFLSS04, Alb02].
5 Objective D: Polynomial-Time Approximation Algorithms
Empirically, polynomial-time constant factor approximation and FPT seem to be
closely associated. As in the case of FPT algorithm design, polynomial-time
constant-factor approximation algorithms have come in a wide variety that also
calls out for some general perspective and systematization.
Our goal in this section is to describe the right way to design polynomial-
time constant-factor approximation algorithms based on polynomial-time extremal
structure theory. This connection is an important part of the monster machine pro-
gram, and it plays out beautifully in the case of M AX LEAF.
A Polynomial-time Approximation Algorithm for MAX LEAF
Step 1. Reduce G using the kernelization rules. (It is easy to verify that the rules
are approximation-preserving.)
Step 2. Take any tree T (not necessarily spanning) in G.
• If all of the structural claims hold, then by our arguments for Boundary
Lemma III, the tree T must have at least n/c leaves, for c = 3.75. There-
fore, lifting T back along the reduction path of Step 1, we obtain a c-
approximation. (This bound can obviously be improved by a more careful
argument.)
• If at least one of the structural claims does not hold, then the tree T can be
improved against one of the inductive priorities. Notice that each structural
claim is proved by an argument that can be interpreted as a polynomial-time
routine that improves T , when the claim is contradicted.
An examination of the inductive priorities shows that T (and its successors)
can be improved in Step 2 only a polynomial number of times (determined by
the list of inductive priorities) until we arrive at a tree T ′ for which all of the
various structural claims hold. At that point, we must have a tree that yields a
c-approximate solution.
A careful analysis of the performance of this approximation algorithm would
be similar in structure to the proof of Boundary Lemma III. In Boundary Lemma
III we are concerned with proving a bound on the “total population”. To prove this
bound, we set a Master Inequality, and sum over the structural pictures, one for
each 1-tree of the witness structure. Here we would entertain an annotation of G,
for example, indicating which vertices are leaves in an “optimal solution”. (The
complement of the annotated set must be a connected dominating set.) The task is
to bound the population of annotated vertices.
34 Vladimir Estivill-Castro, Michael Fellows, Michael Langston, Frances Rosamond
6 Objective E: Structure to Exploit in the Ecology of
Complexity
The point of view expressed in §1.2 leads to a vital but still relatively unexplored
research program first suggested by Leizhen Cai [Cai01] in its proper generality.
The program is to understand (in the sense of FPT versus W [1]-hard) how every
input-governing problem-parameter affects the complexity of every other problem.
As a small example of this program for graph problems, we can make the fol-
lowing table. We use here the shorthand: TW is T REEWIDTH, BW is BAND-
WIDTH, VC is VERTEX COVER, DS is DOMINATING SET, G is GENUS and ML
is MAX LEAF. The entry in the 2nd row and 4th column indicates that there is an
FPT algorithm to optimally solve the DOMINATING SET problem for a graph G
of bandwidth at most k. The entry in the 4th row and second column indicates that
it is unknown whether BANDWIDTH can be solved optimally by an FPT algorithm
when the parameter is a bound on the domination number of the input.
TW BW VC DS G ML
TW FPT W [1]-hard FPT FPT ? FPT
BW FPT W [1]-hard FPT FPT ? FPT
VC FPT ? FPT FPT ? FPT
DS ? ? W [1]-hard W [1]-hard ? ?
G W [1]-hard W [1]-hard W [1]-hard W [1]-hard FPT ?
ML FPT ? FPT FPT FPT FPT
Table 2. The Complexity Ecology of Parameters
Our attention so far has mostly been concernedwith the diagonal — T REEWIDTH
is FPT and BANDWIDTH isW [1]-hard — as stand-alone problems. But if the natu-
ral world of complexity “runs” on a commerce of structural parameters (sometimes
in ways that are not obvious, as Karsten Weihe’s account of the train problem sug-
gests), then it is important to understand how different sources of parameterization
interact in contributing to complexity.
The classification given in the above table is quite crude: FPT vs. W [1]-hard.
When a problem is FPT we are naturally interested in the best possible algorithm,
and — the theme of this paper — the right way to pursue this objective. We next
illustrate how the monster machine program applies to the last row of the table. In
the interests of simplicity of exposition, we do not attempt to use the full power of
the structure theory uncovered by Boundary Lemma III for M AX LEAF, but rather
use only the structure given by the the proof of Boundary Lemma II.
THEOREM 28. For graphs of max leaf number bounded by k, the minimum dom-
ination number can be computed in time O∗(103k) based on a polynomial-time
FPT is P-Time Extremal Structure I 35
reduction to a kernel of size at most 7k.
Proof. Sketch. Since this is an FPT result, we are necessarily (by Lemma 1)
interested in polynomial-time extremal structure and effective kernelization for
this problem, as prescribed by the monster machine. We must therefore develop
a polynomial-time extremal account of the boundary — but what exactly is the
boundary in this case?
We take the following hypotheses:
(1) (G, k) is a yes-instance of M AX LEAF.
(2) (G, k+ 1) is a no-instance of M AX LEAF.
(3) There is a witness structure for (1) that satisfies the inductive priorities of the
proof of Boundary Lemma II for MAX LEAF.
(4) G is reduced.
Here, however, we are obliged to employ a completely different interpretation
of reduced than that used in the proof of Boundary Lemma II. (The reason for
this is that we have no idea what the reduction rules used there might do to the
domination number — we need to use here reduction rules that are specific to our
computational objective of computing the minimum domination number.)
The reduction rules shown in Figure 16 below can be used in this situation.
Figure 16. Reduction rules for minimum domination.
The table below displays the data that shows that reduction rule 1 of Figure 16
is sound. The entry ∅ denotes that the boundary state is “impossible”. The “A-
36 Vladimir Estivill-Castro, Michael Fellows, Michael Langston, Frances Rosamond
coercion” column indicates an alternate state. Suppose for a state σ the alternate
state indicated is σ′. The meaning of the entry is that for any 2-boundaried graph
X and for any d, X ⊕ A has a d-dominating set with a boundary state of σ if and
only if X ⊕A has a d-dominating set with boundary state of σ′. Here “S” denotes
that the boundary vertex is in the dominating set, “R” denotes that it is not in the
dominating set and is dominated from the left, and “L” denotes that it is not in the
dominating set and is dominated from the right.
state A-cost A-coercion B-cost
LL 1 0
LR 2 SL ∅
RR 2 SR ∅
SR 1 0
SL 1 0
SS 1 0
Table 3. Reduction rule 1 data for D OMINATING SET
Almost all of the structural claims in the proof of Boundary Lemma II carry
over (with a few requiring slight modification). The reader can easily check that
we obtain a problem kernel of size at most 7k. The kernel can be analyzed by
means of the algorithm due to Fomin, Kratsch and Woeginger [FKW04], yielding
the running time stated for our algorithm. Knowing the domination number of the
problem kernel allows us to compute the domination number of the input graph by
retracing this information backwards along the kernelization path in polynomial
time. 
What was the best previous result for this problem? Implicit in some previous
results would be a bound g(k) on the pathwidth (or treewidth) of graphs that do
not have a k-leaf tree subgraph. Using the structure theory of Boundary Lemma
II we can show that a path decomposition of width at most g(k) = 20k/3 can be
computed in polynomial time for graphs whose max leaf number is bounded by
k. Combining this with the carefully engineered dynamic programming algorithm
for DOMINATING SET in this setting of Telle and Proskurowsky [TP93] (refined
by Alber and Niedermeier [AN02]) one would get a “best previous” running time
of around O∗(420k/3) or O∗(10322k).
THEOREM 29. For graphs of max leaf number bounded by k, the maximum size
of an independent set can be computed in time O∗(2.972k) based on a polynomial-
time reduction to a kernel of size at most 7k.
Proof. Sketch. The proof is quite similar to the previous theorem. The reduction
rules shown in Figure ??? below can be used, and again (coincidentally) obtain a
FPT is P-Time Extremal Structure I 37
bound on the kernel size of 7k. Analysis of the kernel with Robson’s algorithm
[Rob86] yields a running time of O∗(3.82k). This can be improved, however, by
closer attention to the structure of the kernel. Using the structure revealed in the
proof of Boundary Lemma II, it is not hard to show that the kernel has a vertex
cover of size at most 4.5k. We can then use the FPT algorithm of Chen, Kanj and
Xia [CKX05] for VERTEX COVER to obtain the claimed running time. 
Figure 17. Reduction rules for maximum independent set.
REMARK 30. As a sequel to the above theorems, the reader might wish to con-
sider, as an exercise, why the fifth entry in row six of Table 3 is “FPT”.
The outcome in the above theorems seems quite good, and can no doubt be
much further improved by more careful attention to the extremal structure theory
of graphs of bounded max leaf number, and in particular by employing the deeper
structure of Boundary Lemma III. In general, it might be quite a good idea for pa-
rameterized algorithmics to broaden its attention beyond the well-trodden “row” of
bounded treewidth. It will be interesting to see how often other bounded parameter
structures turn up in applications, once we start looking for them.
6.1 A Summary of the Recipe for Objective E
The monster machine recipe for objective E is a variation on the recipe for objec-
tive A:
(1) Determine the polarity of the boundary, and set up the boundary lemma.
(2) Choose a witness structure.
(3) Set inductive priorities.
38 Vladimir Estivill-Castro, Michael Fellows, Michael Langston, Frances Rosamond
(4) Develop a series of structural claims that describe the situation at the boundary.
Note. Much of (1-4) can be imported from the Boundary Lemma for objective A.
(5) Discover reduction rules that can act in polynomial time on relevant structural
situations at the boundary, where these reduction rules are relevant to the new
computational objective .
(6) As the structure at the boundary becomes clear, fill in the blank regarding the
kernelization bound.
In the proof of Theorem 30, we noted that more careful attention to the boundary
structure shows that the problem kernel admits a vertex cover of size at most 4.5k.
This can no doubt be improved. The task of obtaining this bound is formally
very similar to the task of proving a performance bound for a polynomial-time
approximation algorithm as discussed in §5.
7 Summary
If the only purpose of this paper were to report on an improved FPT kernelization
for the MAX LEAF problem from “something like” 4k [BBW03, Pr05] to 3.75k —
you’d really have to wonder why anyone would bother, for all the effort involved.
It would seem that “life is too short” for that!
Our main point has been programmatic: every reasonable parameter (in the
sense of parameterized complexity) leads to a structure theory project. We have
offered a retrospective interpretation of the graph minors project of Robertson and
Seymour along these lines. One would like some further examples. Unfortunately,
this source of inspiration suggests the possibility of a rather intensive effort.
One can point to some “historical periods” of FPT algorithm design. In the
“Naive Era” various unsystematized and sometimes ad hoc approaches were em-
ployed. Frequently these either re-invented earlier results (for example, the O∗(2k)
FPT algorithm for VERTEX COVER was actually first described in [Mehl84]), or
even sometimes achieved results that were inferior to earlier work.
The field of FPT algorithm design is now firmly in the Second Era, where the
subject pays better attention to pre-“parameterized complexity” results, and in par-
ticular, where for a number of problems, including VERTEX COVER, MAX LEAF
and NONBLOCKER, the best current FPT algorithms employ deep, but off-the-
shelf, extremal combinatorics results, such as the Kleitman-West result employed
by Bonsma, Brueggemann and Woeginger for M AX LEAF [BBW03].
Our intention here is to help usher in the Third Era, of FPT as polynomial-
time extremal structure theory — a distinctive form of extremal combinatorics
that natively suits the purposes of computing. The difference is basically that here
we are permitted polynomial-time pre-processing and are invited to figure out how
make the most of that for the parameter at hand. In order to do this in a way that
beats the results of the Second Era of FPT design, we basically have to “beat”
pure extremal combinatorialists at their own game (except that we cheat a little bit,
FPT is P-Time Extremal Structure I 39
because of our license to do any kind of polynomial-time preprocessing). Since
those people are pretty good at what they do, this again could make us uneasy
concerning the expected scope of the effort.
Here we have managed, in quite a long abstract, to sketch (only!) something
of how to carry out the program for the one case study parameterized problem of
MAX LEAF, necessarily omitting a huge amount of detail that will be reported
in full elsewhere. We have sketched and surveyed something of five inter-related
practical payoffs of the parameter-specific structure theory that emerges from such
an effort. This is intended to be the first of 4 or 5 case studies that will form the core
material of a monograph: When Hard Problems Must Be Solved: FPT Algorithm
Design for Applied Scientists and Engineers [FR08].
Acknowledgments. We would like to thank Pablo Moscato for stimulating discus-
sions concerning “gradient local search” and the possible uses of reduction rules
in genetic algorithms.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[ACFLSS04] F. N. Abu-Khzam, R. L. Collins, M. R. Fellows, M. A. Langston, W. H. Suters and C. T.
Symons. Kernelization algorithms for the vertex cover problem: theory and experiments. Proceed-
ings of the 6th Workshop on Algorithm Engineering and Experiments (ALENEX) , New Orleans, Jan-
uary, 2004, ACM/SIAM, Proc. Applied Mathematics 115, L. Arge, G. Italiano and R. Sedgewick,
eds.
[AF93] K. Abrahamson and M. Fellows, “Finite Automata, Bounded Treewidth and Wellquasiordering,”
In: Graph Structure Theory, American Mathematical Society, Contemporary Mathematics Series,
vol. 147 (1993), 539–564.
[AFFFNRS04] J. Alber, H. Fan, M. Fellows, H. Fernau, R. Niedermeier, F. Rosamond and U. Stege. Re-
fined search tree technique for dominating sets on planar graphs. Journal of Computer and System
Sciences 2004.
[Alb02] J. Alber. Exact Algorithms for NP-Hard Problems on Networks: Design, Analysis and Imple-
mentation. Dissertation, Universita¨t Tu¨bingen, 2002.
[AN02] J. Alber and R. Niedermeier. “Improved Tree Decomposition Based Algorithms for
Domination-Like Problems,” Proceedings of the 5th Latin American Theoretical IN-formatics
(LATIN 2002), Springer-Verlag LNCS 2286 (2002), 613–627.
[BBW03] P. Bonsma, T. Brueggemann and G. Woeginger. A faster FPT algorithm for finding spanning
trees with many leaves. Proceedings of MFCS 2003, Springer-Verlag, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science 2747 (2003), 259–268.
[BEF96] H. Bodlaender, P.Evans and M. Fellows. Finite-state computability of annotations of strings and
trees. Proceedings of the 7th Symposium on Combinatorial Pattern Matching (CPM’96) , Springer-
Verlag, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 1075 (1996), 384–391.
[Bod93] H.L. Bodlaender. On linear time minor tests and depth-first search. Journal of Algorithms 14
(1993), 1–23.
[Cai01] Leizhen Cai, “The Complexity of Coloring Parameterized Graphs,” to appear in Discrete Ap-
plied Math.
[CDDFL00] K. Cattell, M. Dinneen, R. Downey, M. Fellows and M. Langston. On computing graph
minor obstruction sets. Theoretical Computer Science A 233 (2000), 107–127.
[CFJ04] B. Chor, M. Fellows and D. Juedes. Linear kernels in linear time, or how to save k colors in
O(n2) steps. Proceedings of WG 2004, Springer-Verlag, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 3353
(2004), 257–269.
[CKX05] J. Chen, I. Kanj and G. Xia. Simplicity is beauty: improved upper bounds for vertex cover.
Manuscript communicated by email, April, 2005.
40 Vladimir Estivill-Castro, Michael Fellows, Michael Langston, Frances Rosamond
[DF95] R. Downey and M.R. Fellows. Parameterized computational feasibility. In: P. Clote and J. Rem-
mel (eds.): Feasible Mathematics II. Birkha¨user, Boston (1995), 219–244.
[DF99] R.G. Downey and M.R. Fellows. Parameterized Complexity. Springer-Verlag, 1999.
[DFLRS05] F. Dehne, M. Fellows, M. Langston, F. Rosamond and K. Stevens. An O(2O(k)n3) FPT
algorithm for the undirected feedback vertex set problem. Proceedings COCOON 2004, Springer-
Verlag, Lecture Notes in Computer Science (2005), to appear.
[DFS99] R. Downey, M. Fellows and U. Stege. Parameterized complexity: a framework for systemat-
ically confronting computational intractability. In: Contemporary Trends in Discrete Mathematics
(R. Graham, J. Kratochvil, J. Nesetril and F. Roberts, eds.), Proceedings of the DIMACS-DIMATIA
Workshop on the Future of Discrete Mathematics, Prague, 1997, AMS-DIMACS Series in Discrete
Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science , vol. 49 (1999), 49–99.
[DFRS04] F. Dehne, M. Fellows, F. Rosamond and P. Shaw. Greedy localization, iterative compression
and modeled crown reductions: new FPT techniques, an improved algorithm for set splitting and a
novel 2k kernelization for vertex cover. Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Param-
eterized and Exact Computation, Springer-Verlag, Lecture Notes in Computer Science vol. 3162
(2004), 271–280.
[DJS01] G. Ding, Th. Johnson and P. Seymour. Journal of Graph Theory 37 (2001), 189–197.
[Fe01] M. Fellows. Parameterized complexity: main ideas, connections to heuristics and research fron-
tiers. Proceedings ISAAC 2001, Springer-Verlag, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2223 (2001),
291–307.
[Fe02] M. Fellows. Parameterized complexity: the main ideas and connections to practical computing.
In: Experimental Algorithmics, Springer-Verlag, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2547 (2002),
51–77.
[Fer05] H. Fernau. Parameterized Algorithmics: A Graph-Theoretic Approach . Habilitationschrift, Uni-
versity of Tu¨bingen, 2005.
[FHRST04] M. Fellows, P. Heggernes, F. Rosamond, C. Sloper and J.A. Telle. Finding k disjoint tri-
angles in an arbitrary graph. Proceedings WG 2004, Springer-Verlag, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science 3353 (2004), 235–244.
[FKW04] F. Fomin, D. Kratsch and G. Woeginger. Exact (exponential) algorithms for the dominating
set problem. Proceedings of WG 2004, Springer-Verlag, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 3353
(2004), 245–256.
[FL89] M. R. Fellows and M. A. Langston, “An Analogue of the Myhill-Nerode Theorem and its Use
in Computing Finite-Basis Characterizations,” Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on the Founda-
tions of Computer Science (1989), 520–525.
[FL92] M. Fellows and M. Langston. On well-partial-order theory and its applications to combinatorial
problems of VLSI design. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics 5 (1992), 117–126.
[F03] M. Fellows. Blow-ups, win/win’s and crown rules: some new directions in FPT. Proceedings of
the 29th Workshop on Graph Theoretic Concepts in Computer Science (WG 2003) , Springer-Verlag,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2880 (2003), 1–12.
[FMRS00] M. Fellows, C. McCartin, F. Rosamond and U. Stege. Coordinatized kernels and catalytic
reductions: an improved FPT algorithm for max leaf spanning tree and other problems. Proceedings
of the 20th Conference on Foundations of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science
(FST-TCS 2000), Springer, Lecture notes in Theoretical Computer Science 1974 (2000), 240–251.
[FR08] M. Fellows and F. Rosamond. When Hard Problems Must Be Solved: FPT Algorithm Design for
Applied Scientists and Engineers . Manuscript in preparation.
[GGHNW05] J. Guo, J. Gramm, F. Hueffner, R. Niedermeier, S. Wernicke. Improved fixed-parameter
algorithms for two feedback set problems. Proceedings of WADS 2005, Springer-Verlag, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science (2005), to appear.
[GM99] M. Grohe and J. Marino. Definability and descriptive complexity on databases with bounded
treewidth. Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Database Theory , Springer-Verlag,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science 1540 (1999), 70–82.
[Gr01] M. Grohe. The parameterized complexity of database queries. Proc. PODS 2001, ACM Press
(2001), 82–92.
[Gur89] Y. Gurevich, “The Challenger-Solver Game: Variations on the Theme of P=?NP,” Bulletin
EATCS 39 (1989), 112–121.
FPT is P-Time Extremal Structure I 41
[Jac04] A. Jackson. As if summoned from the void: the life of Alexandre Grothendieck (parts I,II).
Notices of the American Mathematical Society 51 (9,10), 2004.
[KW91] D.J. Kleitman and D.B. West. Spanning trees with many leaves. SIAM Journal on Discrete
Mathematics 4 (1991), 99–106.
[LR98] H.-I. Lu and R. Ravi. Approximating maximum leaf spanning trees in almost linear time. Journal
of Algorithms 29 (1998), 132–141.
[Ma04] D. Marx. Chordal deletion is fixed-parameter tractable. Manuscript, 2004.
[Mehl84] K. Mehlhorn. Graph Algorithms and NP-Completeness , Springer, 1984.
[MP94] S. Mahajan and J. G. Peters, “Regularity and Locality in k-Terminal Graphs,” Discrete Applied
Mathematics 54 (1994), 229–250.
[Nie02] R. Niedermeier. Invitation to fixed-parameter algorithms, Habilitationschrift, University of Tub-
ingen, 2002. (Electronic file available from R. Niedermeier.)
[Nie04] R. Niedermeier. Ubiquitous parameterization — invitation to fixed-parameter algorithms. In:
Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science MFCS 2004 , Springer-Verlag, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science 3153 (2004), 84–103.
[Nie05] R. Niedermeier. Invitation to Fixed Parameter Algorithms. Oxford University Press, forthcom-
ing, 2005.
[Pr05] E. Prieto-Rodriguez. Systematic kernelization in FPT algorithm design. Ph.D. dissertation,
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Newcastle, NSW, Australia,
2005.
[PS04] E. Prieto and C. Sloper. Looking at the stars. Proceedings of the First International Workshop on
Parameterized and Exact Computation, Springer-Verlag, Lecture Notes in Computer Science vol.
3162 (2004), 138–149.
[Ra97] V. Raman, “Parameterized Complexity,” in: Proceedings of the 7th National Seminar on Theo-
retical Computer Science , Chennai, India (1997), 1–18.
[Rob86] J.M. Robson. Algorithms for maximum independent sets. Journal of Algorithms 7 (1986), 425–
440.
[RSV04] B. Reed, K. Smith, and A. Vetta. Finding odd cycle transversals. Operations Research Letters
32 (2004), 299–301.
[S-Ob98] R. Solis-Oba. 2-approximation algorithm for finding a spanning tree with the maximum
number of leaves. Proceedings of the 6th Annual European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA’98) ,
Springer, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 1461 (1998), 441–452.
[Slo04] Christian Sloper, University of Bergen, private communication, 2004.
[TP93] J.A. Telle and A. Proskurowski. “Practical Algorithms on Partial k-Trees with an Application
to Domination-Like Problems.” Proceedings WADS’93 – The Third Workshop on Algorithms and
Data Structures, Springer-Verlag LNCS 709 (1993), 610–621.
[Wei98] K. Weihe, “Covering Trains by Stations, or the Power of Data Reduction,” Proc. ALEX’98
(1998), 1–8.
[Wei00] K. Weihe, “On the Differences Between ‘Practical’ and ‘Applied’ (invited paper),” Proc. WAE
2000, Springer-Verlag, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 1982 (2001), 1–10.
[Woe03] G. J. Woeginger. Exact algorithms for NP-hard problems: a survey. Proceedings of 5th Inter-
national Workshop on Combinatorial Optimization-Eureka, You Shrink! Papers dedicated to Jack
Edmonds, M. Junger, G. Reinelt, and G. Rinaldi (Festschrift Eds.) Springer-Verlag, Lecture Notes
in Computer Science 2570 (2003), 184-207.
Vladimir Estivill-Castro
School of Computing and Information Technology, Griffith University
Brisbane QLD 4111, Australia
V.Estivill-Castro@cit.gu.edu.au
Michael R. Fellows
42 Vladimir Estivill-Castro, Michael Fellows, Michael Langston, Frances Rosamond
The Retreat for the Arts and Sciences
Newcastle NSW 2300, Australia
mfellows@cs.newcastle.edu.au
Michael A. Langston
Computer Science Dept., University of Tennessee
Knoxville TN 37996-3450, U.S.A.
langston@cs.utk.edu
Frances A. Rosamond
The Retreat for the Arts and Sciences
Newcastle NSW 2300, Australia
fran@cs.newcastle.edu.au
