UniProt: the Universal Protein knowledgebase
Rolf Apweiler*, Amos Bairoch1, Cathy H. Wu2, Winona C. Barker3, Brigitte Boeckmann1,
Serenella Ferro1, Elisabeth Gasteiger1, Hongzhan Huang2, Rodrigo Lopez,
Michele Magrane, Maria J. Martin, Darren A. Natale2, Claire O'Donovan, Nicole Redaschi1
and Lai-Su L. Yeh3
The EMBL OutstationÐEuropean Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge
CB10 1SD, UK, 1Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Centre Medical Universitaire, 1 rue Michel Servet,
1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland, 2Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and 3National Biomedical
Research Foundation, Georgetown University Medical Center, 3900 Reservoir Road, NW, Box 571414,
Washington, DC 20057-1414, USA
Received August 25, 2003; Revised and Accepted October 27, 2003
ABSTRACT
To provide the scienti®c community with a single,
centralized, authoritative resource for protein
sequences and functional information, the Swiss-
Prot, TrEMBL and PIR protein database activities
have united to form the Universal Protein
Knowledgebase (UniProt) consortium. Our mission
is to provide a comprehensive, fully classi®ed,
richly and accurately annotated protein sequence
knowledgebase, with extensive cross-references
and query interfaces. The central database will have
two sections, corresponding to the familiar Swiss-
Prot (fully manually curated entries) and TrEMBL
(enriched with automated classi®cation, annotation
and extensive cross-references). For convenient
sequence searches, UniProt also provides several
non-redundant sequence databases. The UniProt
NREF (UniRef) databases provide representative
subsets of the knowledgebase suitable for ef®cient
searching. The comprehensive UniProt Archive
(UniParc) is updated daily from many public source
databases. The UniProt databases can be accessed
online (http://www.uniprot.org) or downloaded in
several formats (ftp://ftp.uniprot.org/pub). The sci-
enti®c community is encouraged to submit data for
inclusion in UniProt.
INTRODUCTION
Until recently, Swiss-Prot + TrEMBL (1) and PIR-PSD (2)
coexisted as protein databases with differing sequence cov-
erage and annotation priorities. In 2002, the Swiss-Prot +
TrEMBL group at the Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB)
and European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) and the Protein
Information Resource (PIR) group at the Georgetown
University Medical Center and National Biomedical
Research Foundation joined forces as the UniProt consortium.
The primary mission of the consortium is to support biological
research by maintaining a high-quality database that serves as
a stable, comprehensive, fully classi®ed, richly and accurately
annotated protein sequence knowledgebase, with extensive
cross-references and querying interfaces freely accessible to
the scienti®c community. UniProt will build upon the solid
foundations laid by the consortium members over many years.
The UniProt databases consist of three database layers:
(i) The UniProt Archive (UniParc) provides a stable,
comprehensive, non-redundant sequence collection by storing
the complete body of publicly available protein sequence data.
(ii) The UniProt Knowledgebase (UniProt) provides the
central database of protein sequences with accurate, consistent
and rich sequence and functional annotation.
(iii) The UniProt NREF databases (UniRef) provide non-
redundant data collections based on the UniProt knowledge-
base in order to obtain complete coverage of sequence space at
several resolutions.
THE UNIPROT ARCHIVE (UNIPARC)
The UniProt Archive (UniParc) is the most comprehensive
publicly accessible non-redundant protein sequence collection
available. It contains publicly available protein sequences
from many different sources, including Swiss-Prot, TrEMBL,
PIR-PSD, EMBL (3), Ensembl (4), IPI (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/
IPI), PDB (5), RefSeq (6), FlyBase (7), WormBase (8), and
European, American and Japanese patent of®ces. While a
protein sequence may exist in multiple databases and more
than once in a given database, UniParc stores each unique
sequence only once and assigns a unique UniParc identi®er.
Furthermore, UniParc provides cross-references to the source
databases (accession numbers), sequence versions and status
(active or obsolete). A UniParc sequence version is also
provided, and incremented each time the underlying sequence
changes, thus making it possible to observe sequence changes
in all source databases. An example UniParc report can be
found at http://srs.ebi.ac.uk/srsbin/cgi-bin/wgetz?-noSession+
-e+[UNIPARC:UPI0000133132] (SRS view) and http://www.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +44 1223 494435; Fax: +44 1223 494468; Email: apweiler@ebi.ac.uk
Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue D115±D119
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkh131
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 32, Database issue ã Oxford University Press 2004; all rights reserved
pir.uniprot.org/cgi-bin/upEntry?id=UPI0000133132 (PIR
view).
THE UNIPROT KNOWLEDGEBASE (UNIPROT)
The UniProt knowledgebase is the centrepiece of the consor-
tium activities. We have merged Swiss-Prot, TrEMBL and
PIR-PSD to form the UniProt knowledgebase in order to
provide a central database of protein sequences with annota-
tions and functional information. All suitable PIR-PSD
sequences missing from Swiss-Prot + TrEMBL were incor-
porated into UniProt. Bidirectional cross-references between
Swiss-Prot + TrEMBL and PIR-PSD were created to allow the
easy tracking of the PIR-PSD entries. The transfer into
UniProt of references and experimentally veri®ed data present
in PIR but missing from Swiss-Prot + TrEMBL is ongoing.
The UniProt knowledgebase consists of two parts: a section
containing fully manually annotated records resulting from
literature information extraction and curator-evaluated com-
putational analysis, and a section with computationally
analysed records awaiting full manual annotation. For the
sake of continuity and name recognition, the two sections are
referred to as `Swiss-Prot' and `TrEMBL'. An example
UniProt report can be found at http://www.expasy.org/cgi-bin/
niceprot.pl?P57727 (NiceProt view), http://www.pir.uniprot.
org/cgi-bin/upEntry?id=P57727 (iProClass view) or http://
srs.ebi.ac.uk/cgi-bin/wgetz?-e+[swall-acc:P57727] (SRS
view).
In the following paragraphs we will explain the main
principles of the UniProt knowledgebase.
High-quality annotation
We will curate UniProt knowledgebase entries to an even
higher level of detail than that already achieved in Swiss-Prot
+ TrEMBL and PIR-PSD. In addition to capturing the core
data mandatory to each UniProt entry (consisting principally
of the amino acid sequence, the protein name or description,
taxonomic data and citation information), we strive to attach
as much annotation information as possible to the protein. This
is achieved in two ways: manually and automatically.
Manual annotation by curators based on literature and
sequence analysis
Sequences for which novel functional, structural, and/or
biochemical data have been published are assigned high
manual annotation priority. In UniProt, annotation consists of
the description of the following items:
d function(s) of the protein;
d enzyme-speci®c information (catalytic activity, cofactors,
metabolic pathway, regulation mechanisms);
d biologically relevant domains and sites;
d post-translational modi®cation (PTM)(s);
d molecular weight determined by mass spectrometry;
d subcellular location(s) of the protein;
d tissue-speci®c expression of the protein;
d developmentally speci®c expression of the protein;
d secondary structure;
d quaternary structure;
d interactions;
d splice isoform(s);
d mature protein products;
d polymorphism(s);
d similarities to other proteins;
d use of the protein in a biotechnological process;
d diseases associated with de®ciencies or abnormalities of the
protein;
d use of the protein as a pharmaceutical drug;
d sequence con¯icts, etc.
This annotation is found in the comment lines (CC), feature
table (FT) and keyword lines (KW). Comments are classi®ed
according to topics to allow easy retrieval of speci®c
categories of data from the database.
To acquire the most up-to-date and wide-ranging know-
ledge regarding a protein, information is obtained not only
from publications reporting new sequence data, but also from
review articles to facilitate the periodic revision of protein
families or groups of proteins. Furthermore, we have enlisted
external experts to send us comments and updates concerning
speci®c groups of proteins.
In order to provide the high level of annotation described
above, all UniProt curators read a large amount of scienti®c
literature related to each protein. This enables them to
contribute to the work of the gene ontology (GO) consortium
(9) by assigning GO terms during the annotation process as
they extract information related to each of the GO ontologies,
i.e. the function of a protein, what processes it is involved in
and where in the cell it is located.
Automatic classi®cation and annotation
With the rapid growth of sequence databases, there is an
increasing need for reliable functional characterization and
annotation of newly predicted proteins. To cope with such
large data volumes, faster and more effective means of protein
sequence characterization and annotation are required. One
promising approach is automatic large-scale functional
characterization and annotation, which is generated with
limited human interaction.
InterPro classi®cation. We use InterPro (10) to recognize
domains and to classify all protein sequences in UniProt into
families and superfamilies. InterPro is an integrated resource
of protein families, domains and sites that amalgamates the
efforts of the member databases: Pfam (11), PROSITE (12),
PRINTS (13), ProDom (14), SMART (15), PIRSF (16),
Superfamily (17) and TIGRFAMs (18). The comprehensive
InterPro classi®cation is a prerequisite for improving the
quality and quantity of our annotation using highly structured,
classi®cation-driven, rule-based, automated procedures.
Automatic functional annotation of the TrEMBL section of
UniProt. For automatic annotation, a novel system of
standardized transfer of annotation from well-characterized
proteins in the Swiss-Prot section of UniProt to non-annotated
TrEMBL entries has been developed (19). Using this system,
the Swiss-Prot section is used as the source to generate the
annotation rules, which are then stored and managed in
RuleBase. InterPro is then used to assign TrEMBL entries into
groups. The annotation shared by the functionally character-
ized Swiss-Prot proteins of the group is then extracted and is
assigned to the unannotated TrEMBL entry. This system has
D116 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue
been used to improve the annotation in 25% of TrEMBL
entries. A new data mining approach to automatic annotation
is also being developed to complement this system, which will
increase coverage by automatic annotation over the next year
and will bring the standard of annotation in the TrEMBL
section of UniProt closer to that of the Swiss-Prot section.
Also to be incorporated into the RuleBase annotation
pipeline are the PIR classi®cation-driven rule-based proced-
ures, which will provide standardized and rich UniProt
annotation for position-speci®c features, protein names and
keywords. New feature rules are being de®ned systematically
for fully curated PIRSF families that contain at least one
known 3D structure with experimentally veri®ed functional/
active/binding site information. The PIRSF classi®cation,
based on the evolutionary relationships of whole proteins,
have also been used to detect and correct numerous genome
annotation errors that have resulted from identi®cations based
only on local domain similarities and subsequently propagated
based on transitivity (20).
High-quality Automated and Manual Annotation of
microbial Proteomes (HAMAP)
A combined approach of automated and manual annotation for
prokaryotic genomes in Swiss-Prot has resulted in the
development of the HAMAP project (21). The HAMAP
project, or `High-quality Automated and Manual Annotation
of microbial Proteomes' aims to integrate manual and
automatic annotation methods in order to enhance the speed
of the curation process while preserving the quality of the
database annotation. Automatic annotation is only applied to
entries that belong to manually de®ned orthologous families
and to entries with no identi®able similarities (ORFans).
Annotation of ORFans. Various prediction tools are applied to
proteins that show no similarity to known protein families.
Possible transmembrane regions, signal sequence, coiled coils,
ATP/GTP binding sites, LPXTG motifs and some de®ned
repeats are automatically annotated using rules of consistency
and dependency, and without any further manual veri®cation.
Annotation of members of well-characterized (sub)families.
Proteins belonging to well-characterized protein (sub)families
can be annotated automatically using a rule system that
describes the extent and nature of annotations that can be
assigned by similarity to a prototype manually annotated
entry. Such a rule system also includes a carefully edited
multiple alignment of the (sub)family, which is used both to
propagate feature annotation from a model entry and to
generate pro®les used to identify new members of the family.
Species-speci®c rules and rules speci®c to the biochemical
pathways are used to develop a system able to spot inconsist-
encies at the level of the entire proteome.
Standardized nomenclature and controlled vocabularies
Consistent nomenclature is indispensable for communication
and literature search. UniProt aims to standardize the nomen-
clature for a given protein and its isoforms across related
organisms. For various other UniProt items we use controlled
vocabulary, e.g. for tissues, plasmids and keywords, which are
listed in UniProt documents. The uni®ed UniProt keyword list
is based on Swiss-Prot keywords augmented by the addition of
selected PIR keywords that represent new concepts or new
parent/child nodes of existing Swiss-Prot keywords.
Whenever available, we make use of the of®cial nomenclature
de®ned by international committees while still providing the
published synonyms. Collaborations and regular data ex-
change with other databases and organizations allow the
implementation of community-speci®c nomenclatures.
Integration with other databases
UniProt provides cross-references to external data collections
such as the underlying DNA sequence entries in the DDBJ/
EMBL/GenBank nucleotide sequence databases, 2D PAGE
and 3D protein structure databases, various protein domain
and family characterization databases, PTM databases, spe-
cies-speci®c data collections, variant databases and disease
databases. As a result of this, UniProt acts as a central hub for
biomolecular information archived in more than 50 cross-
referenced databases. A document listing all databases cross-
referenced in UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org/support/docs/
dbxref.shtml) is available and contains, for each database, a
short description and the server URL. This interconnectivity is
achieved almost exclusively via Database cross-Reference
(DR) lines. In addition, links from subsequences or particular
sites to databases specializing in certain types of PTMs or
mutations are provided. Unique and stable feature identi®ers
(FTId) allow reference to a position-speci®c annotation item
in the feature table. Currently these are systematically
attributed to FT VARIANT lines of human sequence entries,
to alternative splicing events (VARSPLIC) and to certain
glycosylation sites (CARBOHYD), but will ultimately be
assigned to all types of FT lines.
Minimal redundancy
Many sequence databases contain, for a given protein
sequence, separate entries that correspond to different litera-
ture reports. In UniProt we try as much as possible to merge all
these data in order to minimize the redundancy of the
database. Differences between sequencing reports due to
splice variants, polymorphisms, disease-causing mutations,
experimental sequence modi®cations or simply sequencing
errors are indicated in the feature table of the corresponding
UniProt entry.
Splice isoforms may differ considerably from one another,
with potentially <50% sequence similarity between isoforms.
The tool VARSPLIC (22), which is freely available enables
the recreation of all annotated splice variants from the FT of a
UniProt entry, or for the complete database. A FASTA-
formatted ®le containing all splice variants annotated in
UniProt can be downloaded for use with similarity search
programs.
Evidence attribution
The UniProt consortium emphasizes the use of an evidence
attribution mechanism for protein annotation that will include,
for all data, the data source, the types of evidence and methods
for annotation. This is essential as the UniProt knowledgebase
will contain data automatically imported from the underlying
nucleotide sequence databases, data imported from other
databases, data from speci®c programs, the results of
Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue D117
automatic annotation systems and most important of all,
expert manual curation. The implementation of evidence tags
will allow the user to distinguish between all these data
sources and to easily identify particular classes of data of
interest such as the experimentally proven protein annotation.
To further improve the quality of protein annotation by
increasing the amount of experimentally veri®ed data with
source attribution, UniProt has developed a bibliography
submission system and is conducting retrospective attribution
of literature data. The submission page allows submission and
categorization of literature citations for experimental annota-
tions, and displays comprehensive bibliographic data col-
lected from many curated databases for each UniProt entry. A
systematic manual attribution of experimental features is
being carried out with computer-assisted mapping to existing
protein bibliographic information. So far, a few thousand
experimental features have been associated with publications
and cross-referenced to the corresponding PMIDs for direct
incorporation into the UniProt knowledgebase.
THE UNIREF DATABASES
Automatic procedures have been developed to create three
UniProt NREF (UniRef) databases, NREF100, NREF90 and
NREF50, from the UniProt knowledgebase as representative
protein sequence databases with high information content. The
databases provide complete coverage of sequence space while
hiding redundant sequences from view. The non-redundancy
facilitates sequence merging in the UniProt knowledgebase
(based on NREF100) and allows faster sequence similarity
searches (by using NREF90 and NREF50).
NREF100 provides, as a modi®ed extension of the PIR-
NREF database (2), a comprehensive non-redundant sequence
collection clustered by sequence identity and taxonomy with
source attribution. As in PIR-NREF, identical sequences and
subfragments from the same source organism (species) are
presented as a single NREF entry with accession numbers of
all the merged UniProt entries, the protein sequence, tax-
onomy, bibliography, links to the corresponding UniProt
knowledgebase and archive records, as well as close sequence
neighbors (with at least 95% sequence identity) from the
same source organism. An example NREF100 report can be
found at http://www.pir.uniprot.org/cgi-bin/unipEntry?id=
URI0000E815.
NREF90 and NREF50 are built from NREF100 using the
CD-HIT algorithm (23) to provide non-redundant sequence
collections for the scienti®c user community to perform faster
homology searches. All records from all source organisms
with mutual sequence identity of >90% or >50%, respectively,
are merged into a single record that links to the corresponding
UniProt knowledgebase records. NREF90 and NREF50 yield
a size reduction of ~40% and 65%, respectively.
PRACTICAL INFORMATION
Interactive access to UniProt
The most ef®cient and user-friendly way to browse the
UniProt databases is via the UniProt web site (http://
www.uniprot.org), which serves as a portal to all aspects
developed in the framework of the UniProt project, and
contains detailed documentation about the background and
scope of UniProt. It provides database query and data mining
mechanisms, user support and communication, ®le download
capabilities and links to consortium resources (SIB: http://
www.expasy.org, EBI: http://www.ebi.ac.uk and PIR: http://
pir.georgetown.edu). The UniProt Help Desk (help@uniprot.
org) provides access to UniProt curators and database
maintainers.
UniProt data availability and submission
UniProt and UniRef entries, and supporting documentation
can be retrieved in various formats (Swiss-Prot/TrEMBL ¯at
®le, FASTA, XML) via anonymous FTP from ftp://ftp.
uniprot.org/pub/.
UniProt accepts submissions of new sequences, entry
updates and corrections, and annotated bibliographic infor-
mation for protein entries. Directions for submission are
available at http://www.uniprot.org/support/submissions.
shtml.
CONCLUSIONS
Complete and up-to-date databases of biological knowledge
are vital for information-dependent biological and biotechno-
logical research. With the rapid accumulation of genome
sequences for many organisms, attention is turning to the
identi®cation and function of proteins encoded by these
genomes. With the increasing volume and variety of protein
sequences and functional information, UniProt serves as a
central resource of protein sequence and function, providing a
cornerstone for scientists active in modern biological research,
especially in the ®eld of proteomics. The resource provides
rich, consistent and non-redundant protein information by
combining reliable automated annotation approaches with
literature-based expert manual curation. UniProt will facilitate
knowledge discovery by allowing researchers to integrate the
enormous amount of data from the Human Genome Project
and from structural and functional genomics and proteomics.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
UniProt is supported mainly by the National Institutes of
Health (NIH) grant 1 U01 HG02712-01. Minor support for the
EBI's involvement in UniProt comes from the two European
Union contracts BioBabel (QLRT-2000-00981) and
TEMBLOR (QLRI-2001-00015) and from the NIH grant
1R01HGO2273-01. Swiss-Prot activities at the SIB are
supported by the Swiss Federal Government through the
Federal Of®ce of Education and Science. PIR activities are
also supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF)
grants DBI-0138188 and ITR-0205470.
REFERENCES
1. Boeckmann,B., Bairoch,A., Apweiler,R., Blatter,M., Estreicher,A.,
Gasteiger,E., Martin,M.J., Michoud,K., O'Donovan,C., Phan,I. et al.
(2003) The Swiss-Prot protein knowledgebase and its supplement
TrEMBL in 2003. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 365±370.
2. Wu,C.H., Yeh,L.-S.L., Huang,H., Arminski,L., Castro-Alvear,J.,
Chen,Y., Hu,Z., Kourtesis,P., Ledley,R.S., Suzek,B.E. et al. (2003) The
Protein Information Resource. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 345±347.
D118 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue
3. Stoesser,G., Baker,W., van den Broek,A., Garcia-Pastor,M., Kanz,C.,
Kulikova,T., Leinonen,R., Lin,Q., Lombard,V., Lopez,R. et al. (2003)
The EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database: major new development.
Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 21±26.
4. Hubbard,T., Barker,D., Birney,E., Cameron,G., Chen,Y., Clark,L.,
Cox,T., Cuff,J., Curwen,V., Down,T. et al. (2002) The Ensembl genome
database project. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 38±41.
5. Westbrook,J., Feng,Z., Chen,L., Yang,H. and Berman,H. (2003) The
Protein Data Bank and structural genomics. Nucleic Acids Res., 31,
489±491.
6. Pruitt,K. and Maglott,D. (2001) RefSeq and LocusLink: NCBI gene-
centered resources. Nucleic Acids Res., 29, 137±140.
7. FlyBase Consortium (2003) The FlyBase database of the Drosophila
genome projects and community literature. Nucleic Acids Res., 31,
172±175.
8. Harris,T., Lee,R., Schwarz,E., Bradnam,K., Lawson,D., Chen,W.,
Blasier,D., Kenny,E., Cunningham,F., Kishore,R. et al. (2003)
WormBase: a cross-species database for comparative genomics. Nucleic
Acids Res., 31, 133±137.
9. Ashburner,M., Ball,C.A., Blake,J.A., Botstein,D., Butler,H., Cherry,J.M.,
Davis,A.P., Dolinski,K., Dwight,S.S., Eppig,J.T. et al. (2000) Gene
Ontology: tool for the uni®cation of biology. Nature Genet., 25, 25±29.
10. Mulder,N., Apweiler,R., Attwood,T., Bairoch,A., Barrell,D.,
Bateman,A., Binns,D., Biswas,M., Bradley,P., Bork,P. et al. (2003) The
InterPro Database, 2003 brings increased coverage and new features.
Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 315±318.
11. Bateman,A., Birney,E., Cerruti,L., Durbin,R., Etwiller,L., Eddy,S.R.,
Grif®ths-Jones,S., Howe,K.L., Marshall,M. and Sonnhammer,E.L.L.
(2002) The Pfam protein families database. Nucleic Acids Res., 30,
276±280.
12. Hulo,N., Sigrist,C.J.A., Le Saux,V., Langendijk-Genevaux,P.,
Bordoli,L., Gattiker,A., De Castro,E., Bucher,P. and Bairoch,A. (2004)
Recent improvements to the PROSITE database. Nucleic Acids Res., 32,
D134±D137.
13. Attwood,T.K., Bradley,P., Flower,D.R., Gaulton,A., Maudling,N.,
Mitchell,A.L., Moulton,G., Nordle,A., Paine,K., Taylor,P. et al. (2003)
PRINTS and its automatic supplement, preprints. Nucleic Acids Res., 31,
400±402.
14. Servant,F., Bru,C., Carrere,S., Courcelle,E., Couzy,J., Peyruc,D.and
Kahn,D. (2002) Prodom: Automated clustering of homologous domains.
Brief. Bioinform., 3, 246±251.
15. Letunic,I., Goodstadt,L., Dickens,N.J., Doerks,T., Schultz,J., Mott,R.,
Ciccarelli,F., Copley,R.R., Ponting,C.P. and Bork,P. (2002) Recent
improvements to the SMART domain-based sequence annotation
resource. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 242±244.
16. Wu,C.H., Nikolskaya,A., Huang,H., Yeh,L.-S., Natale,D.,Vinayaka,C.R.,
Hu,Z., Mazumder,R., Kumar,S., Kourtesis,P. et al. (2004) PIRSF: family
classi®cation system at the Protein Information Resource. Nucleic Acids
Res., 32, D112±D114.
17. Gough,J., Karplus,K., Hughey,R. and Chothia,C. (2001) Assignment of
homology to genome sequences using a library of Hidden Markov
Models that represent all proteins of known structure. J. Mol. Biol., 313,
903±919.
18. Haft,D.H., Loftus,B.J., Richardson,D.L., Yang,F., Eisen,J.A.,
Paulsen,I.T. and White,O. (2001) TIGRFAMs: a protein family resource
for the functional identi®cation of proteins. Nucleic Acids Res., 29,
41±43.
19. Fleischmann,W., Moeller,S., Gateau,A. and Apweiler,R. (1999) A novel
method for automatic and reliable functional annotation. Bioinformatics,
15, 228±233.
20. Wu,C.H., Huang,H., Yeh,L.-S. and Barker,W.C. (2003) Protein family
classi®cation and functional annotation. Comput. Biol. Chem., 27, 37±47.
21. Gattiker,A., Michoud,K., Rivoire,C., Auchincloss,A.H., Coudert,E.,
Lima,T., Kersey,P., Pagni,M., Sigrist,C.J.A., Lachaize,C. et al. (2003)
Automatic annotation of microbial proteomes in Swiss-Prot. Comput.
Biol. Chem., 27, 49±58.
22. Kersey,P., Hermjakob,H. and Apweiler,R. (2000) VARSPLIC:
alternatively-spliced protein sequences derived from Swiss-Prot and
TrEMBL. Bioinformatics, 11, 1048±1049.
23. Li,W., Jaroszewski,L. and Godzik,A. (2002) Tolerating some redundancy
signi®cantly speeds up clustering of large protein databases.
Bioinformatics, 18, 77±82.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue D119
