ScanProsite: detection of PROSITE signature
matches and ProRule-associated functional and
structural residues in proteins
Edouard de Castro1,*, Christian J. A. Sigrist1, Alexandre Gattiker3, Virginie Bulliard1,
Petra S. Langendijk-Genevaux1, Elisabeth Gasteiger1, Amos Bairoch1,2 and Nicolas Hulo1
1Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), 1 rue Michel Servet, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland, 2Structural Biology and
Bioinformatics Department, University of Geneva, 1 rue Michel Servet, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland and
3National Institute of Technology and Evaluation, 2-49-10 Nishihara, Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 151-0066, Japan
Received February 14, 2006; Revised March 1, 2006; Accepted March 13, 2006
ABSTRACT
ScanProsite—http://www.expasy.org/tools/scanprosite/
—is anew and improved version of theweb-based tool
for detecting PROSITE signature matches in protein
sequences. For a number of PROSITE profiles, the
tool now makes use of ProRules—context-dependent
annotation templates—to detect functional and struc-
tural intra-domain residues. The detection of those
features enhances the power of function prediction
based on profiles. Both user-defined sequences
and sequences from the UniProt Knowledgebase
can be matched against custom patterns, or against
PROSITE signatures. To improve response times,
matches of sequences from UniProtKB against
PROSITE signatures are now retrieved from a
pre-computed match database. Several output
modes are available including simple text views and
a rich mode providing an interactive match and
feature viewer with a graphical representation of
results.
INTRODUCTION
To predict protein function, assign family identity or detect
remote homologues, searches against signature databases, also
known as secondary databases (1), are essential. ScanProsite
provides a web interface to identify protein matches against
signatures from the PROSITE database (2).
The PROSITE database consists of a large collection of
biologically meaningful signatures that are described as pat-
terns (regular expressions), used for short motif detection, or
generalized profiles (weight matrices) for sensitive detection
of larger domains. All signatures are built from manually
derived alignments and are provided with extensive manually
curated documentation (taxonomic occurrence, function, etc.).
PROSITE signatures form a high quality collection and
are closely tied to the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (3,4) annotation
process.
In addition, each PROSITE profile is associated with a
manually curated annotation template called ProRule (5).
These rules are used internally, by the Swiss-Prot group, to
automate PROSITE domain annotation of UniProtKB/
Swiss-Prot entries. A number of ProRules define biologically
meaningful information about specific residues within their
associated domain. This positional information (derived
from the mapping of significant residues to the profile) is
provided in the form of contextual feature annotation blocks:
certain conditions—a specific sequence, the presence of other
features—must be fulfilled for the annotation block to be
applied, hence for the feature to be predicted.
Consequently, those ProRules add pattern-like discriminati-
vity with motif-specific information to their associated profile,
allowing the detection of intra-domain features, such as
active sites, binding sites or disulfide bridges. Combining
the sensitivity of profiles with the specificity of motif detec-
tion enhances the accuracy of signature based functional
predictions.
The ScanProsite rich result viewer detects those intra-
domain features by evaluating—on the fly—associated
ProRules on matched profiles and integrates them with the
match results.
PROSITE is an InterPro (6) database member. The
InterProScan tool (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/InterProScan/) can
scan sequences against PROSITE signatures (‘ProfileScan’
application), but does not provide intra-domain feature detec-
tion, ‘rich’ graphical output and extensive scanning options
including scans against custom user patterns.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +41 22 379 5050; Fax: +41 22 379 5858; Email: ecastro@isb-sib.ch
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
W362–W365 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gkl124
DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
ScanProsite was implemented in Perl, and is served through an
Apache web server running on a UNIX operating system. Care
was taken to ensure that all generated pages are fully
standards-compliant (valid HTML 4.01 transitional). The
pre-computed match database and the ProRule database are
stored in a PostgreSQL database. The entire implementation is
based on open source tools.
Program output can either be displayed in the web browser
(interactive mode), or sent by email (batch mode). The rich
view output mode uses standard DHTML (HTML, CSS,
JavaScript), and no additional plugins are required.
Input form
The job submission starting page is located at http://www.
expasy.org/tools/scanprosite/ on the ExPASy web server (7).
Here the user has to enter sequence and/or signature data,
choose the output format, and specify various scan behavior
options before launching the analysis job. The form usage
is described at http://www.expasy.org/tools/scanprosite/
scanprosite-doc.html.
User sequences and/or UniProtKB sequences/databases can
be scanned against user patterns and/or PROSITE signatures/
database. Multiple sequences and/or signatures can be
submitted at once (maximum: 8 for scans against databases,
otherwise 16). In this case, any specified signature will be
searched against any specified sequence (logical OR).
For scans against protein databases, the search space can be
reduced to specific taxa, and/or to entries containing a specific
term in their description (UniProtKB DE line).
Protein databases can be randomized (reversed or shuffled)
to evaluate user pattern significance (8). Pattern matching
mode can be altered (see aforementioned online documenta-
tion page under ‘pattern matching mode’).
Users can choose to retrieve full sequences (in fasta format)
of matched proteins together with signature match results.
For scans against the whole PROSITE signature database,
‘unspecific’ signatures with a high probability of occurrence
(see PROSITE user manual at http://www.expasy.org/prosite/
prosuser.html) can be excluded (this option is activated by
default). Scans can also be restricted to patterns.
Users can also choose to include low level profile matches
(with score smaller than the high confidence - level 0 - cut-off)
in the output (this option is not activated by default).
To save bandwidth and computing power, there is a limit on
the number of distinct matching sequences and total matches
that can be displayed. Users can select the maximum of
matching sequences (by default, not more than 5000 matches
in 1000 sequences will be displayed). A maximum of 10 000 or
100 000 sequences (50 000 or 500 000 signature matches) can
only be requested in the non-interactive ‘batch mode’ where
results are sent to the user via email.
The non-interactive ‘batch mode’ is used automatically
when an email address is specified.
Instructions for simple programmatic access (text/plain
output) are available on demand (email: prosite@expasy.org).
Sequence analysis
Once the job has been submitted, the data are posted to
an application that will make use of pre-computed matches
whenever possible. Results are retrieved from an internal
relational database that stores matches of all PROSITE
signatures (except the ‘unspecific’ signatures with a high
probability of occurrence) against the UniProt Knowledge-
base, including additional splice variants, and PDB (9). For
analyses where no pre-computed results are available (e.g. on
user sequences, user patterns or ‘unspecific’ signatures) a
real-time sequence analysis is performed using the ps_scan
program (10). Users requiring high-throughput sequence
analysis or who wish to use custom databases can download
ps_scan stand-alone tool at ftp://ftp.expasy.org/databases/
prosite/tools/ps_scan/.
Available results are pooled and saved (for 12 h) on the
server, for later use by the rich viewer.
The detection of intra-domain features is performed on the
fly by the rich viewer over the matching domains (and is
therefore only available in the rich view output mode, see
below). Profile match regions are evaluated for fulfillment
of feature detection conditions specified in the associated
ProRules. The features themselves are represented in the
ProRule as UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot annotation blocks that
are applied when detection conditions are fulfilled. The feature
annotation blocks and their detection conditions are retrieved
from an internal database storing a relational representation of
the ProRules.
Detection conditions can be: specific amino acids inside the
domain (regular expressions that can be grouped by logical
operators), groups of conditions in which all conditions must
be fulfilled (e.g. catalytic triad of trypsin protease).
To date, intra-domain feature detection is performed for 136
of the 595 PROSITE profiles (PROSITE release 19.20, of 07-
Feb-2006). Predicted features include (Table 1): binding sites
for chemical groups (such as Heme, ATP), glycosylation site,
disulfide bridges, DNA binding sites, metal ion binding sites,
post-translational modification sites (such as phosphotyrosine,
phosphoserine) etc. The system can be easily extended to use
other UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot feature types.
ScanProsite output
In interactive mode, once the analysis is completed, the results
will be directly displayed in the selected output view mode
inside user’s web browser.
Table 1. UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot features that can be predicted through
ScanProsite (PROSITE release 19.20, of 07-Feb-2006)
UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot
feature key namea
No. of
profiles
Example
(profile AC/ID)
ACT_SITE 26 PS50240/TRYPSIN_DOM
BINDING 8 PS51007/CYTC
CA_BIND 1 PS50222/EF_HAND_2
CARBOHYD 2 PS50015/SAP_B
DISULFID 45 PS50948/PAN
DNA_BIND 17 PS51063/HTH_CRP_2
METAL 24 PS50873/PEROXIDASE_4
MOD_RES 20 PS51149/GLY_RADICAL_2
NP_BIND 9 PS50936/ENGC_GTPASE
SITE 2 PS51062/RUNT
ZN_FING 6 PS50115/ARFGAP
aSee UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot user manual at http://www.expasy.org/sprot/
userman.html#FTID.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue W363
In batch mode, results in simple text format are emailed
to the user-specified email address, together with a link to
visualize the results, stored on the server, through the rich
viewer. In rich view and simple html view modes, matching
UniProt Knowledgebase protein entries are shown with a
link to their ExPASy NiceProt view, their description and
organism. Moreover, for entries that have associated PDB
structures, there are links to interactive 3D views highlighting
the match region over the 3D structure.
Text modes provide no links, but are optimal for copy/past-
ing. See http://www.expasy.org/tools/scanprosite/scanprosite-
doc.html#output for details.
The rich view can be accessed, as a link, from any other
views.
The rich view output mode provides an interactive match
viewer and intra-domain feature predictor/viewer in both text
and graphical forms. See http://www.expasy.org/tools/
scanprosite/scanview-doc.html for details.
The graphical view is a symbolic representation of matches,
inspired by SMART (11) and predicted features in a high
quality image (Portable Network Graphics format) that can
be used in presentations or papers (Figure 1).
The view is generated by a specific web tool that uses saved
results allowing delayed results examination for up to 12 h
after the initial scan (useful in batch mode).
In addition to the match results, intra-domain feature eva-
luations (if any) are detailed. For each evaluated feature, its
UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot feature key, boundaries, description,
the detection conditions and the condition group (if any),
are displayed. Features with fulfilled conditions are shown
under ‘Predicted features’ and integrated into the graphical
representation. Features with unfulfilled conditions are
shown under ‘Absent feature’.
The rich view also provides interactive match and feature
highlighting, on results of a single sequence scan, with most
web browsers e.g. Mozilla, FireFox, Netscape, Opera,
provided JavaScript is enabled (with Internet Explorer this
JavaScript functionality is too slow and was disabled). Moving
the cursor over a feature information line will highlight its
position (green for predicted features, gray for absent features)
Figure 1. ScanProsite result page (rich view mode).
W364 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue
in both the match sequence and the protein sequence.
Moving the cursor over a match in the graphical view or
the text view will highlight in yellow its position in the protein
sequence.
CONCLUSIONS
We have described the current state of the ScanProsite
tool. The new implementation—online since summer
2004—brings the use of pre-computed matches whenever
possible, the detection of intra-domain biological features, a
new graphical result representation and an interactive result
viewer.
PROSITE, through ScanProsite, provides broad intra-
domain feature prediction via a flexible context-dependent
annotation transfer system. Associating domain detection
with an automated annotation system can significantly
increase functional predictive power of profiles.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Eric Jain for careful proof-
reading. This work was supported by grant no. 3152A0-
103922/1 from the Swiss National Science Foundation and
by the Swiss Federal Government through the Federal Office
of Education and Science. Funding to pay the Open Access
publication charges for this article was provided by Swiss
Institute of Bioinformatics (Swiss-Prot group), Switzerland.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Attwood,T.K. and Parry-Smith,D.J. (1999) Introduction to
Bioinformatics. Addison Wesley Longman.
2. Hulo,N., Bairoch,A., Bulliard,V., Cerutti,L., De Castro,E.,
Langendijk-Genevaux,P.S., Pagni,M. and Sigrist,C.J.A. (2006) The
PROSITE database. Nucleic Acids Res., 34, D227–D230.
3. Bairoch,A., Boeckmann,B., Ferro,S. and Gasteiger,E. (2004) Swiss-Prot:
juggling between evolution and stability. Brief Bioinform., 5, 39–55.
4. Wu,C.H., Apweiler,R., Bairoch,A., Natale,D.A., Barker,W.C.,
Boeckmann,B., Ferro,S., Gasteiger,E., Huang,H., Lopez,R. et al. (2006)
The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt): an expanding universe of
protein information. Nucleic Acids Res., 34, D187–D191.
5. Sigrist,C.J.A., De Castro,E., Langendijk-Genevaux,P.S., Le Saux,V.,
Bairoch,A. and Hulo,N. (2005) ProRule: a new database containing
functional and structural information on PROSITE profiles.
Bioinformatics, 21, 4060–4066.
6. Mulder,N.J., Apweiler,R., Attwood,T.K., Bairoch,A., Bateman,A.,
Binns,D., Bradley,P., Bork,P., Bucher,P., Cerutti,L. et al. (2005)
InterPro, progress and status in 2005. Nucleic Acids Res., 33,
D201–D205.
7. Gasteiger,E., Gattiker,A., Hoogland,C., Ivanyi,I., Appel,R.D. and
Bairoch,A. (2003) ExPASy: the proteomics server for in-depth protein
knowledge and analysis. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 3784–3788.
8. Hulo,N., Sigrist,C.J.A., Le Saux,V., Langendijk-Genevaux,P.S.,
Bordoli,L., Gattiker,A., De Castro,E., Bucher,P. and Bairoch,A. (2004)
Recent improvements to the PROSITE database. Nucleic Acids Res., 32,
D134–D137.
9. Berman,H.M., Westbrook,J., Feng,Z., Gilliland,G., Bhat,T.N.,
Weissig,H., Shindyalov,I.N. and Bourne,P.E. (2000) The Protein Data
Bank. Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 235–242.
10. Gattiker,A., Gasteiger,E. and Bairoch,A. (2002) ScanProsite: a reference
implementation of a PROSITE scanning tool. Appl. Bioinformatics, 1,
107–108.
11. Letunic,I., Copley,R.R., Pils,B., Pinkert,S., Schultz,J. and Bork,P. (2006)
SMART 5: domains in the context of genomes and networks.
Nucleic Acids Res., 34, D257–D260.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue W365
