EMAGE: a spatial database of gene expression
patterns during mouse embryo development
Jeffrey H. Christiansen*, Yiya Yang, Shanmugasundaram Venkataraman,
Lorna Richardson, Peter Stevenson, Nicholas Burton, Richard A. Baldock and
Duncan R. Davidson
MRC Human Genetics Unit, Western General Hospital, Crewe Road, Edinburgh, EH4 2XU, UK
Received August 10, 2005; Revised and Accepted August 30, 2005
ABSTRACT
EMAGE (http://genex.hgu.mrc.ac.uk/Emage/database)
is a freely available, curated database of gene expres-
sion patterns generated by in situ techniques in the
developing mouse embryo. It is unique in that it con-
tains standardizedspatial representationsof the sites
of gene expression for each gene, denoted against a
set of virtual reference embryo models. As such, the
data can be interrogated in a novel and abstract man-
ner by using space to define a query. Accompanying
the spatial representations of gene expression pat-
terns are text descriptions of the sites of expression,
which also allows searching of the data by more
conventional text-based methods.
INTRODUCTION
With the completion of whole genome sequencing of various
model organisms, the challenge facing modern biology now is
to determine the biological roles and interactions that each
gene and their products play. Central to addressing this prob-
lem is an understanding of the sites of expression (at both the
transcript and protein level) throughout development as well
as in the adult organism. Techniques for determining sites of
expression in situ such as immunohistochemistry and in situ
hybridization offer direct visualization of the accumulation of
gene products at cellular resolution, and as such, are central to
the elucidation of gene function in complex tissues.
Traditionally, data of this type has been archived using the
conventional method of publication in a journal of at least one
photograph of the expression results with an accompanying
brief description of the sites of expression as determined by the
authors. Whilst this method does allow for the distribution of
the information, data published in this way is often impossible
to retrieve from the literature unless the gene or sites of expres-
sion in question are mentioned in the literature citation, i.e.
in the title, abstract, keywords or MeSH (Medical Subject
Headings, http://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/meshhome.html)
terms of the paper. In the case of gene expression patterns,
this is usually not included in the citation unless the paper is
specifically written to describe the expression pattern itself.
When this information is included in the citation, it is still
often difficult to retrieve owing to the use of non-standardized
language by authors to describe the sites of gene expression. In
addition, patterns are often not completely described by the
authors. This may arise from a lack of anatomical knowledge
that is required to identify and name all of the structures that
express the gene, or from the complexities of a text-based
description required to describe a complex expression pattern.
To help address these problems, we have developed
EMAGE, a database in which gene expression patterns detec-
ted using in situ techniques are described uniquely by using a
combination of both text (i.e. standardized words are used to
list the anatomical parts that express a gene) and space (i.e.
standardized spatial representations are used to show the sites
of expression). A proportion of the data in EMAGE has been
published previously in the literature and our approach extends
the amount of information that can be extracted from the
original data images as well as providing a new access gate-
way and novel analysis possibilities to these data. This
approach also allows access to expression data for users
who are not, or are only superficially, familiar with the
anatomy of the mouse embryo.
DATABASE STRUCTURE
Concept
The framework that houses all data contained in the EMAGE
database is the EMAP Digital Atlas of Mouse Development
(1). This interactive atlas contains two parts—a hierarchically
organized ontology of anatomical terms for all Theiler stages
(2,3) of mouse development [which is also employed by our
colleagues at the GXD database to index expression data from
multiple experimental sources (4)], and a set of virtual 3D
mouse embryo models for most post-implantation stages of
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +44 131 332 2471; Fax: +44 131 467 8456; Email: Jeff.Christiansen@hgu.mrc.ac.uk
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D637–D641
doi:10.1093/nar/gkj006
Theiler stages of development. In a proportion of the 3D
embryo models, 3D anatomical domains have been delineated
within them and these correspond directly to terms in the
ontology (1). See Table 1 for a summary of the current status
of this framework for each Theiler Stage and also online
Supplementary Data for a document which gives a detailed
description of the concepts of the database framework and the
rules and definitions of the annotation.
Software
The database software has client–server architecture. The
application-domain information is stored in an ObjectStore
(http://www.progress.com) database. The database includes
C++ server and Java Swing (http://www.sun.com) client soft-
ware. The C++ server accesses the database and runs on a Sun
Solaris server. The Java client software is delivered by Java
Web Start (http://www.sun.com) or directly through a web
browser and communicates with the C++ server via Corba
(http://www.orbacus.com).
CONTENTS OF THE EMAGE DATABASE
Every EMAGE entry contains at least one original data pho-
tograph showing expression as detected with either one nuc-
leic acid probe or antiserum. Also contained in the entry, is an
accompanying spatial and/or text annotation, which describes
the sites of expression as seen in the assay image(s). Further
information on the contents of an entry can be found in the
‘Data Entry’ section.
As of July 2005, there were 1905 entries covering 704 genes
and 22 Theiler stages of development. Of these entries, 1345
correspond to data from wholemount and 560 from sections of
in situ/immunohistochemistry experiments (for a further
breakdown see Figure 1). Of all entries, 10% correspond to
direct submissions from individual laboratories, 44% to data
that has been published previously in the literature and 46%
are submissions from screening consortia.
DATA QUERYING IN EMAGE
Querying via the Java interface
Downloading and starting the Java interface. The EMAGE
Java interface can be downloaded from the EMAGE home-
page (http://genex.hgu.mrc.ac.uk/Emage/database) and will
run on any platform (Windows, MacOSX and UNIX/Linux)
with Java v1.4.2+ installed. Platform-specific instructions are
given on the website. Following installation, the Java interface
can be launched from the EMAGE homepage by clicking the
‘START’ icon. Every time the interface is subsequently
launched when the computer is connected to the internet,
the latest version of the software is installed. The data in
EMAGE can also be accessed in HTML, without downloading
the Java interface (see below).
Using the Java interface to browse EMAGE data. When the
Java interface launches, a ‘Browse’ window is automatically
loaded. This gives an indication of the number of public entries
in the database at that time. The list can be sorted by gene or
Theiler stage and is presented as a hierarchically organized
tree. Branches of the tree can be opened by clicking on the
toggles. Double/right clicking on a term in the tree (i.e. gene
Figure 1. Contents of the public EMAGE database as of July 2005. The
numbers of wholemount (green), section (blue) and total (red) EMAGE entries
per Theiler Stage in the public EMAGE database is shown.
Table 1. Current status of the framework housing EMAGE data
Theiler
stage
Anatomy
ontology
3D embryo
model
3D anatomy domains
in model
01 +  n/a
02 +  n/a
03 +  n/a
04 +  n/a
05 +  n/a
06 +  n/a
07 + + +
08 + + +
09 + + +
10 + + +
11 + + +
12 + + +
13 + + +
14 + + +
15 + + 
16 + + 
17 + + 
18 + + 
19 + + 
20 + + +
21 +  n/a
22 +  n/a
23 +  n/a
24 +  n/a
25 +  n/a
26 +  n/a
ongoing.
For all embryonic Theiler stages (TS01-26) an ontology of anatomical terms
have been developed.A 3Dembryomodel is present to spatially houseEMAGE
data at TS07-20 inclusive, and of these, 3D anatomical regions have been
defined within the TS07-14 and TS20 embryo models. The work of refining
the anatomical ontology, building embryo models and delineating anatomy is
D638 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
symbol, Theiler stage, EMAGE ID) will load thumbnail
images of the original data in the adjacent panel. Individual
EMAGE entries can be opened by double/right clicking on the
thumbnail images (for a movie of this type of search in action
see online Supplementary Data).
Performing spatial searches in the EMAGE Java interface.
By using the menu option Central Database > Search By Any,
a user can formulate the query: ‘What (genes) are (detected/
possibly detected/not detected) in the following (region) at
(Theiler Stage X)?’.
Two types of spatial expression data are held in the
database—those with original data from sectioned samples
and those with original data as images of wholemount stained
embryos. These two distinct data types are treated separately
in the database and are queried independently of each other.
The user defines their query area by painting an arbitrary
region, either onto a lateral (left or right) wholemount view or
into the 3D space of one of the EMAP 3D virtual embryo
models. This allows either wholemount or 3D (section) data to
be retrieved that spatially intersects with the query domain.
See Figure 2 for examples and also online Supplementary Data
for movies of these types of searches being performed.
In addition, the following query type can be formulated:
‘What (regions) (express/possibly express/do not express) the
following (genes) at (Stage X)?’ The user defines their gene of
interest and subsequently a list of 2D and/or 3D regions are
returned with accompanying original data images. The 2D
(wholemount) regions are displayed directly in the Java inter-
face. Returned 3D regions can be downloaded (in woolz image
format, http://genex.hgu.mrc.ac.uk/Software/woolz/) from
the Java interface and subsequently visualized using accom-
panying MAPaint software (http://genex.hgu.mrc.ac.uk/
MouseAtlasCD/Software.html). MAPaint requires a UNIX
operating environment (Linux, MacOSX, Solaris and so
on), is free and can be obtained by emailing a request to
ma-cdrom@hgu.mrc.ac.uk. For movies of these types of
searches being performed see online Supplementary Data.
Performing text-based searches in the EMAGE Java inter-
face. Following selection of the menu option Central Data-
base > Search By Any, a user can also formulate the query:
‘What (genes) are (detected/possibly detected/not detected) in
the following (named anatomical components) at (Theiler
Stage X)?’. The user is presented with the ontology tree of
anatomical terms for the Theiler stage chosen and can browse
through the list or query it by text to find instances of the term
of interest. Common synonyms are included in the anatomy
nomenclature database and will also be returned from text
queries of the ontology (e.g. searching the list for ‘mesenceph-
alon’ at TS15 will return the synonym ‘future midbrain’).
Appropriate terms are selected by the user by clicking on
them and they will change colour to magenta denoting the
term is selected for search. Following the search, a list of genes
are returned with accompanying original data images (for a
movie showing a search of this type see Supplementary Data).
In addition, the following query type can be formulated:
‘What (named anatomical components) (express/possibly
express/do not express) the following (genes) at (Stage X)?’.
The ontology tree of anatomical terms for the Theiler stage
chosen is returned with relevant terms highlighted (in
magenta). Because of the hierarchical nature of the ontology
tree, all terms including and higher than those directly annot-
ated are returned from this query type when querying for
structures expressing the gene, and all terms including and
lower than those directly annotated are returned when query-
ing for structures with no expression of the gene detected. For
a movie showing a search of this type see online Supplement-
ary Data.
Querying EMAGE via HTML
EMAGE data is also accessible via HTML. This allows
searching of the central EMAGE database by anatomical
structure at a particular Theiler stage. The HTML search is
accessed from the homepage of EMAGE (http://genex.hgu.
mrc.ac.uk/Emage/database/) by clicking on the ‘SEARCH’
icon under the ‘WEB SEARCH EMAGE’ link. The user is
presented with a Java Applet interface that allows selection of
a Theiler stage and subsequent browsing of the ontology of
anatomical terms. Selection of an ontology term allows search-
ing of EMAGE to find genes expressed within that structure.
The results are presented as a list and by following links, the
user is able to peruse the content of individual EMAGE entries
to view the original data images and associated annotation.
EMAGE data can also be reached from an Ensembl (5)
mouse gene report via a distributed annotation system
[DAS, (6)] server. Under these circumstances, EMAGE is
listed amongst the DAS resources in the Ensembl entry and
when selected, results are presented in a tabular format dis-
playing the gene symbol as well as the Theiler stages and the
total number of tissues in which expression is annotated in
EMAGE for the gene. Selection of any of these fields allows
the user to browse relevant lists and through a series of links
ultimately peruse the content of individual EMAGE entries.
DATA SOURCING AND ENTRY IN EMAGE
Data sourcing
Data in EMAGE comes from a variety of sources. Submissions
can be sent directly from individual labs/screening consortia.
In these circumstances, the EMAGE Java interface can be
used to create a local, private database and then send
individual or multiple entries to EMAGE Editorial Staff for
curation. Alternatively, appropriate images or specimens can
be sent to EMAGE Editorial Staff for data mapping and entry,
either by email (to ma-edit@hgu.mrc.ac.uk) or by post
(to EMAGE Editorial Office, MRC Human Genetics Unit,
Western General Hospital, Crewe Road, Edinburgh, EH4
2XU, UK).
A proportion of the data in EMAGE has been published
previously in the literature and incorporation of this data is
performed in collaboration with the GXD database (MGI) (4).
GXD curators scan the literature and annotate the EMAP text
anatomy ontology (7) to indicate the sites of gene expression
according to each author’s text description. GXD and EMAGE
have joint global copyright agreements with the Company of
Biologists Ltd and Elsevier B.V. to reproduce images that have
been published in the journals Development, Developmental
Biology, Gene Expression Patterns and Mechanisms of
Development. At EMAGE, we scan through available images
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D639
associated with GXD entries and spatially map data from
suitable images. This process extracts more information
from the experiment about the sites of gene expression than
is commonly achieved using a text annotation according to the
author’s brief original description alone.
Data entry
Entries can be made for in situ hybridization, immunohisto-
chemistry or transgenic reporter experiments that reflect the
endogenous pattern of gene expression. Information included
Figure 2. Spatial queries formulated using the EMAGE Java interface. Examples are shown of the query type ‘What genes are expressed in this region, at this stage?’
for (A) ‘wholemount’ data and (B) 3D data. Shown in the left hand panel in each case are arbitrary regions that have been defined using a simple paint tool (shown in
magenta). Following searching of the central EMAGE database, a list of genes expressed somewhere in the specified region are returned, and the user can choose to
display thumbnails of original data (shown in the right panels). Further details associatedwith an entry [such as probe, specimen, submitter information, links, further
original data images (full-size) and the annotation] can be obtained by double clicking on the thumbnail image (for movies of these and other types of searches see
online Supplementary Data).
D640 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
in an EMAGE entry includes: (i) Probe/antibody
information—including a unique probe identifier, Mouse
Gene Nomenclature Committee approved gene name and sym-
bol (with associated MGI gene ID), nucleic acid sequence of
the probe or amino acid sequence of the target epitope of the
antisera (when known) and the labelling and visualization
methods used. (ii) Information about the Specimen—
including the Theiler stage, alternate staging method and
value (e.g. dpc, somite number), strain, sex, fixation/
embedding treatment and notes useful for interpretation of
the data. At least one original data image is always included.
(iii) Submitter/author contact details. (iv) Links to relevant
data in other databases—e.g. PubMed and MGI/GXD. (v)
Annotation—if the annotation is spatial, this includes a digital
representation of the sites and levels of gene expression in the
data embryo in spatially equivalent regions of the appropri-
ately stage-matched virtual embryo model.
Briefly, spatial annotation involves the ‘warping’ and sub-
sequent extraction of signal of a digital representation of the
original data image into the standard spatial context of one
of the EMAP digital embryo models. This is achieved using
the accompanying MAPaint program (for further information
on the spatial mapping process see http://genex.hgu.mrc.ac.uk/
MouseAtlasCD/html/guides/sect070104.htm and http://genex.
hgu.mrc.ac.uk/MouseAtlasCD/html/guides/wm070104.htm).
The annotation can also include a simple text annotation to
the EMAP anatomy ontology which may also include informa-
tion on levels and patterns (e.g. graded, restricted and so on) of
expression in the original data image.
Levels are denoted broadly to reflect regions of strongest,
moderate and weakest expression in the data image, as well as
regions of possible expression, and regions where no expres-
sion is detected in the assay. The colour convention employed
is red for ‘strongest’, yellow for ‘moderate’, blue for ‘weak-
est’, green for ‘possible’ and cyan for ‘not detected’.
In cases where spatial annotation has been performed into
the 3D space of an embryo model with 3D anatomical domains
defined within it, the expression domain will intersect with
regions of known anatomy. Under these circumstances, the
spatial annotation is therefore accompanied by an automatic-
ally generated text annotation to the corresponding terms in
the anatomical ontology.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
EMAGE will continue to acquire and spatially map gene
expression patterns in the developing mouse embryo. This
includes data from the literature in conjunction with our col-
leagues at the GXD database (4), as well as data acquired from
large-scale expression screening consortia as well as that from
individual labs. We are currently developing tools to allow
direct spatial comparisons of multiple complex patterns and
hierarchical clustering of these to segregate any number of
patterns into groups showing spatial similarities. We are also
working towards incorporation of full 3D datasets into
EMAGE that are derived from stained whole mount embryos
imaged using Optical Projection Tomography (8).
USER SUPPORT
There is dedicated User Support for EMAGE. Please refer
issues to ma-edit@hgu.mrc.ac.uk.
We also provide Hands-On User Courses on a regular basis.
For details see http://genex.hgu.mrc.ac.uk/Emage/courses/
course.html.
CITING EMAGE
To reference the EMAGE database, please cite this article. For
referring to specific data entries in the database, please list
the EMAGE:ID and also mention that the data was retrieved
from the EMAGE database, MRC Human Genetics Unit,
Edinburgh, UK (http://genex.hgu.mrc.ac.uk).
SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Supplementary Data is available at NAR Online.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
EMAGE is supported by the Medical Research Council. We
would like to thank Dr Martin Ringwald and our colleagues at
the GXD database (MGI, Jackson Laboratory, Maine USA) for
input and also The Company of Biologists Ltd and Elsevier
B.V. for copyright agreements allowing the reproduction of
images from Development, Developmental Biology,
Mechanisms of Development and Gene Expression Patterns.
Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this
article was provided by the Medical Research Council.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Baldock,R.A., Bard,J.B., Burger,A., Burton,N., Christiansen,J., Feng,G.,
Hill,B., Houghton,D., Kaufman,M., Rao,J. et al. (2003) EMAP and
EMAGE: a framework for understanding spatially organized data.
Neuroinformatics, 1, 309–325.
2. Kaufman,M. (1992) The Atlas of Mouse Development. Academic Press,
London.
3. Theiler,K. (1989) The House Mouse: Atlas of Embryonic Development.
Springer-Verlag, NY.
4. Hill,D.P., Begley,D.A., Finger,J.H., Hayamizu,T.F., McCright,I.J.,
Smith,C.M., Beal,J.S., Corbani,L.E., Blake,J.A., Eppig,J.T. et al. (2004)
ThemouseGene ExpressionDatabase (GXD): updates and enhancements.
Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D568–D571.
5. Hubbard,T., Andrews,D., Caccamo,M., Cameron,G., Chen,Y., Clamp,M.,
Clarke,L., Coates,G., Cox,T., Cunningham,F. et al. (2005) Ensembl 2005.
Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D447–D453.
6. Dowell,R.D., Jokerst,R.M., Day,A., Eddy,S.R. and Stein,L. (2001) The
distributed annotation system. BMC Bioinformatics, 2, 7.
7. Bard,J.L., Kaufman,M.H., Dubreuil,C., Brune,R.M., Burger,A.,
Baldock,R.A. and Davidson,D.R. (1998) An internet-accessible database
of mouse developmental anatomy based on a systematic nomenclature.
Mech. Dev., 74, 111–120.
8. Sharpe,J., Ahlgren,U., Perry,P., Hill,B., Ross,A., Hecksher-Sorensen,J.,
Baldock,R. and Davidson,D. (2002) Optical projection tomography as a
tool for 3D microscopy and gene expression studies. Science, 296,
541–545.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D641
