Cleavage of dsRNAs hyper-edited by ADARs
occurs at preferred editing sites
A. D. J. Scadden* and M. A. O’Connell1
University of Cambridge, 80 Tennis Court Road, Cambridge, CB2 1GA, UK and 1MRC Human Genetics Unit,
Western General Hospital, Crewe Road, Edinburgh, EH4 2XU, UK
Received September 9, 2005; Revised and Accepted September 30, 2005
ABSTRACT
Long double-stranded RNAs (dsRNAs) may undergo
covalent modification (hyper-editing) by adenosine
deaminases that act on RNA (ADARs), whereby up
to 50–60% of adenosine residues are converted to
inosine. Previously, we have described a ribonuc-
lease activity in various cell extracts that specifically
targets dsRNAs hyper-edited by ADARs. Such a ribo-
nuclease may play an important role in viral defense,
or may alternatively be involved in down-regulation of
other RNA duplexes. Cleavage of hyper-edited dsRNA
occurs within sequences containing multiple IU pairs
but not in duplexes that contain either isosteric GU
pairs or Watson–Crick base pairs. Here, we describe
experiments aimed at further characterizing cleavage
of hyper-edited dsRNA. Using various inosine-
containing dsRNAs we show that cleavage occurs
preferentially at a site containing both IU and UI
pairs, and that inclusion of even a single GU pair
inhibits cleavage. We also show that cleavage
occurs on both strands within a single dsRNA mole-
cule and requires a 20-OH group. Strikingly, we show
that ADAR1, ADAR2 or dADAR all preferentially
generate the preferred cleavage site when hyper-
editing a long dsRNA.
INTRODUCTION
Eukaryotic cells have a number of sensitive defense mechan-
isms that recognize and respond to the presence of long
double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) molecules (1). Such molecules
may arise through antisense transcription, or more commonly
may indicate the presence of viruses or other invading nucleic
acid molecules. One general antiviral mechanism employed by
the cell in response to dsRNA involves the induction of PKR
(2) and oligoadenlylate synthetase/RNase L (3,4). Alternat-
ively, dsRNA may be utilized in the RNA interference (RNAi)
pathway to silence the cognate gene (5,6). On the other hand,
adenosine deaminases that act on RNA (ADARs) may catalyze
the covalent modification of long dsRNA molecules (7).
Modification by ADARs and RNAi appear to be mutually
antagonistic processes (8–12).
ADARs constitute a family of enzymes that exist throughout
the metazoa, including mammals [ADAR1 and ADAR2 (7)],
frogs, worms and flies [dADAR (13)]. Conversion of adenos-
ine (A) residues to inosine (I) residues within dsRNA by
ADARs constitutes one type of RNA editing. Inosine differs
from guanosine only by the presence of an exocyclic amine
group, and preferentially pairs with cytosine residues. As
inosine is decoded by the translation machinery as guanosine,
selective editing by ADARs has the potential to change the
coding capacity of an mRNA (7). Alternatively, ADARs may
catalyze hyper-editing within long dsRNA molecules, which
results in up to 50% of the adenosine residues being converted
to inosine (14,15). Hyper-editing has the potential to alter not
only the sequence of a dsRNA molecule, but also its structure
as IU and UI pairs are less stable than the corresponding
Watson–Crick AU and UA pairs (16). The presence of both
IU and UI pairs may result in localized distortions of the
A-form RNA duplex.
Several pathways have been identified in cells that may
determine the fate of hyper-edited dsRNA. Hyper-edited
dsRNA may be retained in the nucleus by a protein complex
that comprises p54nrb, PSF and matrin 3 (17). Moreover, it has
recently been proposed that hyper-edited dsRNA binds to
vigilins in the nucleus and may be involved in the formation
of heterochromatin (18). Hyper-editing of dsRNA by ADARs
has alternatively been proposed to form part of an antiviral
mechanism whereby covalent modification may tag the
dsRNA for subsequent disposal. Previously, we have identified
a ribonuclease activity in various cell extracts (HeLa S100,
Xenopus laevis oocyte extract) that specifically cleaves hyper-
edited dsRNA (19). In contrast, dsRNAs containing only
Watson–Crick base pairs or that contain GU pairs rather than
IU pairs were not cleaved in either Xenopus oocyte or HeLa
cell extracts. Cleavage of inosine-containing dsRNA occurs 50
of U residues within the sequence 50-IIUI-30/30-UUIU-50 and
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +44 1223 333665; Fax: +44 1223 766002; Email: adjs@bioc.cam.ac.uk
 The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
5954–5964 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 18
doi:10.1093/nar/gki909
 Published online October 27, 2005
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
leaves a 30 phosphate (19). We have recently shown (12) that
cleavage of hyper-edited dsRNAs involves Tudor Staphylo-
coccal Nuclease (TSN), which was previously described as a
component of the RNA-induced silencing complex necessary
for RNAi (20). We showed that TSN binds specifically to
dsRNAs containing multiple IU pairs, and that the addition
of recombinant TSN to a limited amount of Xenopus extract
caused an increase in cleavage of inosine-containing dsRNA.
Moreover, specific inhibitors of TSN also inhibited cleavage.
Nevertheless, it is likely that TSN constitutes only part of a
protein complex necessary for cleavage of hyper-edited
dsRNA (12). In addition to a potential role in viral
defense, the TSN complex might target non-coding dsRNAs
sequences that undergo hyper-editing by ADARs (10,21).
While editing of such sequences is thought to prevent their
entry into the RNAi pathway per se, removal from the cell via
the TSN-mediated pathway would ensure their exclusion.
Recent data showed that ADARs could edit pre-miRNA pre-
cursors (22); this observation raises the additional possibility
that inappropriately edited miRNAs could be fed into a
destruction pathway that specifically recognizes hyper-
edited dsRNAs.
Here, we set out to further characterize the properties of
hyper-edited dsRNAs that undergo cleavage in Xenopus
oocyte extract. Cleavage of dsRNA substrates that contain a
mixture of IU and GU pairs supports the previous observations
that GU pairs are unable to substitute IU pairs and that multiple
IU pairs are required for cleavage. We show that cleavage
requires a 20-OH residue, and that cleavage can occur on
both strands within a single molecule. We use various sub-
strates to show that cleavage occurs preferentially within a site
that contains both IU and UI pairs. Strikingly, editing of a long
dsRNA (DKP) by ADAR2, ADAR1 or dADAR efficiently
generates this cleavage site.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
RNA substrates
20-protected RNA oligonucleotides were purchased from
Dharmacon and deprotected before use according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Sequences of synthetic dsRNAs
are shown in Table 1. Double-stranded RNAs were prepared as
described previously (19). RNA oligonucleotides were 50 end-
labeled with [g-32P]ATP (3000 Ci/mmol; Amersham) using
T4 PNK (23). In each dsRNA only one strand of the duplex
was labeled. DKP is a perfect dsRNA substrate (295 bp) that
comprises spliced exons 2 and 3 of a-tropomyosin, generated
by deletion between the KpnI and PvuII sites at the ends of the
intron in construct pGC+DX (24). The sense RNA strand
(296 nt) was synthesized using SP6 RNA polymerase (Strata-
gene) following linearization of DKP with BamHI. The
antisense RNA (329 nt) was synthesized using T7 RNA poly-
merase from a PCR template generated from DKP (19). DKP
dsRNA was prepared as described previously (19). The hairpin
with a single internal label was prepared by RNA ligation (25).
The sequences of the two RNA oligonucleotides to be ligated
were 50-ACUGGACAIIUICUCCGAGG (50 RNA) and 50-
UACGCCUCGGAGUIUUUGUCCAGUAUC (30 RNA), and
the bridging DNA oligonucleotide sequence was 50-AGGC-
TCCGCATGGAGCCTCGTGGAC. The 30 RNA was 50 end-
labeled with [g-32P]ATP to give a single label adjacent to the
Table 1. dsRNA substrates: sequences of the synthetic dsRNA oligonucleotides used in this study
Substrate 50 Sequence 30 dsRNA used to show that:
IIUI (wild type) ACUGGACAIIUICUCCGAGG GU pairs have a deleterious effect on cleavage (Figure 1)
UGACCUGUUUIUGAGGCUCC
GU (control) ACUGGACAGGUGCUCCGAGG
UGACCUGUUUGUGAGGCUCC
IIUI/UUGU ACUGGACAIIUICUCCGAGG
UGACCUGUUUIUGAGGCUCC
GGUG/UUIU ACUGGACAGGUGCUCCGAGG
UGACCUGUUUIUGAGGCUCC
IIUI-30 GAUGAACUGGACAIIUICUCCGAGGCUCUC Additional IU pairs increase cleavage efficiency (Figure 1D)
CUACUUGACCUGUUUIUGAGGCUCCGAGAG
IIIUI-30e GAUGAACUGGACIIIUICUCCGAGGCUCUC
CUACUUGACCUGUUUIUGAGGCUCCGAGAG
dUT ACUGGACAIIdUICUCCGAGG 20-OH groups are important for cleavage (Figure 2)
UGACCUGUUU IUGAGGCUCC
dUB ACUGGACAI IUICUCCGAGG
UGACCUGUUdUIUGAGGCUCC
IIUI hairpin ACUGGACAIIUICUCCGAGG*UA Cleavage of IIUI dsRNA occurs on both strands
CUAUGACCUGUUUIUGAGGCUCCGC within a single molecule (Figure 3)
GU hairpin ACUGGACAGGUGCUCCGAGGUA
CUAUGACCUGUUUGUGAGGCUCCGC
IIUI-pal CUGGACAIIUIUUCUCCGAG Cleavage occurs preferentially between the IU and UI pair in
GACCUGUUUIUIIGAGGCUC the sequence IIUI (Figures 4 and 5)
COMP ACUGACAUUUUCCUGACAIIUICCUGAGA
UGACUGUIIIIGGACUGUUUIUGGACUCU
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 18 5955
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
tetraloop sequence (underlined). Ligated RNAs were purified
on a 16% (v/v) polyacrylamide gel before use (25).
Preparation of extracts and recombinant proteins
Xenopus laevis oocyte extracts were prepared according to a
method described previously (26). The ADARs used in this
study were the short form (p110) of human ADAR1 (27)
(ADAR1), human ADAR2b (27) (ADAR2) and dADAR
3/4 (13) (dADAR). Recombinant ADARs were expressed in
Pichia pastoris, as described previously (28).
RNA editing
DKP was edited using ADAR1, ADAR2 or dADAR according
to a method described previously (28). Editing reactions res-
ulted in 30–45% of adenosine residues being converted to
inosine, as determined by TLC. Edited RNAs were amplified
using RT–PCR and cloned into pGEM-Teasy (Promega) as
described previously (19). A total of 20–45 clones correspond-
ing to editing by each enzyme were sequenced to analyze
editing frequency at each position.
Ribonuclease assays
50 end-labeled dsRNA substrates (50 fmol) were assayed in a
10 ml reaction that contained 10 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.9,
0.8 mM ATP, 1 mg tRNA and 10% Xenopus oocyte extract.
Reactions were incubated at 25C for 0–2 h and then treated
with 6 ml Proteinase K (20 mg/ml) in a total volume of 100 ml
1· Proteinase K buffer for 30 min at 37C. The RNA was
extracted once with phenol/chloroform and recovered by pre-
cipitation with ethanol and carrier tRNA. The RNA pellets
were dried, resuspended in formamide dyes and analyzed by
denaturing PAGE (18% polyacrylamide gels). The gels were
dried under vacuum and visualized by either autoradiography
or using a Storm PhosphorImager. Quantification was addi-
tionally performed using a Storm PhosphorImager and
Molecular Dynamics software. RNA melting experiments
were carried out according to a previous method (29) where
the assays were in 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl.
RESULTS
Previously, we used short model dsRNA substrates to dem-
onstrate that the presence of multiple IU pairs resulted in
efficient cleavage of the dsRNA in Xenopus laevis oocyte
extracts (12). Cleavage occurred efficiently within the
sequence 50-IIUI-30/30-UUIU-50, which is referred to as the
‘wild-type’ sequence (IIUI, Table 1), and decreased as the
number of IU pairs were reduced. Here, we describe a
study aimed at further characterizing the properties of the
cleavage site.
GU pairs have a deleterious effect on cleavage
While the IIUI dsRNA was cleaved efficiently in Xenopus
oocyte extract, an equivalent control dsRNA that contained
isosteric GU pairs (GU, Table 1) was stable (12,19). Synthetic
RNA duplexes (20 bp) that contain a mixture of IU and GU
pairs were now used to analyze cleavage in Xenopus oocyte
extract (Table 1). The RNA duplexes were 50 end-labeled on
either the top or the bottom strand.
When the IIUI dsRNA labeled on the top strand was incub-
ated in Xenopus extract, efficient cleavage occurred to give a
single product (Figure 1A, lanes 1–4 and Figure 1C). When
one UG pair was introduced into the IIUI dsRNA to give the
substrate IIUI/UUGU (Table 1), cleavage on the top strand
was reduced by at least 50% (Figure 1A, lanes 5–8 and
Figure 1C). Efficient cleavage was observed when the wild-
type IIUI dsRNA was labeled on the bottom strand and yielded
several products (Figure 1A, lanes 9–12 and Figure 1C).
However, the inclusion of a GU pair (IIUI/UUGU) reduced
cleavage on the bottom strand by at least 70% (Figure 1A,
lanes 13–16 and Figure 1C). Quantification of the individual
cleaved products revealed that there was a disproportionately
large reduction in cleavage at position ‘c’ (Figure 1F), which is
adjacent to the UG pair (data not shown). These data show that
the presence of even one GU pair in the context of multiple IU
pairs was incompatible with efficient cleavage. As GU and IU
pairs are isosteric, a single IU to GU substitution was unlikely
to have a significant effect on the RNA structure. This idea is
supported by RNA melting experiments (29) which show a
single A260 transition with melting temperatures of 61.3 and
62.1C for the IIUI and IIUI/UUGU dsRNAs, respectively
(data not shown). The small difference in melting temperature
is consistent with previous reports that IU pairs are less stable
than GU pairs (30), but is unlikely to be a significant deter-
minant for differential cleavage at 25C. When the control GU
substrate was labeled on either the top or the bottom strand, no
cleavage was observed, as expected (Figure 1B, lanes 1–4 and
9–12, respectively, and Figure 1C). Similarly, when three GU
pairs replaced IU pairs (substrate GGUG/UUIU, Table 1),
no cleavage was detectable on the top strand (Figure 1B,
lanes 5–8 and Figure 1C). A very small amount of cleavage
was seen on the bottom strand (Figure 1B, lanes 13–16 and
Figure 1C). These data are again consistent with the observa-
tion that GU pairs are unable to substitute for IU pairs, and that
multiple IU pairs are required for efficient cleavage (12).
Additional IU pairs increase cleavage efficiency
As mentioned above, we have previously shown that cleavage
efficiency decreased with decreasing number of IU pairs,
where the hierarchy is 4 IU pairs > 3 IU pairs >>> 2 IU
pairs (or GU pairs). Cleavage of a dsRNA substrate that con-
tains 5 IU pairs (IIIUI-30e, Table 1) was next compared with
cleavage of the wild-type IIUI sequence (IIUI-30, Table 1). In
these experiments, the dsRNA substrates were 30 bp in length.
Cleavage efficiency of the IIUI-30 was comparable with cleav-
age of the standard 20 bp IIUI duplex when compared in
parallel assays (data not shown). When the IIUI-30 duplex
labeled on the top strand was incubated in Xenopus oocyte
extract one major cleaved product was again seen (Figure 1D,
lanes 1–4). Cleavage of the IIIUI-30e dsRNA yielded the same
product with greater efficiency (Figure 1D, lanes 5–8 and
Figure 1E). When both IIUI-30 and IIIUI-30e dsRNAs
were labeled on the bottom strand, multiple cleavage products
were seen, as expected. Again, cleavage of IIIUI-30e was
substantially more efficient than cleavage of the IIUI-30
duplex (compare lanes 13–16 and 9–12, respectively, and
Figure 1E). The increase in cleavage efficiency of IIIUI-30e
can largely be accounted for by enhanced cleavage at position
‘a’ (Figure 1F). These data therefore show that the cleavage
5956 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 18
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
efficiency can be increased further by extension of the cleav-
age site by a single IU pair.
20-OH groups are important for cleavage
Cleavage of inosine-containing RNA duplexes occurs 50 of U
residues to give a 30 phosphate (19). dsRNA substrates that
contained a single deoxy-uridine (dU) residue on either the top
(dUT) or the bottom (dUB) strand (Table 1) were assayed for
cleavage in Xenopus oocyte extract. When dsRNAs were
labeled on the top strand, cleavage of either dUT or dUB
yielded the same cleavage product as the wild-type IIUI
dsRNA (Figure 2A, compare lanes 5–12 with 1–4), and
with comparable efficiency (Figure 2B). When the dsRNAs
were labeled on the bottom strand, cleavage of IIUI and dUT
dsRNAs were indistinguishable (Figure 2A, lanes 13–20 and
Figure 2C). In contrast, cleavage of dUB was substantially
reduced (Figure 2A, lanes 21–24 and Figure 2C). The reduc-
tion in cleavage can be explained by the reduction of cleavage
at position ‘b’ (Figure 1F), which is immediately 30 of the dU
residue. This indicates that the 20-OH group of the adjacent
50 nucleotide is critical for cleavage. The presence of 20-OMe
U residues within the cleavage site of a substrate with four
consecutive IU pairs [4I substrate (19)] also abolished cleav-
age, supporting the idea that the 20-OH is necessary (data not
shown).
Cleavage of IIUI dsRNA occurs on both strands within a
single molecule
Cleavage is seen on either strand of the IIUI duplex depending
on which strand is 50 end-labeled, e.g. Figure 1A, lanes 1–4
and 9–12. However, it is impossible from these data to
Figure 1. GU pairs have a deleterious effect on cleavage. (A) Cleavage assays were carried out using IIUI dsRNA molecules [50 end-labeled on one strand (*)] and
substrates where IU pairs were replaced by GU pairs (Table 1). Time points used in these assays were 0, 0.5, 1 and 2 h. (B) Cleavage assays were carried out using
control GU dsRNA molecules [50 end-labeled on one strand (*)], and substrates where GU pairs were replaced by IU pairs. Time points used in these assays were 0,
0.5, 1 and 2 h. (C) Data from cleavage assays as shown in (A) and (B) were quantitated following phosphorimaging (n > 4). The amount of cleaved product is given as
the percentage of the total amount of dsRNA. (D) Cleavage assays using dsRNA substrates [50 end-labeled on one strand (*)] that contain four or five IU pairs were
carried out. Time points used in these assays were 0, 0.5, 1 and 2 h. (E) Data from cleavage assays as shown in (D) were quantitated as described above (n > 4). The
amount of cleaved product is again given as the percentage of the total dsRNA. (F) A schematic diagram showing the position(s) of cleavage within the cleavage site
sequence.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 18 5957
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
determine whether cleavage is restricted to one strand of a
duplex or whether both strands of a single duplex may be
cleaved. dsRNA hairpins that contain either the wild-type
IIUI sequence (IIUI hairpin, Table 1) or the control GU
sequence (GU hairpin, Table 1) were used to analyze whether
both strands of a single molecule undergo cleavage. The
sequence of the RNA hairpins were identical to the equivalent
RNA duplexes, but with the addition of a UNCG tetraloop
sequence linking the strands. When the 50 end-labeled IIUI
hairpin was incubated in Xenopus oocyte extract, several
cleavage products were observed that corresponded to
cleavage within the IIUI cleavage site on either strand, as
indicated (Figure 3A and B). Cleavage of the RNA hairpin
on the top strand appeared to be most efficient (Figure 3A,
lanes 1–4; open square). However, the product corresponding
to cleavage on the bottom strand (closed square) may be
underrepresented if the cleaved molecule was able to undergo
further cleavage on the top strand. Conversely, no cleavage of
the control GU hairpin was detectable (Figure 3A, lanes 9–12).
In order to look directly at whether both strands could undergo
cleavage, an IIUI hairpin substrate was used that was labeled
internally at a single position immediately 50 of the tetraloop
sequence (indicated by an asterisk, Table 1 and Figure 3C).
Cleavage of this substrate again yielded several products fol-
lowing incubation in Xenopus oocyte extract (Figure 3A, lanes
5–8 and Figure 3C). One set of cleavage products (34 nt) was
the result of cleavage on either the top or bottom strand, which
yielded products of a similar molecular weight (open circle;
Figure 3A and C). In addition, a pair of cleavage products
(24 nt) was detected that resulted from cleavage of both
RNA strands within the same molecule (closed circle;
Figure 3A and C). These data therefore show that an IIUI
dsRNAmaybecleaved onbothstrandswithinasinglemolecule.
Cleavage occurs preferentially between the IU and
UI pair in the IIUI sequence
Experiments using the IIUI hairpin suggested that cleavage
50 of the U residue on the top strand was more efficient than
cleavage of the bottom strand (Figure 3A, lanes 1–4). To
test whether cleavage at such a position was preferred, an
additional dsRNA substrate was used where the IIUI sequence
was extended to give the palindromic sequence 50-IIUIUU-30/
30-UUIUII-50 (IIUI-pal, Table 1). Cleavage of both the IIUI
and IIUI-pal dsRNAs, labeled on the top strand, yielded a
single product (Figure 4A, lanes 1–4 and 5–8, respectively,
and Figure 4B). Although cleavage occurred at the same rel-
ative position within the IIUI sequence for both substrates
(Figure 4C), the cleaved product of the IIUI-pal dsRNA was
1 nt shorter as the result of the position of the IIUI sequence
within the dsRNA (Table 1). Cleavage of the IIUI-pal dsRNA
appeared to be more efficient than the IIUI substrate, consist-
ent with the observation that cleavage efficiency increases
with increasing numbers of IU pairs (12). Cleavage of the
IIUI dsRNA labeled on the bottom strand yielded several
cleavage products, as expected (Figure 4A, lanes 9–12 and
Figure 4B). In contrast, cleavage of the IIUI-pal substrate
labeled on the bottom strand gave rise to one major cleaved
product (Figure 4A, lanes 13–16 and Figure 4B). This product
corresponded to cleavage at the same relative position as
occurs on the top strand (Figure 4C). Furthermore, although
cleavage occurred at a single position, cleavage of IIUI-pal
Figure 2. 20-OH groups are important for cleavage. (A) Cleavage assays were carried out using IIUI, dUT and dUB dsRNA molecules [50 end-labeled on one strand
(*)], to investigate the effect of dU residues on cleavage. Time points used in these assays were 0, 0.5, 1 and 2 h. (B) Data from cleavage assays as shown in (A) were
quantitated following phosphor imaging (n > 4). The amount of cleaved product is given as the percentage of the total dsRNA.
5958 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 18
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
dsRNA was more efficient than the IIUI substrate (Figure 4B).
These data therefore suggested that the preferred site of cleav-
age is between an IU and a UI pair, in the context of the IIUI
sequence. Nevertheless, in the absence of the preferred cleav-
age site cleavage occurs efficiently 50 of U residues when there
are multiple IU pairs (e.g. Figure 1A, lanes 9–12).
IIUI is better than the 4I site for cleavage
Based on the experiments using IIUI-pal dsRNA, we predicted
that cleavage within the sequence IIUI would be preferable to
cleavage within a run of four UI pairs if they were in direct
competition. To test this idea, a dsRNA was used for cleavage
assays that contained both the 4I and IIUI cleavage sites
(COMP, Figure 5A and Table 1). The cleavage sites were
arranged such that the U residues of the 4I site (that are sus-
ceptible to cleavage) were on the same strand as the IIUI
sequence of the wild-type cleavage site. The context of
both cleavage sites was similar to the wild-type dsRNA,
with regard to both flanking nucleotides and distance from
the ends of the dsRNA (Figure 5A). When the dsRNAs
were labeled on the top strand, cleavage of the wild-type
(20 bp) IIUI dsRNA in Xenopus oocyte extract gave a single
product (Figure 5B, lanes 1–4). In contrast, cleavage of the
COMP dsRNA labeled on the top strand yielded products
corresponding to cleavage at both the 4I (closed circle) and
IIUI (open circle) sequences (Figure 5B, lanes 5–8). As the
dsRNA was labeled only at the 50 end, it was likely that
cleavage at the IIUI sequence was underrepresented if addi-
tional cleavage occurred at the 4I site. Nevertheless, cleavage
at the IIUI site appeared to be at least 2.5-fold more efficient
than at the 4I site in the COMP dsRNA (Figure 5C). The sum
of cleavage at both sites was similar to the efficiency of cleav-
age of the 20 bp IIUI dsRNA. When the IIUI and COMP
dsRNAs labeled on the bottom strand were assayed in Xenopus
oocyte extract, both yielded several cleavage products with
equal efficiency corresponding to cleavage at the IIUI
sequence (Figure 5B, lanes 11–18 and Figure 5C). No cleav-
age occurred within the 4I site on the bottom strand of the
COMP dsRNA due to the absence of U residues (Figure 5B,
lanes 15–18). These data corroborated those described above
that suggested that the preferred site of cleavage is between an
IU and a UI pair in the sequence 50-IIUI-30/30-UUIU-50.
Hyper-editing of a long dsRNA substrate
Previously, we used a long (295 bp) dsRNA (DKP, Figure 6A)
to analyze cleavage of dsRNAs hyper-edited by ADAR2 (19).
This initial analysis revealed that cleavage occurred efficiently
at a site containing IU and UI pairs, such as that described
above. We have now used this long dsRNA substrate to carry
out a more extensive analysis of hyper-editing by ADAR2.
Figure 3. Cleavage of IIUI dsRNA occurs on both strands within a single molecule. (A) Cleavage assays were carried out using IIUI or GU hairpins (Table 1). The GU
hairpin was 50 end-labeled (*) while the IIUI hairpin was labeled either on the 50 end (*) or internally, adjacent to the tetraloop sequence (*). Time points used in this
assay were 0, 0.5, 1 and 2 h. Positions of cleavage within the 50 end-labeled or internally labeled IIUI hairpins are shown schematically in (B) and (C), respectively.
The product corresponding to cleavage on the top strand of the 50 end-labeled IIUI hairpin is indicated by an open square while cleavage on the bottom strand is
indicated by a closed square. Cleavage products corresponding to cleavage on either the top or the bottom strand of the internally labeled IIUI hairpin are indicated by
an open circle (34–37 nt), while cleavage products corresponding to cleavage on both strands are indicated by a closed circle (24 nt). Molecular weight markers
(nt) are shown at the left of the figure. (B) Cleavage of the 50 end-labeled IIUI hairpin is shown schematically. The blue line represents the 32P-labeled cleaved
product(s) following cleavage at the site(s) indicated by the arrow(s). The striped line indicates cleavage at multiple positions on the bottom strand. (C) Cleavage of
the internally labeled IIUI hairpin is shown schematically. The pink line represents the 32P-labeled cleaved product(s) following cleavage at the site(s) indicated by the
arrow(s). The striped line indicates cleavage at multiple positions on the bottom strand.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 18 5959
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Hyper-editing of DKP by ADAR1 and dADAR was sub-
sequently analyzed.
Editing preferences of ADAR2
DKP dsRNA was hyper-edited by ADAR2 such that 30–45%
of adenosine residues were converted to inosine. Edited
sequences were then amplified by RT–PCR and cloned for sub-
sequent sequencing. Owing to the choice of oligonucleotide
primers used for RT–PCR, editing within the sequences shown
in gray at the 50 and 30 ends of DKP (Figure 6A) was not
determinable. These sequences were therefore excluded
from all data analyses described. Approximately 40 unique
clones corresponding to the sense strand and 30 clones cor-
responding to the antisense strand were used to analyze editing
of DKP by ADAR2.
The efficiency of editing of each adenosine residue on either
strand was determined, where the efficiency of editing was
expressed as the percentage of the total number of clones
edited. These data are summarized in Figure 6B. Although
there were approximately twice the number of adenosines on
the sense strand as the antisense (29 and 14%, respectively),
75% of all adenosines on each strand were edited. When
hyper-editing occurs within perfect dsRNA, the efficiency of
editing of particular adenosines is influenced by the neighbor-
ing nucleotides (15,31). Neighbor preferences were therefore
calculated for editing sites on both strands of DKP (Figure 6C).
This analysis showed a 50 neighbor preference of U ¼ A > C >
G which is similar to those determined previously for ADAR2
[U  A > C ¼ G (31)] and ADAR1 [U ¼ A > C > G (15)].
Despite quantitative differences in the various studies, the
hierarchy of neighbor preferences was preserved when ana-
lyzing editing of DKP. A similar analysis revealed that
ADAR2 also appears to have a 30 neighbor preference when
editing DKP (Figure 6C, G > A ¼ C ¼ U). While this appears
to differ from that determined previously for ADAR2
[U ¼ G > C ¼ A (31)], the only real difference appears to
be the lack of preference for a U residue 30 of the edited
adenosine. This discrepancy may reflect the different methods
used to analyze hyper-editing by ADAR2. Whereas this study
involved the analysis of individual clones corresponding to
edited sequences, previous studies employed methods where
the whole population of edited dsRNAs was assessed simul-
taneously [e.g. nuclease protection, primer extension (31)].
Nevertheless, these data are largely consistent with those
Figure 4. Cleavage occurs preferentially between the IU and UI pair in the IIUI sequence. (A) Cleavage assays were carried out using IIUI and IIUI-pal dsRNA
molecules [50 end-labeled on one strand (*)]. Time points used in these assays were 0, 0.5, 1 and 2 h. (B) Data from cleavage assays as shown in (A) were quantitated
following phosphor imaging (n > 4). The amount of cleaved product is given as the percentage of the total amount of dsRNA. (C) A schematic diagram showing the
position(s) of cleavage within the IIUI and IIUI-pal dsRNAs.
5960 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 18
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
previously reported with regard to neighbor preferences for
editing by ADAR2. While editing by ADARs is not thought to
be processive per se (15), it is interesting to note that when
there are two or three adjacent adenosine residues editing
efficiency appears highest at the 30 adenosine and then
decreases at each successive adenosine in a 30 to 50 direction
[e.g. A217–219 (red bars, Figure 6B)]. This observation is
upheld for all adenosine dinucleotides and triplets in DKP,
regardless of the neighboring nucleotides (data not shown).
This preference may reflect an intrinsic property of the enzyme
important for either binding or catalysis. Consistent with pre-
vious data (19), one sequence that was edited efficiently by
ADAR2 on both strands was 50-A200AUA203-30 (Figure 6A
and B), which gave rise to the cleavage site sequence 50-IIUI-
30. Efficient editing of this sequence is in accordance with both
the 50 and 30 neighbor preferences determined previously for
ADAR2 (31).
These analyses confirmed that hyper-editing of DKP by
ADAR2 was consistent with earlier studies where relatively
short dsRNA substrates were used (15,31). DKP was therefore
additionally used as a substrate for ADAR1 and dADAR to
enable a comparison of hyper-editing.
ADAR1, ADAR2 and dADAR generate the
preferred cleavage site
As described above for ADAR2, DKP was hyper-edited by
ADAR1 or dADAR such that 30–45% of adenosine residues
were converted to inosine. RT–PCR was used to amplify the
edited sequences and the products were cloned for subsequent
sequencing. A total of 20–40 individual clones corresponding
to the antisense strand of DKP were analyzed for both ADAR1
and dADAR. Again, the editing efficiency at each position was
determined and expressed as the percentage of the total num-
ber of clones edited. These data are summarized together with
the data corresponding to editing of the antisense strand by
ADAR2 (Figure 6D). These data show that while editing
occurs at equivalent positions by all three ADAR enzymes,
Figure 5. IIUI is better than the 4I site for cleavage. (A) Sequence of IIUI and COMP dsRNAs. The two cleavage sites in the COMP dsRNA are labeled as IIUI (open
circle) and 4I (closed circle). (B) Cleavage assays were carried out using IIUI and COMP dsRNA molecules [50 end-labeled on one strand (*)]. Time points used in
these assays were 0, 0.5, 1 and 2 h. Cleavage on the top strand of the COMP dsRNA at the 4I site is indicated by a closed circle, while cleavage at the IIUI site on either
strand of the COMP dsRNA is indicated by an open circle. (C) Data from cleavage assays as shown in (A) were quantified following phosphorimaging (n > 4). The
amount of cleaved product is given as the percentage of the total amount of dsRNA. Cleavage of COMP dsRNA occurred at the IIUI sequence (COMP IIUI) or at the 4I
sequence (COMP 4I).
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 18 5961
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
the efficiency of editing at each site varies. For example,
editing of adenosine 183 occurred in 100% of the clones edited
by ADAR2, 92% of clones edited by dADAR but only 36% of
clones edited by ADAR1 (blue bars, Figure 6D). Other
examples of variation are readily seen at adenosines 44,
152 and 288 where the editing efficiency is considerably
different for each enzyme (blue bars, Figure 6D). These
data therefore show that ADAR1, ADAR2 and dADAR
have distinct but overlapping specificities. This is consistent
with previous findings using ADAR1 and ADAR2 (31). Of the
three enzymes, dADAR appears to edit numerous positions
more efficiently than either ADAR1 or ADAR2. Nevertheless,
both ADAR1 and dADAR show similar 50 neighbor prefer-
ences, where U was preferred and G was least favorable (data
not shown). This is consistent with the 50 neighbor preferences
of both ADAR1 and ADAR2 described above. As the triplet
XAA was underrepresented on this strand it was difficult to
draw conclusions about the 30 neighbor preferences of ADAR1
or dADAR. Although differential editing was seen at most
positions, it was striking that adenosine 202 was edited effi-
ciently by all three ADARs—94, 98 and 100% for ADAR1,
dADAR and ADAR2, respectively (green bars, Figure 6D).
This adenosine is contained within the sequence that consti-
tutes the cleavage site sequence when edited. When just the
deaminase domain of dADAR was used for editing assays,
adenosine 202 was still edited despite the overall efficiency of
editing being <5% (data not shown). Adenosine 202 was also
preferentially edited by both ADAR1 and ADAR2 when the
overall level of editing was relatively low (<10% adenosines
converted to inosine; data not shown). Similar observations
were made when analyzing editing on the sense strand at
adenosines 200–203 (data not shown). Strikingly, these
data together indicated that each of the ADARs tested
would efficiently generate the cleavage site sequence. The
preferred cleavage site therefore corresponds to a preferred
editing site.
Figure 6. Editing by ADAR1, ADAR2 or dADAR generates the IIUI sequence. (A) Sequence of DKP RNA (sense strand). An example of an adenosine triplet
(A217–219) is shown in bold. The cleavage site sequence (A200–203) is underlined. (B) Efficiency of editing of DKP by ADAR2. Efficiency of editing is expressed as
the percentage of clones that contain an inosine residue at each edited position. Hundred percent editing is indicated by a dotted line. Editing of the antisense and sense
strands are shown at the top and bottom of the graph, respectively. Red bars show an example of editing of an adenosine triplet (A200–203). (C) The average editing (%)
of each adenosine preceded by a particular nucleotide (AAX, CAX, GAX, UAX) was calculated to give 50 neighbor preferences. Similarly, the average editing (%) of
each adenosine followed by a particular nucleotide (XAA, XAC, XAG, XAU) was calculated to give 30 neighbor preferences. The total number of adenosines in each
context is shown in brackets. (D) Efficiency of editing ofDKP (antisense strand) by ADAR2, ADAR1 or dADAR. Efficiency of editing is expressed as the percentage
of clones that contain an inosine residue at each edited position. Hundred percent editing is indicated by a dotted line. Blue bars indicate particular adenosine residues
differentially edited by the three ADARs. The green bar indicates the adenosine residue within the cleavage site sequence.
5962 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 18
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
DISCUSSION
Previously, we have described a ribonuclease present in vari-
ous cell extracts that specifically cleaves dsRNA hyper-edited
by ADARs (19). Here, we have described experiments aimed
at further investigating the cleavage of hyper-edited dsRNAs.
Furthermore, we have analyzed hyper-editing of a long
dsRNA substrate by various ADARs and show that they all
give rise to the preferred cleavage site.
Cleavage of inosine-containing dsRNA occurs within the
sequence 50-IIUI-30/30-UUIU-50. In contrast, when GU and UG
pairs replace the IU and UI pairs, respectively, cleavage is
abolished. Two explanations have previously been proposed to
explain the difference in susceptibility to cleavage of dsRNAs
containing either IU or GU pairs. While the geometry of IU
and GU pairs is essentially identical, the additional minor
groove amine groups present on guanosine may interfere
with cleavage. Alternatively, the IU- or GU-containing
dsRNAs may adopt different structures that give rise to dif-
ferential cleavage. However, as the melting profile of IU- and
GU-containing dsRNAs were comparable, our favored
explanation for the specific cleavage was recognition of
specific distorted dsRNA structures (19). We have now
used substrates that contain a mixture of IU and GU pairs
for cleavage assays. When a single UI was replaced by a
UG pair in the substrate IIUI/UUGU, cleavage on the top
strand was reduced by at least 50%, and on the bottom
strand by at least 70% (Figure 1A). As the conformation of
the UI and UG pairs were expected to be comparable, these
data show that the single exocyclic amine group within
the cleavage site was sufficient to interfere with cleavage. It
is likely that the amine group may sterically hinder cleavage
per se. This idea is supported by the observation that cleavage
at the position adjacent to the GU pair (position ‘c’, Figure 1F)
on the bottom strand of the substrate IIUI/UUGU was
disproportionately reduced. A single UI pair in the substrate
GGUG/UUIU was inefficient for cleavage, consistent with
the observation that multiple IU pairs are required for
cleavage (12).
A single U to dU substitution within the cleavage site of the
substrate dUB caused cleavage to be abolished at the adjacent
scissile bond. In contrast, a dU residue in the substrate dUT
had no effect on cleavage of either strand. These data therefore
suggest that the OH group may be important mechanistically
for cleavage of the RNA, rather than for ribonuclease binding.
The OH group may act as the nucleophile for cleavage at the
adjacent position.
Cleavage assays using the substrate IIUI-pal revealed that
the preferred site of cleavage was between the IU and UI pair
within the wild-type sequence IIUI. Although cleavage norm-
ally occurs at the adjacent UI pairs on the bottom strand of the
IIUI dsRNA, the position of cleavage shifted to occur almost
exclusively between the IU and UI pairs within the IIUI
sequence on the bottom strand of the palindromic sequence
(Figure 4C). This preference for cleavage between an IU and
UI pair was confirmed using the COMP dsRNA where cleav-
age could take place at a sequence containing only UI pairs
(4I) or which contained both IU and UI pairs (IIUI). Cleavage
again occurred 2- to 3-fold more efficiently within the IIUI
sequence than at the 4I sequence. Although cleavage of the
IIUI-pal and COMP substrates highlighted a preferred
sequence for cleavage, it is important to note that cleavage
does occur efficiently at other sequences in the absence of
more competitive sites. For example, cleavage occurs effi-
ciently on the bottom strand of the IIUI and 4I substrates
(19) where there are adjacent UI pairs. The preference for
cleavage between an IU and UI pair in the IIUI sequence
may reflect either the optimal binding site for the protein
complex involved in cleavage, or the ideal configuration of
bases within the active site. Purification of the complete pro-
tein complex involved in cleavage will enable further studies
to discriminate between these two possibilities. The observa-
tion that both strands of an inosine-containing dsRNA are
cleaved within a single molecule (Figure 3A) makes it tempt-
ing to speculate that a ribonuclease dimer may be responsible
for cleavage. This idea is supported by the symmetrical cleav-
age of the IIUI-pal substrate. Future studies will enable ana-
lyses of protein binding and the arrangement of the
ribonuclease to be elucidated.
DKP was used as a model substrate to analyze editing pref-
erences of ADAR2, ADAR1 and dADAR. An extensive ana-
lysis using ADAR2 was initially carried out to verify that
editing of DKP was consistent with the preferences determined
previously using relatively short dsRNA substrates (31). DKP
was subsequently used as a substrate for hyper-editing by
ADAR1 and dADAR. This analysis revealed that each aden-
osine residue was edited to a different extent by each of the
three ADARs (Figure 6D). Of the three enzymes, dADAR
edited numerous positions more efficiently than either
ADAR1 or ADAR2. This suggests that dADAR may have
a broader specificity than either ADAR1 or ADAR2, which
is consistent with the idea that dADAR edits multiple RNA
targets in vivo (32). This study therefore showed that the three
ADARs have distinct yet overlapping specificities, even on a
long perfect dsRNA. Nevertheless, it is striking that one
sequence in DKP was edited efficiently by all three ADARs,
which gave rise to the preferred cleavage site sequence (50-
IIUI-30/30-UUIU-50). This sequence was also edited by both
ADAR1 and ADAR2 when the editing efficiency was low
(<10%), and by the deaminase domain of dADAR when
<5% editing occurred overall. Efficient editing of the sequence
50-AAAUA-30/30-UUUAU-50 is in accordance with the neigh-
bor preferences determined both here and previously (15,31).
However, the observation that this site appears to be a hot spot
for editing suggests that there are other factors contributing to
the choice of editing site. It will be interesting to test whether
preferential binding of ADARs to this site plays a role in its
selection (33). We have thus demonstrated a marked correla-
tion between hyper-editing and subsequent cleavage; we have
shown that the preferred cleavage site containing multiple IU
and UI pairs would be preferentially created by all three
ADARs tested.
The data described here corroborate previous data and pro-
vide insight into the determinants of an inosine-containing
dsRNA that make it susceptible to cleavage. We have
previously described the potential role of TSN in cleavage
of hyper-edited dsRNA (12). It is now of interest to identify
the complete protein complex necessary for cleavage such that
a more precise analysis of dsRNA protein interactions can be
undertaken. The insights provided in this work will aid in this
future investigation.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 18 5963
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Emma Gooding and Gillian
Ring for input into experiments investigating hyper-editing of
DKP. The authors would like to thank Chris Smith for helpful
discussions and comments on the manuscript. This work was
funded by a Wellcome Trust RCDF (A.D.J.S.) and by the MRC
(M.A.O’C.). Funding to pay the Open Access publication
charges for this article was provided by JISC.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Maquat,L.E. and Carmichael,G.G. (2001) Quality control of mRNA
function. Cell, 104, 173–176.
2. Samuel,C.E. (1998) Protein-nucleic acid interactions and cellular
responses to interferon. Methods, 15, 161–165.
3. Zhou,A., Hassel,B.A. and Silverman,R.H. (1993) Expression cloning of
2-5A-dependent RNase: a uniquely regulated mediator of interferon
action. Cell, 72, 753–765.
4. Silverman,R.H. (1997) 2-5A dependent RNase L: a regulated
endoribonuclease in the interferon system.. In D’Alessio,G. and
Riordan,J.F. (eds), Ribonucleases—Structures and Functions. Academic
Press, NY, pp. 515–551.
5. Novina,C.D. and Sharp,P.A. (2004) The RNAi revolution. Nature, 430,
161–164.
6. Denli,A.M. and Hannon,G.J. (2003) RNAi: an ever-growing puzzle.
Trends Biochem. Sci., 28, 196–201.
7. Bass,B.L. (2002) RNA editing by adenosine deaminases that act on RNA.
Annu. Rev. Biochem., 71, 817–846.
8. Scadden,A.D. and Smith,C.W. (2001) RNAi is antagonized by A!I
hyper-editing. EMBO Rep., 2, 1107–1111.
9. Knight,S.W. and Bass,B.L. (2002) The role of RNA editing by ADARs in
RNAi. Mol. Cell, 10, 809–817.
10. Tonkin,L.A. and Bass,B.L. (2003) Mutations in RNAi rescue aberrant
chemotaxis of ADAR mutants. Science, 302, 1725.
11. Yang,W., Wang,Q., Howell,K.L., Lee,J.T., Cho,D.S., Murray,J.M. and
Nishikura,K. (2005) ADAR1 RNA deaminase limits short interfering
RNA efficacy in mammalian cells. J. Biol. Chem., 280, 3946–3953.
12. Scadden,A.D. (2005) The RISC subunit Tudor-SN binds to hyper-edited
double-stranded RNA and promotes its cleavage. Nature Struct. Mol.
Biol., 12, 489–496.
13. Palladino,M.J., Keegan,L.P., O’Connell,M.A. and Reenan,R.A. (2000)
dADAR, a Drosophila double-stranded RNA-specific adenosine
deaminase is highly developmentally regulated and is itself a target for
RNA editing. RNA, 6, 1004–1018.
14. Nishikura,K., Yoo,C., Kim,U., Murray,J.M., Estes,P.A., Cash,F.E. and
Liebhaber,S.A. (1991) Substrate specificity of the dsRNA
unwinding/modifying activity. EMBO J., 10, 3523–3532.
15. Polson,A.G. and Bass,B.L. (1994) Preferential selection of adenosines for
modification by double-stranded RNA adenosine deaminase. EMBO J.,
13, 5701–5711.
16. Serra,M.J., Smolter,P.E. and Westhof,E. (2004) Pronounced instability of
tandem IU base pairs in RNA. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, 1824–1828.
17. Zhang,Z. and Carmichael,G.G. (2001) The fate of dsRNA in the nucleus: a
p54(nrb)-containing complex mediates the nuclear retention of
promiscuously A-to-I edited RNAs. Cell, 106, 465–475.
18. Wang,Q., Zhang,Z., Blackwell,K. and Carmichael,G.G. (2005) Vigilins
bind to promiscuously A-to-I-edited RNAs and are involved in the
formation of heterochromatin. Curr. Biol., 15, 384–391.
19. Scadden,A.D. and Smith,C.W. (2001) Specific cleavage of hyper-edited
dsRNAs. EMBO J., 20, 4243–4252.
20. Caudy,A.A., Ketting,R.F., Hammond,S.M., Denli,A.M., Bathoorn,A.M.,
Tops,B.B., Silva,J.M., Myers,M.M., Hannon,G.J. and Plasterk,R.H.
(2003) A micrococcal nuclease homologue in RNAi effector complexes.
Nature, 425, 411–414.
21. Levanon,E.Y., Eisenberg,E., Yelin,R., Nemzer,S., Hallegger,M.,
Shemesh,R., Fligelman,Z.Y., Shoshan,A., Pollock,S.R., Sztybel,D. et al.
(2004) Systematic identification of abundant A-to-I editing sites in the
human transcriptome. Nat. Biotechnol., 22, 1001–1005.
22. Luciano,D.J., Mirsky,H., Vendetti,N.J. and Maas,S. (2004) RNA editing
of a miRNA precursor. RNA, 10, 1174–1177.
23. Sambrook,J. and Russell,D.W. (2001) Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory
Manual. 3rd edn. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring
Harbor, NY.
24. Smith,C.W.J., Chu,T.T. and Nadal-Ginard,B. (1993) Scanning and
competition between AGs are involved in 30 splice site selection in
mammalian introns. Mol. Cell. Biol., 13, 4939–4952.
25. Moore,M.J. and Query,C.C. (1998) Uses of site-specifically modified
RNAs constructed by RNA ligation. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, pp. 75–108.
26. Korner,C.G., Wormington,M., Muckenthaler,M., Schneider,S.,Dehlin,E.
and Wahle,E. (1998) The deadenylating nuclease (DAN) is involved in
poly(A) tail removal during the meiotic maturation of Xenopus oocytes.
EMBO J., 17, 5427–5437.
27. O’Connell,M.A., Gerber,A. andKeegan,L.P. (1998)Purification of native
and recombinant double-stranded RNA-specific adenosine deaminases.
Methods, 15, 51–62.
28. Ring,G.M., O’Connell,M.A. and Keegan,L.P. (2004) Purification and
assay of recombinant ADAR proteins expressed in the yeast
Pichia pastoris or in Escherichia coli. Methods Mol. Biol., 265,
219–238.
29. Loakes,D. and Brown,D.M. (1994) 5-Nitroindole as an universal base
analogue. Nucleic Acids Res., 22, 4039–4043.
30. Strobel,S.A., Cech,T.R., Usman,N. and Beigelman,L. (1994) The
2,6-diaminopurine riboside.5-methylisocytidine wobble base pair: an
isoenergetic substitution for the study of G.U. pairs in RNA. Biochemistry,
33, 13824–13835.
31. Lehmann,K.A. and Bass,B.L. (2000) Double-stranded RNA adenosine
deaminases ADAR1 and ADAR2 have overlapping specificities.
Biochemistry, 39, 12875–12884.
32. Hoopengardner,B., Bhalla,T., Staber,C. and Reenan,R. (2003) Nervous
system targets of RNA editing identified by comparative genomics.
Science, 301, 832–836.
33. Klaue,Y., Kallman,A.M., Bonin,M., Nellen,W. and Ohman,M. (2003)
Biochemical analysis and scanning force microscopy reveal
productive and nonproductive ADAR2 binding to RNA substrates.
RNA, 9, 839–846.
5964 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 18
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
