Transcription regulation of the EcoRV
restriction– modification system
Ekaterina Semenova1, Leonid Minakhin1, Ekaterina Bogdanova3, Maxim Nagornykh3,
Anatoliy Vasilov1, Tomasz Heyduk4, Alexander Solonin3, Marina Zakharova3 and
Konstantin Severinov1,2,5,*
1Waksman Institute for Microbiology, 2Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rutgers,
the State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA, 3Institute of Biochemistry and
Physiology of Microorganisms, Russian Academy of Sciences, Puschino 142292, Russia, 4E. A. Doisy
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, St Louis University Medical School, St Louis, MO 63104, USA and
5Institute of Molecular Genetics, Moscow, Russia
Received October 17, 2005; Revised and Accepted November 16, 2005
ABSTRACT
When a plasmid containing restriction–modification
(R–M) genes enters a naı¨ve host, unmodified host
DNA can be destroyed by restriction endonuclease.
Therefore, expression of R–M genes must be regu-
lated to ensure that enough methyltransferase is
produced and that host DNA is methylated before
the endonuclease synthesis begins. In several R–M
systems, specialized Control (C) proteins coordinate
expression of the R and the M genes. C proteins
bind to DNA sequences called C-boxes and activate
expression of their cognate R genes and inhibit the
M gene expression, however the mechanisms remain
undefined. Here, we studied the regulation of gene
expression in the C protein-dependent EcoRV sys-
tem. We map the divergent EcoRV M and R gene pro-
moters and we define the site of C protein-binding
that is sufficient for activation of the EcoRV R
transcription.
INTRODUCTION
Type II restriction–modification (R–M) systems consist of
(i) a restriction endonuclease that recognizes a specific
DNA sequence and introduces double-stranded breaks at or
around the recognition site and (ii) a methyltransferase
(methylase) that recognizes the same DNA sequence and
methylates it. Methylation prevents site recognition by the
endonuclease and thus protects the target DNA from cleavage.
Type II R–M genes are often plasmid-encoded and can spread
from one bacterial host to another, crossing species boundaries
and impacting genome evolution on a global scale (1,2). While
some view R–M systems as purely selfish, i.e. concerned with
their own propagation through bacterial populations (2,3), a
plasmid containing R–M genes can confer selective advantage
by, e.g. protecting the host from bacteriophage infection,
which the phage will have to overcome by acquiring special-
ized anti-restriction genes [such as, e.g. T7 gene 0.3, (4)].
During cell entry and establishment of a plasmid containing
R–M genes, unmodified host DNA can be attacked by the
endonuclease, causing host cell death. It is therefore intuitively
clear that expression of R–M genes should be regulated to
ensure that enough methylase is produced to methylate host
DNA before endonuclease is synthesized. Since many R–M
genes are found clustered on broad-range mobile genetic
elements, coordinated expression of these genes should
occur in different bacteria, i.e. should be independent of
host regulators.
Many R–M systems, such as BamHI (5), BglII (6), Eco72I
(7), EcoRV (8), Esp1396I (9), PvuII (10) and SmaI (11) rely on
specialized Control (C) proteins (12) for coordinated expres-
sion. Genes coding for C proteins are usually located upstream
of, and partially overlap with the endonuclease gene (13). C
proteins bind to palindromic DNA sequences called C-boxes
(13) and activate expression of their cognate endonuclease
genes as well as their own expression. As a consequence, C
protein overproduction interferes with establishment of plas-
mids carrying the corresponding R–M genes (3) presumably
by causing premature activation of endonuclease expression.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed at Waksman Institute for Microbiology, 190 Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA. Tel:+1 732 445 6095;
Fax: +1 732 445 5735; Email: severik@waksman.rutgers.edu
Correspondence may also be addressed to Marina Zakharova. Tel: +7 096 773 2598; Fax: +7 095 956 3370; Email: zemskovam@mail.ru
The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors
 The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
6942–6951 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 21
doi:10.1093/nar/gki998
 Published online December 6, 2005
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 3, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Overproduction of some C proteins was also shown to inhibit
methylase gene expression in vivo (3,10).
All C proteins are related through common ancestry and
several R–M systems can be regulated by heterologous C
proteins, indicating that the regulation mechanism is evolu-
tionarily conserved. C proteins are also related to phage
helix–turn–helix (HTH) DNA-binding transcription factors,
including the well-studied l repressor. The structure of one
C protein, from the AhdI R–M system, was recently solved
(14). As expected from the results of sequence analysis, the
structure of the C.AhdI dimer is similar to the l repressor
structure. However, in contrast to the well-studied l switch,
nothing is known about the mechanism(s) of C proteins action,
their mode of interaction with RNAP, or with the C-boxes. In
this work, we characterized the effects of C.EcoRV, a C pro-
tein encoded by the EcoRV R–M system, on transcription from
the EcoRV promoters.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Bacterial strains and media
Escherichia coli HB101 (ATCC33694) was used as a host to
study ecoRV genes expression; E.coli XL1-Blue (Stratagene,
USA) was used as a cloning host; E. coli M15[pREP4]
(Qiagen, USA) was used to express recombinant C.EcoRV
protein, E. coli Z85 (23) was used for phage restriction experi-
ments. Cells were grown at 37C in standard Luria–Bertani
medium (broth) (LB) media with appropriate antibiotics.
Plasmids and proteins
Plasmid pEF42 was constructed by cloning a PvuII fragment
containing the entire set of ecoRV genes from a natural plas-
mid pLG13 (15) in a cloning vector pHSG415. Plasmid
pEF42DC and pEF42DCR were constructed by site-specific
PCR mutagenesis of pEF42. Plasmid pEcoRVC was con-
structed by cloning the entire C.EcoRV reading frame with
the upstream 70 bp EcoRV sequence into the pFD51 vector.
pEcoRVCS and pEcoRVCL were constructed from pEcoRVC
by site-directed mutagenesis. Plasmids pM and pR were gen-
erated by inserting, in opposite orientations, the 170 bp ecoRV
spacer with truncated EcoRVC gene into the pFD51 vector
plasmid. Details of molecular cloning are available from
the authors upon request. Mutations of the C-boxes in pR
were made by QuikChange Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit
(Stratagene) according to manufacturer’s protocol.
Purification of recombinant C.EcoRV was described
previously (8).
Primer extension and 50 RACE
For primer extension experiments, E.coli HB101 cells harbor-
ing corresponding plasmid(s) were harvested in the exponen-
tial phase of growth at OD600 ¼ 0.4, and total RNA was
extracted using RNeasy Mini Kit (QIAGEN) according to
manufacturer’s instructions including the DNase I digestion
step. RNA concentrations and purity were tested by measure-
ments of absorbance at 260/280 nm and by electrophoresis in
1% formaldehyde-agarose gel. For primer extension reaction,
20 mg of total RNA were reverse-transcribed with 100 U of
SuperScript III enzyme from First-Strand Synthesis kit for
RT–PCR (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s proto-
col in the presence of 1 pmol [g-32P] end-labeled primer. The
reactions were treated with RNase H, precipitated with ethanol
and dissolved in formamide loading buffer. As a marker for
each primer extension reaction, sequencing reaction (with fmol
DNA Cycle Sequencing kit from Promega) was performed on
PCR fragment of the corresponding plasmid using the same
end-labeled primer as was used for the primer extension. The
reaction products were resolved on a 7% sequencing gel and
revealed using PhosphorImager.
50 RACE was performed exactly as described in Semenova
et al. (16) and Minakhin et al. (17). In this method, one-half of
the RNA sample is treated with tobacco acid pyrophosphatase
(TAP), an enzyme that converts 50 triphosphates of RNA into
monophosphates that can be ligated to exogenously added
RNA oligonucleotide by RNA ligase. Another one-half of
the RNA sample is left untreated and is used as a control.
After the ligation, RT and PCR amplification are used to
identify DNA fragments whose abundance increases after
TAP treatment (such fragments must be generated from
RNA molecules that contained 50 triphosphates, and must
therefore correspond to transcription initiation start points).
Gel retardation assay
The reactions contained, in 10 ml of reaction buffer [40 mM
Tris–HCl (pH 8.0), 90 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2,125 mg/ml
BSA, 5 mM DTT and 10% glycerol], 0–1.6 mM of C.EcoRV
and 2 nM of [g-32P] labeled DNA fragment containing wild-
type or mutant C boxes. Reactions were incubated for 10 min
at 37C, combined with 2 ml of loading buffer (50% glycerol,
0.05% bromophenol blue and 0.1 mg/ml heparin) and imme-
diately loaded on to an 8% native polyacrylamide gel. After
electrophoresis at 400 V for 2 h at room temperature, the gels
were visualized using PhosphorImager.
RESULTS
Genetic organization of the EcoRV control region
The genetic organization of the EcoRV control region is
shown on Figure 1. The ecoRVR and ecoRVM genes are
divergently transcribed; their initiating codons are separated
by a 306 bp spacer. The spacer contains the ecoRVC gene,
which is transcribed in the same direction as ecoRVR and
overlaps with it by 17 bp. The ecoRVC and ecoRVR are
likely co-transcribed from an upstream promoter, though the
transcription start site has not been mapped. Two translational
products of the ecoRVC gene are possible. The ATG for the
longer 99 aminoacid product is located 23 bp upstream of the
ecoRVM initiating ATG; the ATG for the shorter 75 amino
acid product is 72 bp further upstream. Both proteins were
overexpressed and both were reported to bind to ecoRV C-box
in vitro (8).
The product of the shorter ecoRVC open reading frame
(ORF) is sufficient for stable maintenance and
expression of EcoRV R–M genes in vivo
Plasmid pEF42 contains the entire EcoRV R–M system. E.coli
cells carrying pEF42 restrict the growth of phage l (Figure 2),
indicating that plasmid-borne ecoRV genes are functional and
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 21 6943
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 3, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
that the activities of the ecoRV promoters in cells harboring
pEF42 represent the situation during stable maintenance of the
ecoRVR–M system, when both the methyltransferase and the
restriction endonuclease genes are expressed. pEF42DC is a
derivative of pEF42 in which the reading frame of the shorter
ecoRVC ORF is disrupted by a single-bp deletion. Cells
carrying pEF42DC were as ineffective in restricting l growth
as cells harboring pEF42DCR, a plasmid that lacks both the
ecoRVC and ecoRVR genes (Figure 2). The results there-
fore show that no R.EcoRV synthesis occurs in the absence of
C.EcoRV.
Plasmid pEcoRVC contains the longer ecoRVC ORF and
70 bp of the upstream EcoRV sequence. pEcoRVC is com-
patible with pEF42 and its derivatives. To determine which of
the two possible C.EcoRV proteins is sufficient for restriction
of l growth, E.coli cells harboring pEF42DC were transformed
with two pEcoRVC derivatives. The first derivative,
pEcoRVCS, harbored a frame-shift mutation identical to
that engineered in pEF42DC (affects both the shorter and
the longer ecoRVC ORF); the second derivative,
pEcoRVCL, harbored a 1 bp deletion that only affected the
longer ORF. As can be seen from Figure 2, cells harboring the
second derivative efficiently restricted l growth, while cells
harboring the first one did not, as expected. Therefore, we
conclude that the shorter C.EcoRV is sufficient for production
of enough R.EcoRV to restrict l growth. Based on the effi-
ciency of restriction by cells harboring pEcoRVCS and
pEF42DC (compared to that observed with cells harboring
pEF42 only), the longer C.EcoRV, if it is produced, does
not significantly contribute to R.EcoRV synthesis.
Determination of the EcoRV transcription start sites
The key to understanding transcription regulation in the
EcoRV system is to relate the site of C.EcoRV-binding, the
C-box, with transcription initiation start points and rates of
utilization of divergent promoters PecoRVCR and
PecoRVM in the presence and in the absence of
C.EcoRV. Total RNA was isolated from exponentially grow-
ing E.coli HB101 cells harboring pEF42 or pEF42DC and
primer extension reactions were performed to identify diver-
gent EcoRV transcripts initiated close to the C-box. As can be
seen from Figure 3, left panel, a single primer extension prod-
uct reflecting leftward (PecoRVM) transcription from pEF42
or pEF42DC was detected. The primer extension product band
obtained with RNA prepared from cells harboring pEF42 had a
diffuse appearance on the denaturing gel, suggesting the pres-
ence of several closely spaced 50 ends. The primer extension
band obtained with RNA from cells harboring pEF42DC was
less diffuse. The amounts of primer extension product did not
ecoRV·RecoRV·M ecoRV·C
ctttatctttcataataagaaccatttgtaaaaaatATGccaaagaaacccattttgggttatcccattttggggtgcATAATATAtaaaaaaaATgATggtaaatctATGtctg
gaaatagaaaGTAttattcttggtaaacattttttatacggtttctttgggtaaaacccaatagggtaaaaccccacgtattATATattttttttactaccatttagatacagac
taagagaaatcataaaaaaaaatagagtaatttgtaaactctctcaaggagaggttgccaaggcacttggaaagccacaatcctacatatctaaaatagaacaaggagaaagac
attctctttagtatttttttttatctcattaaacatttgagagagttcctctccaacggttccgtgaacctttcggtgttaggatgtatagattttatcttgttcctctttctg
gcgttgacgttgacgaatttatagccatctgttttgcaataggaattgacccaataaatacacttaaagaagtaataatggaaaaaaaacATGagtcttcgttcTGAtttaattaatgca
cgcaactgcaactgcttaaatatcggtagacaaaacgttatccttaactgggttatttatgtgaatttcttcattattaccttttttttgtactcagaagcaagactaaattaattacgt
-10 
PecoRV·M
EcoRV C-box
M.EcoRV, Met1 
Met1 
C.EcoRV_short 
Met1
C.EcoRV_long  
Met1, 
R.EcoRV 
term, 
C.EcoRV 
EcoRV
C-box
C-box1       C-box2     
-10
 PecoRV·CR
Figure 1. The EcoRV regulatory region. The ecoRV genes are schematically shown at the top (the shorter ecoRVC ORF is shown in solid brown color. The sequence
of the intergenic region containing the entire sequence of ecoRVC and the initial sequences of the ecoRV R–M genes is expanded at the bottom. The beginnings of
ecoRV R–M ORFs are indicated by colors matching those used at the top of the figure. The PecoRVM and PecoRVCR start sites are shown by leftward and
rightward arrows, respectively, the potential 10 promotor elements are capitilized and underlined. The EcoRV C-box is shown in red; the two sets of inverted
repeats in the C-box are indicated by arrows and labeled C-box1 and C-box2. The two potential ATG codons for ecoRVC product and its termination codon are
capitalized and color-coded.
λ dilution
-2 -4 -6 -8
pEF42
pEF42∆C
pEF42∆CR
pEF42∆C
pEcoRVCS
pEF42∆C
pEcoRVCL
Figure 2. The shorter ecoRVC ORF is sufficient for EcoRV R–M system
function. The horizontal lines show the overnight 37C growth of E.coli Z85
strain harboring the indicated plasmids on LB plates. Cells were spotted with
indicated dilutions of l-vir phage lysate.
6944 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 21
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 3, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
appear to be significantly different in cells harboring pEF42 or
pEF42DC, suggesting that C.EcoRV does not have a strong
effect on steady-state levels of PecoRVM transcripts.
The 50 end of primer extension products were localized to
the run of 4 Gs at the rightmost edge of the C-box (for the
orientation presented in Figure 1). The 50 end of primer exten-
sion products obtained with RNA from cells harboring
pEF42DC were 2 nt downstream of 50 end of primer extension
products obtained with RNA from cells harboring pEF42. The
primer extension end points are preceded by two overlapping
sequences, TATtAT and TATAtT, which are similar to the
s70-10 promoter element consensus sequence TATAAT, 17–
19 bases further upstream, there is a TaGAtt sequence similar
to the 35 promoter element consensus sequence TTGACA.
As an alternative way to determine PecoRVM transcrip-
tion start site(s), 50 RACE was performed. A single PCR frag-
ment was observed, and its abundance increased upon the
treatment of the RNA preparation with TAP, indicating that
the PCR fragment was due to amplification of transcripts
initiated by RNAP rather than due to processed transcripts’
amplification (see Materials and Methods for details). The
PCR fragment obtained with RNA prepared from cells
harboring pEF42 was cloned and the EcoRV insert sequence
was determined in 27 recombinant plasmids. The results are
summarized in Table 1 and overall confirm the results of
primer extension mapping. Interestingly, the most frequent
clone contained 5 Gs at the end of the EcoRV sequence
(9 plasmids), while five clones contained 4 Gs. Since
EcoRV DNA only contains 4 Gs in the area of the
PecoRVM start site, at least one C residue present at the
50 end of the majority of PecoRVM transcripts is not
template-encoded. This must be due to transcript slippage
at the run of G residues in the template strand of the initial
transcribed sequence of PecoRVM. Plasmids containing
EcoRV inserts with 2 and 1 Gs at the end of the EcoRV
sequence were also found (1 each). Since transcript slippage
requires at least three identical residues in the DNA template
(18) the most likely transcription initiation start point for
most PecoRVM is at the two rightmost Gs of the C-box.
In addition to clones corresponding to transcription initiation
events at the stretch of Gs, rare clones containing EcoRV
inserts that began downstream and upstream of this region
were also detected (Table 1).
50 RACE was also performed with RNA purified from cells
harboring pEF42DC and 23 plasmids containing EcoRV
inserts were sequenced (Table 1). In this case, no slippage
products at the stretch of Gs was observed and most clones
corresponded to transcripts containing 1,2 or 3 Gs at their
50 end (5 plasmids each). No plasmids corresponding to
upstream transcription initiation/processing events were pre-
sent, while plasmids with downstream boundaries were found
at the same frequency as in the samples prepared from cells
harboring pEF42 (Table 1).
The locations of rightward (PecoRVCR) transcripts start
points were also determined. As can be seen, primer extension
products were only observed when functional C.EcoRV was
present (Figure 3, right panel). The major group of primer
extension products mapped to an AT-rich area upstream of
an uninterrupted run of 8 As in the EcoRV DNA. Additional
minor primer extension products mapped in the beginning of
the run of As and also downstream of it. The most downstream
product’s 50 end was located only 2 nt upstream of the initi-
ating ATG of the shorter ecoRVC ORF. It should be noted
that no primer extension products corresponding to RNA 50
end that originated from within the shorter ecoRVC ORF
were detected (data not shown), indicating that the ecoRVC
and ecoRVR ORFs are indeed co-transcribed.
50 RACE was performed to identify the PecoRVCR tran-
scripts initiation points. One PCR fragment was observed,
however its abundance did not change upon TAP treatment.
The PCR fragments obtained with and without TAP treatment
were treated as described above, and the EcoRV sequence was
determined in 36 individual recombinant plasmids (18 each
from samples with and without TAP treatment). Analysis of
plasmid sequences showed no differences in distribution of
different clones in samples with or without TAP treatment
(data not shown). Therefore the combined (with and without
TAP) results are presented in Table 2. As can be seen, in
addition to transcripts containing 1, 2, 3, 7 and 8 As and
corresponding to transcription initiation within the run of
8 As in the EcoRV DNA, transcripts containing 9, 10, 11,
12 and 16 As were present (Table 2). Thus, as is the case
with the PecoRVM transcripts, the majority of PecoRVCR
transcripts are the products of transcript slippage. It should be
noted that though the results of 50 RACE do not identify
Figure 3. Primer extension analysis of ecoRV promoters. RNA was purified
from the E.coli HB101 cells harboring the indicated plasmids and primer
extension reactions were performed to reveal 50 end of divergent RNAs
transcribing from the EcoRV regulatory region. The sequencing reactions’
marker lanes were prepared with the EcoRV DNA and primers used for primer
extension.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 21 6945
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 3, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
PecoRVCR initiation point (due to the lack of response to
TAP treatment), the presence of long A runs at PecoRVCR 50
end clearly indicates that PecoRVCR transcription initiates
within the run of 8 As. The products of slippage may account
for some of the longer primer extension products seen in
Figure 3. Because of the large scatter in the positions of
50 end of the PecoRVCR transcripts initiated in the run of
As, it is difficult to unambiguously determine the positions
of promoter elements.
To understand the EcoRV system establishment and main-
tenance in a naı¨ve host, the activities of PecoRVCR and
PecoRVM need to be compared. To this end, two plasmids,
pR and pM, in which the EcoRV spacer with truncated
ecoRVC is cloned in opposite orientations in a vector
plasmid, were constructed. Since the same oligonucleotide
primers can be used to detect EcoRV transcripts from pM
and pR, and since the same amounts of plasmid DNA are
present in pM and pR-containing cells (as judged by visual
inspection of ethidium bromide-stained agarose gels), pairwise
comparisons of steady-state levels of transcripts from
PecoRVCR and PecoRVM in the presence or in the absence
of C.EcoRV provided by compatible pEF42 becomes possible.
Total RNA was isolated from exponentially growing E.coli
HB101 cells harboring either pR or pM alone, or pR (or pM)
and pEF42 (or pEF42DC), and primer extension reactions
were performed (Figure 4). Primer extension products’
50 end obtained with pR and pM-specific primers matched
those obtained using the pEF42 primers (Figure 3). Impor-
tantly, comparisons of the amounts of primer extension
products in the absence or in the presence of pEF42 showed
that in the presence of C.EcoRV, the steady-state levels of
PecoRVCR and PecoRVM transcripts are comparable.
The ecoRVR promoter-proximal C-box half-site does
not contribute to ecoRVC regulation
The C.EcoRV protein is homologous to l repressor, a proto-
typical molecular switch that cooperatively interacts with sev-
eral closely spaced DNA-binding sites (operators). Different
patterns of transcription from divergent l promoters that are
regulated by the repressor binding and whose activities deter-
mine the lysis-lysogeny decision are achieved depending on
the occupancy of repressor binding sites (19). Inspection of
the C-box sequence reveals that it contains two pairs of
inverted repeats (Figure 5A). Assuming that only one pair
of inverted repeats is recognized by the C.EcoRV protein
Table 1. Determination of the PecoRVM transcript start points by 50 RACE
No. of
clones
pEF42
1 TAATACGTGGGGTTTTACCCTATTGGGTTTTACCCAAAGAAACCGTATAAAAAATGTTTACCAAGAATAATACTTTCTATTTCAAAAACAAGGCG
1 AATACGTGGGGTTTTACCCTATTGGGTTTTACCCAAAGAAACCGTATAAAAAATGTTTACCAAGAATAATACTTTCTATTTCAAAAACAAGGCG
9 GGGGGTTTTACCCTATTGGGTTTTACCCAAAGAAACCGTATAAAAAATGTTTACCAAGAATAATACTTTCTATTTCAAAAACAAGGCG
5 GGGGTTTTACCCTATTGGGTTTTACCCAAAGAAACCGTATAAAAAATGTTTACCAAGAATAATACTTTCTATTTCAAAAACAAGGCG
1 GGTTTTACCCTATTGGGTTTTACCCAAAGAAACCGTATAAAAAATGTTTACCAAGAATAATACTTTCTATTTCAAAAACAAGGCG
1 GTTTTACCCTATTGGGTTTTACCCAAAGAAACCGTATAAAAAATGTTTACCAAGAATAATACTTTCTATTTCAAAAACAAGGC
1 TTTTACCCTATTGGGTTTTACCCAAAGAAACCGTATAAAAAATGTTTACCAAGAATAATACTTTCTATTTCAAAAACAAGGC
1 TACCCTATTGGGTTTTACCCAAAGAAACCGTATAAAAAATGTTTACCAAGAATAATACTTTCTATTTCAAAAACAAGGC
2 AAAAAATGTTTACCAAGAATAATACTTTCTATTTCAAAAACAAGGC
1 AAAAATGTTTACCAAGAATAATACTTTCTATTTCAAAAACAAGGC
1 AAAATGTTTACCAAGAATAATACTTTCTATTTCAAAAACAAGGC
1 AAAAACAAGGC
2 AACAAGGC
pEF42DC
2 GGGGTTTTACCCTATTGGGTTTTACCCAAAGAAACCGTATAAAAAATGTTTACCAAGAATAATACTTTCTATTTCAAAAACAAGGCG
5 GGGTTTTACCCTATTGGGTTTTACCCAAAGAAACCGTATAAAAAATGTTTACCAAGAATAATACTTTCTATTTCAAAAACAAGGCG
5 GGTTTTACCCTATTGGGTTTTACCCAAAGAAACCGTATAAAAAATGTTTACCAAGAATAATACTTTCTATTTCAAAAACAAGGCG
5 GTTTTACCCTATTGGGTTTTACCCAAAGAAACCGTATAAAAAATGTTTACCAAGAATAATACTTTCTATTTCAAAAACAAGGCG
1 TTTTTTACCCTATTGGGTTTTACCCAAAGAAACCGTATAAAAAATGTTTACCAAGAATAATACTTTCTATTTCAAAAACAAGGCG
2 AAAAAATGTTTACCAAGAATAATACTTTCTATTTCAAAAACAAGGCG
1 AAAAATGTTTACCAAGAATAATACTTTCTATTTCAAAAACAAGGC
1 AAAATGTTTACCAAGAATAATACTTTCTATTTCAAAAACAAGGC
1 AAAAACAAGGC
The EcoRV sequences of plasmids obtained after cloning the 50 RACE product obtained after TAP treatment of RNA prepared from cells harboring pEF42 or
pEF42DC are shown. Residues not encoded by the EcoRV DNA are indicated in boldface.
Table 2. Determination of the PecoRVCR transcript start points by 50 RACE
No. of clones
1 AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAATGATGGTAAA
3 AAAAAAAAAAAATGATGGTAAA
4 AAAAAAAAAAATGATGGTAAA
3 AAAAAAAAAATGATGGTAAA
7 AAAAAAAAATGATGGTAAA
6 AAAAAAAATGATGGTAAA
1 AAAAAAATGATGGTAAA
2 AAATGATGGTAAA
1 AATGATGGTAAA
3 ATGATGGTAAA
The EcoRV sequences of plasmids obtained after cloning the 50 RACE
product obtained with and without TAP treatment of RNA prepared from
cells harboring pEF42 are shown. Residues not encoded by the EcoRV DNA
are indicated in boldface.
6946 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 21
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 3, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
 A C G T A C G T A C G T A C G T
Plasmids
RLPrimer
pM pM
+
pE
F4
2
pM
+
pE
F4
2∆
C
pM pM
+
pE
F4
2
pM
+
pE
F4
2∆
C
pR pR
+
pE
F4
2
pR
+
pE
F4
2∆
C
pR pR
+
pE
F4
2
pR
+
pE
F4
2∆
C
Promoter      PecoRV·CR             PecoRV·M                   PecoRV·CR                PecoRV·M
Figure 4. Steady-state levels of PecoRVCR and PecoRVM transcripts in the presence or in the absence of C.EcoRV. RNA was purified from the E.coli HB101 cells
harboring the indicated plasmids and primer extension reactions were performed to reveal 50 end of divergent RNAs arising from the EcoRV regulatory region. The
R primer allows the detection of rightward transcripts from pR or pM (PecoRVCR or PecoRVM transcripts, correspondingly). The L primer allows the detection
of leftward transcripts from pR or pM (PecoRVM or PecoRVCR transcripts, correspondingly). The sequencing reactions’ marker lanes were prepared using the
pM or pR plasmids and primers used for primer extension.
C1mutC2mutC1wtC2mutC1mutC2wtC1wtC2wtC-box A C G T
pE
F4
2
pE
F4
2∆
C
_ pE
F4
2
pE
F4
2∆
C
_
pE
F4
2
pE
F4
2∆
C
_ pE
F4
2
pE
F4
2∆
C
_
PecoRV·CR
PecoRV·M
cccattttgggttatcccattttggg
cGGattttgggttatcccattttggg
cccattttgggttatcccattttCCg
cGGattttgggttatcccattttCCg
EcoRV C-box
C-box1                   C-box2
C1wtC2wt
C1mutC2wt
C1wtC2mut
C1mutC2mut
A
B
Figure 5. Effect of the EcoRV C-box mutations on steady-state levels of ecoRV promoters’ transcripts. (A) Sequences of wild-type and mutant C-boxes used in
experiments are shown. Two sets of inverted repeats above the alignment are indicated by arrows and labeled C-box1 and C-box2. (B) RNA was purified from the
E.coli HB101 cells harboring the pR plasmid with or without mutations in the EcoRV C-box and compatible plasmids pEF42 (the source of C.EcoRV) or pEF42DC
(no functional C.EcoRV produced) and primer extension reactions were performed to determine the amounts of PecoRVCR and PecoRVM transcripts. The
sequencing reactions’ marker lanes were prepared using the pR plasmid and primers used for primer extension.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 21 6947
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 3, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
dimer, a question arises about the role of each of the two C-box
operators in regulation of EcoRV transcription. To answer this
question, pR derivatives with substitutions in the first, second
or both C-box operators were created and tested in vivo in the
presence or in the absence of C.EcoRV provided by pEF42. In
each C-box operator, two outermost G:C base pairs were sub-
stituted by the C:G base pairs (Figure 5A). The mutations
break the dyad-axis symmetry of C-box operators and should
prevent C.EcoRV-binding (this expectation is validated in
experiment shown in Figure 6, see below). As can be seen
from Figure 5B, substitution in the second, PecoRVCR-
proximal operator (C-box2) had no deleterious effect on
C.EcoRV-dependent activation of the ecoRVCR promoter
transcription. In fact, the fold activation of transcription
from PecoRVCR (compared to basal level) was stronger
when C-box2 was mutated. In contrast, mutation of the
first, PecoRVCR-distal operator (C-box1) abolished the
activation of PecoRVCR and was indistinguishable from
the double mutation changing both operators. We therefore
conclude that the binding of the C.EcoRV protein to
PecoRVCR-distal C-box1 is required (and sufficient) for
activation of ecoRVR expression.
Both the C-box2 mutation and the double mutation stimu-
lated transcription from PecoRVM and also shifted the
transcription initiation start point 2 nt downstream. Since
the C-box2 mutation alters the initial transcribed sequence
of PecoRVM, the reasons for observed effects may be com-
plex. One attractive possibility is that changing the C-box2
sequence stimulates transcription by interfering with transcript
slippage. Mutation in C-box1 had little effect on the overall
level of transcription from PecoRVM but inhibited
C.EcoRV-dependent transcript slippage. It is therefore tempt-
ing to speculate that slippage results from a combination of
appropriate initial transcribed sequence (a run of 4 Gs) and
from a clash between RNAP that escapes the promoter and
C.EcoRV bound at C-box1.
C.EcoRV binds more tightly to the
PecoRVCR-distal C-box1
EcoRV fragments containing wild-type or mutant C-boxes
were used in gel mobility shift assays with purified recombi-
nant C.EcoRV (the product of the shorter ORF). The results
are presented in Figure 6. As can be seen, the addition of
increasing concentrations of C.EcoRV shifted the wild-type
EcoRV DNA fragment. Two distinct shifted bands were
apparent. One band with intermediate mobility was present
at low concentrations of C.EcoRV. At higher concentrations of
C.EcoRV, an additional band of lower mobility appeared. The
results are consistent with a view that at high concentrations,
two C.EcoRV dimers simultaneously interact with the C-box
DNA, producing a complex with the lowest electrophoretic
mobility. This interpretation is reinforced by results obtained
with DNA fragments harboring mutations in C-box1 or
C-box2, where only the intermediate mobility band was pre-
sent. No shifted bands were observed with the DNA fragment
harboring mutations in both C-box operators.
The results of the binding experiments presented in Figure 6
were quantified and subjected to nonlinear regression analysis
to extract the values of equilibrium dissociation constants and
to assess potential cooperativity of C.EcoRV interactions
with the two C-box operators. The results of such analysis
for DNA fragments containing a single functional C-box,
i.e. harboring mutations either in C-box1 or C-box2, are pre-
sented in Figure 7A and B, respectively. Experimental data
were fitted to a simple binding model involving a formation
of a 1:1 complex between C.EcoRV dimer and each C-box
operator. The data fitted well to this simplest model, therefore
more complex models (e.g. involving monomer–dimer
C.EcoRV association linked to DNA-binding) were not con-
sidered. Recovered equilibrium dissociation constants were
502 ± 170 nM (binding to a C-box2 only) and 115 ± 17 nM
(binding to a C-box1 only). Figure 7C illustrates analysis of
binding to the wild-type EcoRV fragment. In this case,
C.EcoRV can interact with each C-box operator either in
the presence or in the absence of the protein bound to the
other operator. The ratio of equilibrium dissociation constants
for these two binding scenarios provides information regard-
ing potential cooperativity of binding to the two operators.
When the protein binds to the two sites independently, this
ratio is expected to be 1. Deviations from the ratio of 1 are
indicative of either positive (ratio <1) or negative cooperativ-
ity (ratio >1). Fitting of the data for the wild-type EcoRV DNA
fragment to a model involving formation of 1:1 C.EcoRV
dimer–DNA complexes (protein bound either to C-box1 or
C-box2) and 2:1 C.EcoRV dimer–DNA complexes (protein
bound to both C-box1 or C-box2) resulted in a ratio value of
0.8 ± 0.3, i.e. was not significantly different from 1. Based on
these quantitative analyses, we conclude that C.EcoRV binds
to the two C-boxes independently without significant coop-
erativity and with 5-fold higher affinity to C-box1 compared
to C-box2.
DISCUSSION
For host cell survival, it is essential that sufficient amounts of
the M.EcoRV enzyme are produced before R.EcoRV synthesis
commences. Our results indicate that during the establishment
of a plasmid harboring the EcoRV genes in a naı¨ve host
(a situation mimicked in cells harboring pM or pR plasmids
in the absence of pEF42) the steady-state amount of
PecoRVCR transcripts is low, while PecoRVM levels are
high, which should result in preferential synthesis of
M.EcoRV and modification of host DNA.
Figure 6. Interaction of C.EcoRV protein with mutant EcoRV C-box DNA.
DNA fragments containing mutations in EcoRV C-box were combined with
increasing amounts of C.EcoRV (the product of the shorter ecoRVC ORF)
and reaction products were resolved by native PAGE and revealed by
autoradiography.
6948 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 21
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 3, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Weak transcription from the ecoRVCR promoter leads to
gradual accumulation of the C.EcoRV protein. C.EcoRV binds
strongly to PecoRVCR-distal C-box1 leading to very strong
activation of the ecoRVCR promoter and further increase in
C.EcoRV (and R.EcoRV) synthesis. The runaway synthesis of
C.EcoRV (and R.EcoRV) is regulated by C.EcoRV-binding to
low-affinity C-box2, which attenuates activated transcription
from PecoRVCR. The resulting level of transcription from
PecoRVCR becomes comparable to transcription from
PecoRVM. The negative effect of C.EcoRV-binding on over-
all levels of the ecoRVM promoter transcription appears to be
minimal, at least at our conditions.
The principles of regulation that emerge from our analysis
of the EcoRV system should be generally applicable to other
R–M systems that rely on C proteins for expression of their
genes. These principles are significantly different from those
operating in other R–M systems, where transcription from the
initially strong methyltransferase promoter is strongly down-
regulated either by direct binding of methyltransferase to
promoter region (20–22) or by covalent modification (methy-
lation) of promoter DNA (23) which indirectly leads to activa-
tion of restriction endonuclease promoter.
Transcript slippage occurs during transcription initiation
on both PecoRVM and PecoRVCR and is a consequence
of repetitive DNA sequences at transcription initiation start
points of both promoters. While C.EcoRV changes the level of
transcript slippage on PecoRVM, the overall level of tran-
scription from this promoter is the same in the absence or in the
presence of the C protein, suggesting that the slippage does not
significantly contribute to regulation of EcoRV genes’ expres-
sion at our conditions. It should be noted, however, that we can
not exclude that PecoRVM transcripts initiated in the pres-
ence of and in the absence of C.EcoRV are translated with
different efficiency, i.e. the levels of functional PecoRVM
transcripts may change in a C.EcoRV-dependent manner.
Moreover, slippage may conceivably interfere with productive
initiation from both ecoRV promoters at conditions that alter
the intracellular concentrations of CTP (for PecoRVM) or
ATP (for PecoRVCR). Regulatory transcript slippage has
been described for several promoters expressing genes
whose products are involved in nucleotide biosynthesis
[see, e.g. Cheng et al. (18)]; the significance, if any, of
such a regulation for EcoRV is not known. We note that
the appearance of primer extension product bands from the
PpvuIIR (10) a promoter that is also a subject of activation by a
C protein, is consistent with multiple 50 end of RNA generated
by transcript cleavage. Knowle et al. (24) had argued that
multiple 50 end of PvuII transcripts may be an artifact of primer
extension by reverse transcriptase. We think this is unlikely in
our case since (i) our protocol results in the appearance of
different non-template-encoded nucleotides for PecoRVCR
and pEcoRVM transcripts and (ii) no non-template-encoded
residues were detected when the same protocol was used to
identify transcription initiation start points from multiple
phage promoters (16,17). Thus, transcript slippage may be a
general phenomenon for C protein-regulated promoters.
The PecoRVCR-distal C-box1 is centered 33 bp
upstream of the run of 8 As where most of the ecoRVCR
transcription originates. Due to transcript slippage, it is
impossible to unambiguously determine the PecoRVCR tran-
scription start site. However, since transcripts containing as
little as 1–3 As on their 50 end can be detected, it seems
plausible that transcription from PecoRVCR initiates at the
end of the A run. This translates into a 40 bp distance
between C-box1 center and the PecoRVCR transcription
Figure 7. Quantitative analysis of C.EcoRV interaction with ecoRV DNA.
(A) Binding of C.EcoRV to DNA harboring mutation in C-box1, (B) binding
of C.EcoRVC to DNA harboring mutation in C-box2, (C) binding of C.EcoRV
to DNA containing wt C-box1 and wt C-box2. Data shown correspond to the
average of 2–3 independent gel mobility shift experiments. Fractions of free
DNA and protein–DNA complexes at each protein concentration were calcu-
lated as a ratio of band intensity of the band of interest to the sum of intensities of
all bands in the lane. Solid lines represent the best nonlinear regression fit of
experimental data to an appropriate binding model, as described in the text.
Nonlinear regression was performed using SCIENTIST (Micromath Scientific
Software, Salt Lake City, UT).
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 21 6949
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 3, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
initiation start site. A similar distance between the site of
activator binding and transcription initiation start point is
found in bacterial promoters activated by protein–protein con-
tacts with s70 region 4 or a subunit N-terminal domain
(25,26). In vitro experiments with appropriate RNAP mutants
will be necessary to establish the contact that is used for
transcription activation by C.EcoRV and other C proteins.
The distance between the proximal C-box2 and the
PecoRVCR transcription start site is 24 bp which is too
short for transcription activation through most common
mechanisms found in bacteria. However, a protein bound at
such a distance from the transcription initiation site is likely to
inhibit transcription, as is indeed observed. Thus, the relative
locations of the PecoRVCR transcription start site and
C.EcoRV-binding sites are consistent with the general view
of PecoRVCR regulation outlined above.
The C proteins are related to l repressor, a prototypical
regulator that operates a molecular switch during the lysis-
lysogeny decision. The C.EcoRV-operated switch is clearly
simpler than the l switch: it contains only two operators (three
in l), there is no cooperativity between operator-bound
C.EcoRV molecules (cooperative binding of l repressors is
essential for an all-or-none behavior of the l switch), and only
one of the ecoRV promoters, PecoRVR, is regulated by
C.EcoRV (l repressor binding to its operators regulates two
divergent promoters). Despite these differences, the molecular
mechanism of transcription activation by C.EcoRV and l
repressor may be identical. Site-directed mutagenesis of C
protein residues homologous to l repressor residues that
when mutated result in positive control (pc) phenotypes
(19) will be required to test this conjecture.
Both C-box half-sites are located downstream of the
PecoRVM transcription start site. The distal half-site is
centered 21 bp downstream, so it is not surprising that C
protein-binding has little effect on PecoRVM transcription.
The center of the proximal site is only 6 bp downstream of the
PecoRVM transcription start site, and so an inhibitory effect
of C.EcoRV-binding to this site is expected. However, since
the proximal half-site binding is relatively weak, the effect
observed in vivo is small, possibly because not enough C
protein is produced at our conditions for complete occupancy
of this site. It is also possible that PecoRVM transcription is
truly C.EcoRV-independent. This is supported by comparative
analysis of other R–M systems that are known to be regulated
by C proteins. For example, the ahdI R and M genes are
convergent and the C-box is only found in front of the co-
transcribed ahdIC and ahdIR messages (27). The ahdIM
transcription must therefore be independent of C.AhdI and is
likely constitutive.
The overlapping nature of methyltransferase and restriction
endonuclease promoters in EcoRV and PvuII significantly
complicates mapping of promoter elements in these systems,
since most genetic alterations will affect both promoters.
Therefore the deletion mapping results obtained using
promoter fusions (21) may be a complex mixture of direct
(alteration in intrinsic promoter strength of a promoter studied)
and indirect (effects on competition between divergent
promoters) effects. It therefore appears that further studies
of simpler systems such as AhdI will be needed to uncover
the molecular mechanism of transcription activation by
C proteins.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to Dr S. Nechaev for critical reading of the
manuscript. This work was supported by NIH GM grant R01
59295 and NIH FIRCA Research Grant R03 TW07145 to (KS),
and NIH GM R01 50514 (to T.H.). E.S. was partially supported
by Charles and Johanna Busch postdoctoral fellowship.
Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this
article was provided by NIH R01 grant GM59295.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Jeltsch,A. and Pingoud,A. (1996) Horizontal gene transfer contributes to
the wide distribution and evolution of type II restriction-modification
systems. J. Mol. Evol., 42, 91–96.
2. Kobayashi,I. (2001) Behavior of restriction-modification systems as
selfish mobile elements and their impact on genome evolution.
Nucleic Acids Res., 29, 3742–3756.
3. Nakayama,Y. and Kobayashi,I. (1998) Restriction-modification gene
complexes as selfish gene entities: roles of a regulatory system in their
establishment, maintenance, and apoptotic mutual exclusion.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 95, 6442–6447.
4. Tock,M.R. and Dryden,D.T. (2005) The biology of restriction and
anti-restriction. Curr. Opin. Microbiol., 8, 466–472.
5. Ives,C.L., Nathan,P.D. and Brooks,J.E. (1992) Regulation of the BamHI
restriction-modification system by a small intergenic open reading frame,
bamHIC, in both Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis. J. Bacteriol.,
174, 7194–7201.
6. Anton,B.P., Heiter,D.F., Benner,J.S., Hess,E.J., Greenough,L.,
Moran,L.S., Slatko,B.E. and Brooks,J.E. (1997) Cloning and
characterization of the BglII restriction-modification system reveals a
possible evolutionary footprint. Gene, 187, 19–27.
7. Rimseliene,R., Vaisvila,R. and Janulaitis,A. (1995) The eco72IC
gene specifies a trans-acting factor which influences expression of
both DNA methyltransferase and endonuclease from the Eco72I
restriction-modification system. Gene, 157, 217–219.
8. Zheleznaya,L.A., Kainov,D.E., Yunusova,A.K. and Matvienko,N.I.
(2003) Regulatory C protein of the EcoRV modification-restriction
system. Biochemistry (Mosc), 68, 105–110.
9. Cesnaviciene,E., Mitkaite,G., Stankevicius,K., Janulaitis,A. and
Lubys,A. (2003) Esp1396I restriction-modification system:
structural organization and mode of regulation. Nucleic Acids Res.,
31, 743–749.
10. Vijesurier,R.M., Carlock,L., Blumenthal,R.M. and Dunbar,J.C. (2000)
Role and mechanism of action of C. PvuII, a regulatory protein conserved
among restriction-modification systems. J. Bacteriol., 182, 477–487.
11. Heidmann,S., Seifert,W., Kessler,C. and Domdey,H. (1989) Cloning,
characterization and heterologous expression of the SmaI restriction-
modification system. Nucleic Acids Res., 17, 9783–9796.
12. Tao,T., Bourne,J.C. and Blumenthal,R.M. (1991) A family of regulatory
genes associated with type II restriction-modification systems.
J. Bacteriol., 173, 1367–1375.
13. Bart,A., Dankert,J. and van der Ende,A. (1999) Operator sequences for the
regulatory proteins of restriction modification systems. Mol. Microbiol.,
31, 1277–1278.
14. McGeehan,J.E., Streeter,S.D., Papapanagiotou,I., Fox,G.C. and
Kneale,G.G. (2005) High-resolution crystal structure of the
restriction-modification controller protein C.AhdI from Aeromonas
hydrophila. J. Mol. Biol, 346, 689–701.
15. Zakharova,M.V., Kravets,A.N., Klimashina,N.V. and Solonin,A.S.
(1991) Properties of the replicator region of the natural plasmid pLG13
containing genes of the EcoRV restriction-modification system.
Mol. Biol. (Mosk.), 25, 1615–1625.
16. Semenova,E., Djordjevic,M., Shraiman,B. and Severinov,K. (2005) The
tale of two polymerases: transcription profiling and gene expression
strategy of bacteriophage Xp10. Mol. Microbiol., 55, 764–777.
17. Minakhin,L., Semenova,E., Liu,J., Vasilov,A., Severinova,E.,
Gabisonia,T., Inman,R., Mushegian,A. and Severinov,K. (2005)
Genome and gene expression of Bacillus anthracis bacteriophage Fah.
J. Mol. Biol., 354, 1–15.
6950 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 21
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 3, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
18. Cheng,Y., Dylla,S.M. and Turnbough,C.L.,Jr (2001) A long T. A tract in
the upp initially transcribed region is required for regulation of upp
expression by UTP-dependent reiterative transcription in Escherichia
coli. J. Bacteriol., 183, 221–228.
19. Ptashne,M. (2005) Regulation of transcription: from lambda to
eukaryotes. Trends Biochem. Sci., 30, 275–279.
20. Som,S. and Friedman,S. (1994) Inhibition of transcription in vitro by
binding of DNA (cytosine-5)-methylases to DNA templates containing
cytosine analogs. J. Biol. Chem., 269, 25986–25991.
21. Karyagina,A., Shilov,I., Tashlitskii,V., Khodoun,M., Vasil’ev,S.,
Lau,P.C. and Nikolskaya,I. (1997) Specific binding of sso II DNA
methyltransferase to its promoter region provides the regulation of sso II
restriction-modification gene expression. Nucleic Acids Res., 25,
2114–2120.
22. Christensen,L.L. and Josephsen,J. (2004) The methyltransferase from the
LlaDII restriction-modification system influences the level of expression
of its own gene. J. Bacteriol., 186, 287–295.
23. Zakharova,M., Minakhin,L., Solonin,A. and Severinov,K. (2004)
Regulation of RNA polymerase promoter selectivity by covalent
modification of DNA. J. Mol. Biol., 335, 103–111.
24. Knowle,D., Lintner,R.E., Touma,Y.M. and Blumenthal,R.M. (2005)
Nature of the promoteractivated by C.PvuII, an unusual regulatory protein
conserved among restriction-modification systems. J. Bacteriol., 187,
488–497.
25. Dove,S.L., Darst,S.A. and Hochschild,A. (2003) Region 4 of sigma as a
target for transcription regulation. Mol. Microbiol., 48, 863–874.
26. Niu,W., Kim,Y., Tau,G., Heyduk,T. and Ebright,R.H. (1996)
Transcription activation at class II CAP-dependent promoters:
two interactions between CAP and RNA polymerase. Cell, 87,
1123–1134.
27. Streeter,S.D., Papapanagiotou,I., McGeehan,J.E. and Kneale,G.G. (2004)
DNA footprinting and biophysical characterization of the controller
protein C.AhdI suggests the basis of a genetic switch. Nucleic Acids Res.,
32, 6445–6453.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 21 6951
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 3, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
