Choosing between DNA and RNA: the polymer
specificity of RNA helicase NPH-II
Jane Kawaoka1,2 and Anna Marie Pyle2,3,*
1Department of Pathology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA, 2Department of Molecular Biophysics
and Biochemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA and 3Howard Hughes Medical Institute
Received October 5, 2004; Revised December 23, 2004; Accepted January 5, 2005
ABSTRACT
NPH-II is a prototypical member of the DExH/D
subgroup of superfamily II helicases. It exhibits
robust RNA helicase activity, and a detailed kinetic
framework for unwinding has been established.
However, like most SF2 helicases, there is little
known about its mode of substrate recognition and
its ability to differentiate between RNA and DNA
substrates. Here, we employ a series of chimeric
RNA–DNA substrates to explore the molecular
determinants for NPH-II specificity on RNA and to
determine if there are conditions under which DNA
is a substrate. We show that efficient RNA helicase
activity depends exclusively on ribose moieties in
the loading strand and in a specific section of the
30-overhang. However, we also document the pres-
ence of trace activity on DNA polymers, showing
that DNA can be unwound under extremely permiss-
ive conditions that favor electrostatic binding. Thus,
while polymer-specific SF2 helicases control sub-
strate recognition through specific interactions with
the loading strand, alternative specificities can arise
under appropriate reaction conditions.
INTRODUCTION
The DExH/D proteins are a subset of helicase superfamily II,
and they represent a large group of ATP-dependent remodel-
ing proteins that are involved in virtually all known aspects of
RNA metabolism (1), many forms of viral replication (2–5),
and in certain DNA rearrangements (the recQ group of hel-
icases) (6). Despite the ubiquity and importance of this pro-
tein family, there is limited understanding of their reaction
mechanisms and substrate specificities. Phylogenetically,
NPH-II is a prototypical member of the DExH/D family (7),
and it was the first one shown to unwind RNA (8). NPH-II
readily unwinds RNA substrates that contain a 30-overhang (9),
it displays a high degree of processivity, and the kinetic para-
meters that describe its mechanism of RNA unwinding have
been described (10,11). NPH-II is both a robust motor for RNA
displacement (10), and for the removal of proteins that are
bound to RNA sites (12,13).
The majority of known helicases specifically unwind
only one type of duplex, acting on either DNA or RNA.
While a few helicases have the ability to unwind either
type of polymer, such as NS3 from HCV (14) and SV40
large T antigen (15), most display strong apparent discrim-
ination for a particular class of nucleic acid. The basis for
this discrimination is unknown, and it is of great interest to
understand how polymer specificity is controlled. In the case
of NPH-II, unwinding of RNA has been characterized in great
detail (10,11). However, there is apparent ambiguity about
the activity of NPH-II on DNA substrates. Several studies
indicate that NPH-II acts exclusively on RNA substrates
(9,16), while one report suggests that NPH-II can unwind
DNA (17).
To begin dissecting the basis of polymer specificity in SF2
proteins, and to better understand the nucleic acid specificity
of NPH-II in particular, we have conducted a comparative
analysis of unwinding for a family of substrates that contain
varying amounts of DNA and RNA in both the top and bottom
strands. Helicase unwinding of purely DNA substrates was
examined, along with NPH-II activity toward hybrid duplexes
(one strand of RNA and another strand of DNA) and chimeric
duplexes that contain patches of DNA or RNA in the same
strand. We observe that certain regions of the loading strand
are of particular importance in directing the strong RNA spe-
cificity of NPH-II. In addition, we observe small amounts of
DNA unwinding that may be promoted by an alternative strand
displacement mechanism.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed at 266 Whitney Avenue, Bass Building, Room 334, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
Tel: +1 203 432 5633; Fax: +1 203 432 5316; Email: anna.pyle@yale.edu
ª The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
644–649 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 2
doi:10.1093/nar/gki208
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Protein expression and purification
NPH-II was isolated and purified as described previously (11).
In brief, protein was expressed in SF21 cell suspensions
(27C), at an m.o.i. of 3, with a harvest after 72 h of infection.
NPH-II was purified using a 10-His tag and both batch and
column techniques, followed by a phosphocellulose column
(Whatman, P-11 cell). Aliquots were stored at 80C until
needed. Preparations were evaluated for NPH-II content (by
SDS–PAGE), and NPH-II concentration (Coomassie or silver
stain densitometry using BSA standards) and confirmed
by western blot using anti-NPH-II antibody (provided by
S. Shuman) and MALDI-MS (HHMI protein core facility,
Columbia University, NY). Activity was determined by
ATPase and unwinding assays.
Synthesis of nucleic acid substrates
DNA and RNA oligonucleotides. DNA oligonucleotides were
chemically synthesized by the HHMI Core Facility at
Columbia University (New York, NY). They were purified
by denaturing PAGE. RNA chimeric RNA–DNA oligo-
nucleotides were chemically synthesized and deprotected
(18) or purchased from Dharmacon, Inc. (Lafayette, CO),
with subsequent deprotection and purification by denaturing
PAGE. All phosphoramidites used for in-house synthesis were
purchased from Glen Research. Substrates were prepared as
described previously (10), and concentrations were determ-
ined by specific activity. Substrate duplexes contained a
50-32P-end label on the top strand. The substrate was stored
at 80C in a buffer of 10 mM MOPS (pH 5), 1 mM EDTA.
RNA trap molecules. Trap RNA (24 bp duplex flanked by 18
single-stranded nucleotides at the 30 end; top strand 50-GCC
UCG CUG CCG UCG CCA GCA UAU-30, bottom strand 50-
AUA UGC UGG CGA CGG CAG CGA GGC AGA GGA
GCA GAG GGA GCA-30) was made from synthetic RNAs
(18). It was annealed and prepared as previously described
(10). Concentrations were determined spectrophotometrically
at A260 (nm) using a Hewlett Packard UV-Vis spectrophoto-
meter (Model 8453).
NPH-II enzyme activity assays
Unwinding timecourses. Unwinding was performed using
standard reaction conditions (40 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 4 mM
Mg(OAc)2, 15 nM NPH-II, 70 mM NaCl, 25
C) (11), unless
stated otherwise. Prior to initiation of unwinding reactions,
NPH-II protein (15 nM) was preincubated with duplex sub-
strate (1–2 nM, labeled with 32P at the 50 end of the top strand)
for 3 min at room temperature. Single-cycle unwinding reac-
tions were initiated by the simultaneous addition of 3.5 mM
ATP and 400 nM duplex RNA trap. Multiple cycle unwinding
reactions were initiated by the addition of 3.5 mM ATP alone.
Effects of the non-hydrolyzable ATP analog, adenosine 50-
(b,g-imino)triphosphate (AMP-PNP) (Sigma Chemicals)
were tested under multiple cycle conditions, at a final concen-
tration of 5.0 mM. All reactions were conducted in volumes of
15–20 ml at 25C. Specified timepoints were taken by adding
aliquots of the reaction mix to two volumes of quench buffer
(25 mM EDTA, 0.4% SDS, 0.05% BPB, 0.05% XCB, 10%
glycerol). Duplex and unwound products were resolved by
15% native PAGE. Size markers for unwound species were
made by heating duplex substrates at 95C. The dried gels
were visualized on a Storm PhosphorImager and reaction pro-
ducts were analyzed using ImageQuant software. Kinetic ana-
lysis was done using Kaleidagraph software (Abelbeck),
where the fraction of unwound substrate was fitted to the
integrated first-order rate law. Error analysis was performed
by using at least three trials for each experiment. Reported
variance in kinetic parameters was calculated with a 90%
confidence limit (19).
RESULTS
DNA unwinding activity of NPH-II
To resolve apparent discrepancies in the literature regarding
NPH-II specificity, and to begin exploring the basis for poly-
mer specificity by SF2 helicases, we designed a series of
experiments to evaluate DNA unwinding by NPH-II. Initial
experiments were conducted with DNA substrate A (Figure 1),
which has the same sequence and length as RNA substrate
RNA1 (Figure 1). Under standard single-cycle conditions that
have been established for unwinding of RNA (Methods),
NPH-II was unable to unwind DNA A (Figure 2b, timecourse
of panel A, left). In contrast, NPH-II readily unwound the
analogous RNA substrate RNA1 (see Figure 3b).
To determine if apparent inactivity toward DNA could be
attributable to an insufficient single-stranded region [an effect
that was previously hypothesized (17)], the overhang length
was doubled to 40 nt (Figure 2a, substrate B) and then tripled
to 60 nt (Figure 2a, substrate C). Despite the longer overhangs,
neither of these substrates was unwound by NPH-II under
standard conditions (data not shown). These experiments
were repeated under more permissive multiple-cycle reaction
conditions and DNA unwinding was still not observed (data
not shown).
To further increase permissivity of the DNA unwinding
reaction, unwinding reactions were again conducted under
multiple-cycle conditions, but the NaCl concentration was
lowered from 70 to 11 mM. Conditions of low ionic strength
are expected to promote binding by stabilizing electrostatic
interactions between nucleic acid and NPH-II. Using this highly
permissive salt concentration (under which NPH-II quantitat-
ively unwinds RNA duplexes in less than 20 s), a small amount
of DNA unwinding was detected (Figure 2b, panel A, right).
DNA unwinding under these conditions is extremely poor in
comparison to unwinding of a similar RNA substrate (data not
shown). Rate constants for DNA unwinding were not computed
because the reactions never achieved a significant end-point
and amplitudes were extremely low (Figure 2b).
To determine if longer single-stranded overhangs would
promote DNA unwinding activity under the new permissive
conditions, NPH-II activity was tested with DNA substrates B
and C. Substrate C, with the longest overhang (60 nt), was the
least reactive, and substrate B (40 nt overhang) was unwound
to a smaller extent than substrate A (Figure 2b, compare panels
A, B and C, right). Therefore, despite having the same duplex
length, all three substrates were unwound to differing extents
by NPH-II, with an inverse relationship between unwinding
and overhang length.
Because DNA unwinding by NPH-II is so inefficient and
requires such radically permissive conditions (multiple cycle,
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 2 645
with 15-fold protein excess, 11 mM NaCl), it was of interest to
determine whether the reaction is ATP dependent. To evaluate
this possibility, the same timecourses were run with DNA
substrates A–C, except that ATP was not added. Instead,
time points were taken after preincubation with NPH-II
(time zero is before NPH-II is added to reaction). In the
absence of ATP, no unwinding was observed (data not
shown). To distinguish whether the requirement for ATP
was related to ATP binding, we studied DNA unwinding
in the presence of the non-hydrolyzable ATP analog, adeno-
sine 50-adenylylimidodiphosphate (AMP-PNP). However,
unwinding of the DNA substrates was not observed in the
presence of AMP-PNP (data not shown). This suggests that
DNA unwinding by NPH-II is an ATP-dependent process,
and that ATP binding, alone, is not sufficient to promote
duplex destabilization.
NPH-II reaction with DNA/RNA hybrid substrates
To further examine the nucleic acid specificity of NPH-II, we
created a pair of hybrid duplex substrates that contained one
RNA and one DNA strand (Figure 3a, substrate D and E). The
substrates, which are analogous to RNA1 (Figure 1), are ident-
ical in secondary structure (34 bp with a 20 nt overhang) and
sequence. Substrate D, which contains an RNA bottom strand
and DNA top strand, was readily unwound by NPH-II
(Figure 3b, substrate D). The rate constant and amplitude
for unwinding are similar to that of RNA1 [Figure 3b, compare
timecourses RNA1 (filled circles) and D (open circles)]. In
contrast, substrate E, which contains a DNA bottom strand and
an RNA top strand, was not unwound by NPH-II [Figure 3b,
substrate E (squares)], as observed for the cognate DNA sub-
strate under the same reaction conditions (Figure 2b,
panel A, left). These results demonstrate that the top and
bottom strands of a substrate are recognized differently by
NPH-II, and are consistent with previous studies on mixed
substrates (9). The results are also consistent with evidence
that NPH-II tracks along the bottom strand, which contains all
of the determinants for specificity (11).
Probing the basis for strand specificity with chimeric
oligonucleotides
To dissect the basis for polymer specificity by NPH-II, a set of
chimeric substrates was synthesized and tested for unwinding
(Figure 1, substrates F–I). Having established that an all-DNA
loading strand was inhibitory under single-cycle conditions,
we tested the effect of a bottom strand that contains DNA
throughout the duplex region and RNA in the overhang
(Figure 4a; substrate F). Conversely, we examined a bottom
Figure 1. Substrate duplexes used in this study. Red characters signify DNA nucleotides and black characters indicate RNA. Substrates RNA1 and A are identical in
sequence and length, except that all Us have been replaced by Ts in the DNA substrate. Substrates B and C are the same as A, except for the length of the overhang,
which is two or three repeats, respectively, of the same 20mer sequence shown. RNA2 is a derivative of RNA1 that is shorter by 4 nt at the 50 end of the top strand,
resulting in a 30 bp duplex region and 24 nt overhang. It serves as the control duplex for substrates H and I, which have the same structure and sequence.
646 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 2
strand that contained DNA in the overhang and RNA in the
duplex region (Figure 4a; substrate G). In addition, we
synthesized substrates H and I, for which a section of DNA
is placed away from, or immediately adjacent to the junction
with duplex, respectively (Figure 4a).
NPH-II was unable to unwind substrate F under standard
conditions, although unwinding of substrate G was significant
and quantifiable (Figure 4b), which indicates that NPH-II has
an RNA requirement in the duplex region of the bottom
strand. Given that an entirely DNA overhang was inhibitory,
we were interested in determining whether there was a por-
tion of the overhang that contributed the most to specificity.
We observed that substrate H (in which the overhang is
entirely DNA except for 4 nt of RNA adjacent to the duplex
junction) was unwound so readily that its behavior was indis-
tinguishable from that of an all-RNA substrate (Figure 4b). In
contrast, substrate I (containing 4 nt of DNA adjacent to the
junction) was unwound to a far lesser extent. Indeed, beha-
vior of substrates I and G were almost indistinguishable
(Figure 4b).
DISCUSSION
Specificity is determined by the identity of the
loading strand
These results clearly demonstrate that NPH-II requires RNA in
the loading (bottom) strand in order to catalyze efficient
unwinding. While this part of the study is largely consistent
with previous work on hybrid duplexes (9), there are a few
salient differences. In the previous study, a small amount of
unwinding was observed for a hybrid substrate that contains
DNA in the loading strand and RNA in the top strand (similar
to substrate E). We do not observe unwinding of any substrates
that contain DNA in the bottom strand under single cycle
conditions. Indeed, behavior of substrate E is virtually indis-
tinguishable to that of an all-DNA substrate.
Another distinction from previous work on hybrid sub-
strates is that their activity had not been evaluated simul-
taneously with an analogous all-RNA substrate. In the
present work, we compare all-RNA and hybrid substrates
under identical conditions in side-by-side timecourses. In
this way, it is possible to unambiguously demonstrate that
specificity is dictated by the loading strand and that the
polymer identity of the top strand is irrelevant for primary
function of NPH-II. These findings are similar to those in
which hybrid substrates were used to study polymer speci-
ficity of the NS3 helicase from hepatitis C virus. Although
NS3 can unwind both RNA and DNA under the same
Figure 3. The role of RNA versus DNA in the substrate strands. (a) Schematic
representation of the substrates used in this experiment, where DNA is indic-
ated by red lines in either the top (substrate D) or bottom (substrate E)
strands. U is replaced by T in the DNA strand. (b) Timecourses of single
cycle kinetics show similar unwinding behavior of substrates with an
RNA loading strand, regardless of top strand identity. Only substrates with
an RNA loading strand, substrate RNA1 (filled circles, Af(RNA1) = 0.49 – 0.06
and k1(RNA1) = 0.34 – 0.08 min1) and substrate D (empty circles,
Af(D) = 0.51 – 0.01 and k1(D) = 0.28 – 0.11 min1), show unwinding. No
unwinding is seen for substrate E, which contains an RNA top strand and a
DNA loading strand.
Figure 2. Unwinding of DNA substrates by NPH-II. (a) Substrates of 34 bp are
composed of either DNA (red bold lines) or RNA (thin black lines). The duplex
sequence is the same for all four substrates. The overhang for the DNA sub-
strates is 20, 40 or 60 nt and corresponds to multiples of the 20mer sequence 30-
GUA ACU ACG ACA AUC AUG CA-50, where U is replaced by T in DNA.
(b) A trace of DNA unwinding is seen under ‘permissive’ conditions. Native gel
shift assays showing NPH-II unwinding of DNA substrates A, B and C in the
absence of trap RNA (multiple cycle), in a low-salt buffer of 11 mM NaCl,
40 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 4 mM MgOAc, 15 nM NPH-II, 1 nM duplex substrate and
3.5 mM ATP. Timepoints are 0, 10 s, 30 s, 45 s, 1 min, 2 min and 5 min. At the
last timepoint (5 min), the maximum amount of unwinding under low-salt
conditions for substrates A, B and C is 16%, 12% and 5%, respectively.
The timecourse for panel A under higher-salt conditions (70 mM NaCl, left)
shows no unwinding. Timepoints are 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 5 and 10 min.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 2 647
conditions, it preferentially unwinds DNA and this
specificity is dictated by the polymer identity of the loading
strand (20). NPH-II and NS3 are both members of helicase
superfamily 2, which suggests that members of this entire
family of helicases derive their respective polymer spe-
cificities from interactions with the bottom strand. This is
also consistent with the emerging view that SF2 helicases
translocate by tracking along the backbone of the substrate
loading strand (11).
What portion of the loading strand is recognized?
A key role for the junction
Like many unidirectional helicases that initiate unwinding on
‘tailed substrates’ (16,21,22), NPH-II requires a long, single-
stranded 30 overhang adjacent to the duplex region. The single-
stranded tail of the loading strand may provide information
about polarity and may ensure that the helicase binds to the
‘correct strand’ before initiating unwinding (23,24). It may
also provide important electrostatic determinants for product-
ive binding of the helicase.
The minimal overhang length for efficient unwinding by
NPH-II is 19 nt, and it has been established that short over-
hangs of 4 nt do not support unwinding (9). Despite this
requirement for a longer overhang, the present work shows
that only a small portion of the overhang contributes to poly-
mer specificity. Specifically, we demonstrate a ribose require-
ment for the four single-stranded nucleotides that are
immediately adjacent to the duplex. This establishes that
different regions of the overhang play different roles in
directing the function of NPH-II, and that the residues closest
to the overhang are particularly important for establishing
polymer specificity.
In addition to the junction region of the overhang, there is a
second region of the loading strand that exhibits a strong ribose
requirement. Unwinding studies on substrates F, G and H
(Figure 4b) demonstrate that RNA is required in the bottom
strand portion of the duplex. The results therefore indicate that
ribose sugars contribute to the initiation of unwinding (at the
junction), and to the continued translocation of NPH-II along
the bottom strand during the course of unwinding.
Traces of DNA unwinding by NPH-II: significance
and mechanism
This work, and that of others (9,16), clearly establishes that
RNA is the preferred substrate for NPH-II. However, we have
demonstrated that DNA can be unwound, with very low
efficiency, under an unusual set of multiple-cycle reaction
conditions that promote nonspecific electrostatic interactions
between proteins and nucleic acids (low salt: 11 mM NaCl).
It is possible that similar conditions contributed to previous
observations of DNA activity by NPH-II (17).
There are at least two mechanisms that might account for
the DNA unwinding that has been observed. (i) ‘Active’:
NPH-II catalyzes DNA unwinding via ATP-dependent trans-
location along the loading strand with concomitant top-strand
displacement, as has been demonstrated for RNA (8,10).
(ii) ‘Passive’: NPH-II coats the loading strand and passively
displaces the top strand through a binding mechanism that
does not involve active translocation of an individual helicase
molecule.
Mechanism (i) is supported by the fact that DNA unwinding
requires ATP. Furthermore, the failure of an ATP analog
(AMP-PNP) to support unwinding suggests that ATP hydro-
lysis is a prerequisite for DNA unwinding. However, these
results do not, by themselves, disprove alternative mechanisms
for DNA unwinding. First of all, the kinetic framework for
NPH-II establishes that productive binding of NPH-II can only
occur in the ATP-bound state (10). Therefore, the ATP
dependence of reaction does not necessarily imply an active
motor function and may instead indicate that ATP (or ADP)
Figure 4. Probing the effects of DNA in various parts of the loading strand.
(a) Schematic representation of substrates used in this experiment.
Oligonucleotides were prepared with DNA (bold red lines) in different
regions of the loading strand. (b) Timecourses of single-cycle kinetics for
substrates RNA2 and F–I. Substrate RNA2 (filled circles) displays similar
kinetics to the 34 bp duplex (RNA1), and serves here as a control for substrates
H (open circles) and I (filled squares), which also have a 30 base top strand.
Substrate F (filled triangles) was not unwound. Unwinding rate constants for
the four substrates that could unwind are k1(RNA2) = 0.32 – .03 min1, k1(H) =
0.23 – 0.05 min1, k1(I) = 0.07 – .02 min1 and k1(G) = 0.06 – 0.01 min1.
Reaction amplitudes are Af(RNA2) = 0.57 – 0.04, Af(H) = 0.58 – 0.07,
Af(I) = 0.18 – 0.01, Af(G) = 0.14 – 0.01.
648 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 2
stimulates adoption of a specific NPH-II conformation that is
conducive to binding (which would be required for Mechan-
ism (ii), as well). The fact that AMP-PNP did not stimulate
unwinding could be attributable to imperfect binding of the
analog by NPH-II (no ATP analog is an exact mimic), or
because ATP hydrolysis may, in fact, induce a conformational
change that is necessary for productive binding (irrespective of
translocation).
Mechanism (ii) is supported by several lines of evidence.
NPH-II has previously been shown to bind DNA with equal
affinity to RNA (9,16). Thus, the reduced unwinding of DNA
cannot simply be attributed to a defect in enzyme–substrate
affinity. The requirement for multiple-cycle conditions sug-
gests that unwinding may result from filament formation along
the loading strand [a RecA-like mechanism (25,26), which
would displace the top strand in a manner similar to that of
single-strand binding protein (SSB) (27)]. This is supported by
the observation that NPH-II unwinds DNA more effectively in
the presence of SSB (17). Finally, a passive binding mechan-
ism is supported by the fact that DNA unwinding is inhibited
by longer single-stranded overhangs, which ‘soak up’ NPH-II
molecules and leave fewer protein units to aggregate along the
loading strand, thereby inhibiting top-strand displacement.
Although it is inefficient, the residual (and somewhat
forced) activity of NPH-II on DNA raises an important pos-
sibility. Depending on conditions, a single helicase may be
able to utilize multiple mechanisms for duplex unwinding,
particularly on different types of polymers. Helicase enzymes
are nucleic acid binding proteins, and simple binding behavior
always has the potential to dominate over other types of activ-
ities. Dual mechanistic capabilities by helicases may be
advantageous and one could imagine that, at times, this serves
a biological function. The existence of multiple pathways also
highlights the sensitivity of reaction mechanism to experi-
mental design.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Eckhard Jankowsky and Victor Serebrov for helpful
discussions about this work. We also thank Stewart Shuman
(Sloan Kettering Institute, New York, NY) and Christian Gross
(Vertex Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, MA) for NPH-II
plasmids and baculovirus constructs, protein expression pro-
tocols and many thoughtful discussions. We also thank Stavros
Lomvardas (Columbia University, New York, NY) for help
with protein expression and purification and for helpful
discussions. This work was supported by a grant from the
NIH (GMRO1 60620) to A.M.P., who is an investigator of
the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. Funding to pay the
Open Access publication charges for this article was provided
by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.
REFERENCES
1. de la Cruz,J., Kressler,D. and Linder,P. (1999) Unwinding RNA in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae: DEAD-box proteins and related families.
Trends Biochem. Sci., 24, 192–198.
2. Fernandez,A., Guo,H.S., Saenz,P., Simon-Buela,L., Gomez de
Cedron,M. and Garcia,J.A. (1997) The motif V of plum pox potyvirus CI
RNA helicase is involved in NTP hydrolysis and is essential for virus
RNA replication. Nucleic Acids Res., 25, 4474–4480.
3. Grassmann,C.W., Isken,O. and Behrens,S.E. (1999) Assignment
of the multifunctional NS3 protein of bovine viral diarrhea virus
during RNA replication: an in vivo and in vitro study. J. Virol.,
73, 9196–9205.
4. Gross,C.H. and Shuman,S. (1998) The nucleoside triphosphatase and
helicase activities of vaccinia virus NPH-II are essential for virus
replication. J. Virol., 72, 4729–4736.
5. Kadare,G. and Haenni,A.L. (1997) Virus-encoded RNA helicases.
J. Virol., 71, 2583–2590.
6. Prince,P.R., Emond,M.J. and Monnat,R.J.,Jr. (2001) Loss of Werner
syndrome protein function promotes aberrant mitotic recombination.
Genes Dev., 15, 933–938.
7. Gorbalenya,A. and Koonin,E.V. (1993) Helicases: amino acid sequence
comparisons. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., 3, 419–429.
8. Shuman,S. (1992) Vaccinia virus RNA helicase: an essential enzyme
related to the DE-H family of RNA-dependent NTPases. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA, 89, 10935–10939.
9. Gross,C.H. and Shuman,S. (1996) Vaccinia virus RNA helicase: nucleic
acid specificity in duplex unwinding. J. Virol., 70, 2615–2619.
10. Jankowsky,E., Gross,C.H., Shuman,S. and Pyle,A.M. (2000) The DExH
protein NPH-II is a processive and directional motor for unwinding RNA.
Nature, 403, 447–451.
11. Kawaoka,J., Jankowsky,E. and Pyle,A.M. (2004) Backbone tracking by
the SF2 helicase NPH-II. Nature Struct. Mol. Biol., 11, 526–530.
12. Fairman,M.E., Maroney,P.A., Wang,W., Bowers,H.A., Gollnick,P.,
Nilsen,T.W. and Jankowsky,E. (2004) Protein displacement by DExH/D
‘RNA helicases’ without duplex unwinding. Science, 304, 730–734.
13. Jankowsky,E., Gross,C.H., Shuman,S. and Pyle,A.M. (2001) Active
disruption of an RNA–protein interaction by a DExH/D RNA helicase.
Science, 291, 121–125.
14. Tai,C.L., Chi,W.K., Chen,D.S. and Hwang,L.H. (1996) The helicase
activity associated with hepatitis C virus nonstructural protein 3 (NS3).
J. Virol., 70, 8477–8484.
15. Fanning,E. and Knippers,R. (1992) Structure and function of simian virus
40 large tumor antigen. Annu. Rev. Biochem., 61, 55–85.
16. Shuman,S. (1993) Vaccinia virus RNA helicase. Directionality and
substrate specificity. J. Biol. Chem., 268, 11798–11802.
17. Bayliss,C.D. and Smith,G.L. (1996) Vaccinia virion protein I8R has both
DNA and RNA helicase activities: implications for vaccinia virus
transcription. J. Virol., 70, 794–800.
18. Wincott,F., DiRenzo,A., Shaffer,C., Grimm,S., Tracz,D., Workman,C.,
Sweedler,D., Gonzalez,C., Scaringe,S. and Usman,N. (1995) Synthesis,
deprotection, analysis and purification of RNA and ribozymes.
Nucleic Acids Res., 23, 2677–2684.
19. Shoemaker,D.P., Garland,C.W., Steinfeld,J.I. and Nibler,J.W. (1981)
Treatment of experimental data. In Amerman,S. (ed.), Experiments in
Physical Chemistry. McGraw Hill, Inc., New York, pp. 25–52.
20. Pang,P.S., Jankowsky,E., Planet,P.J. and Pyle,A.M. (2002) The hepatitis
C viral NS3 protein is a processive DNA helicase with cofactor
enhanced RNA unwinding. EMBO J., 21, 1168–1176.
21. Bird,L.E., Brannigan,J.A., Subramanya,H.S. and Wigley,D.B. (1998)
Characterisation of Bacillus stearothermophilus PcrA helicase:
evidence against an active rolling mechanism. Nucleic Acids Res.,
26, 2686–2693.
22. Gwack,Y., Yoo,H., Song,I., Choe,J. and Han,J.H. (1999)
RNA-stimulated ATPase and RNA helicase activities and RNA binding
domain of hepatitis G virus nonstructural protein 3. J. Virol., 73,
2909–2915.
23. Lohman,T.M. and Bjornson,K.P. (1996) Mechanisms of
helicase-catalyzed DNA unwinding. Annu. Rev. Biochem., 65, 169–214.
24. McGhee,J.D. and von Hippel,P.H. (1974) Theoretical aspects of
DNA–protein interactions: co-operative and non-co-operative binding
of large ligands to a one-dimensional homogeneous lattice. J. Mol. Biol.,
86, 469–489.
25. Bazemore,L.R., Takahashi,M. and Radding,C.M. (1997) Kinetic analysis
of pairing and strand exchange catalyzed by RecA. Detection by
fluorescence energy transfer. J. Biol. Chem., 272, 14672–14682.
26. Egelman,E.H. and Stasiak,A. (1986) Structure of helical RecA–DNA
complexes. Complexes formed in the presence of ATP-gamma-S or ATP.
J. Mol. Biol., 191, 677–697.
27. Muniyappa,K., Williams,K., Chase,J.W. and Radding,C.M. (1990)
Active nucleoprotein filaments of single-stranded binding protein and
recA protein on single-stranded DNA have a regular repeating structure.
Nucleic Acids Res., 18, 3967–3973.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 2 649
