Base-stacking and base-pairing contributions into
thermal stability of the DNA double helix
Peter Yakovchuk, Ekaterina Protozanova and Maxim D. Frank-Kamenetskii*
Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University,
36 Cummington Street, Boston, MA 02215, USA
Received October 28, 2005; Revised and Accepted January 4, 2006
ABSTRACT
Two factors are mainly responsible for the stability
of the DNA double helix: base pairing between com-
plementary strands and stacking between adjacent
bases. By studying DNA molecules with solitary
nicks and gaps we measure temperature and salt
dependence of the stacking free energy of the DNA
double helix. For the first time, DNA stacking paramet-
ers are obtained directly (without extrapolation) for
temperatures from below room temperature to close
to melting temperature. We also obtain DNA stacking
parameters for different salt concentrations ranging
from 15 to 100 mM Na1. From stacking parameters of
individual contacts, we calculate base-stacking con-
tribution to the stability of AT- and GC-containing
DNA polymers. We find that temperature and salt
dependences of the stacking term fully determine
the temperature and the salt dependence of DNA sta-
bility parameters. For all temperatures and salt con-
centrationsemployed in present study, base-stacking
is the main stabilizing factor in the DNA double helix.
AT pairing is always destabilizing and GC pairing
contributes almost no stabilization. Base-stacking
interaction dominates not only in the duplex overall
stability but also significantly contributes into the
dependence of the duplex stability on its sequence.
INTRODUCTION
Stability of the DNA double helix with respect to separation of
complementary strands is known to depend on the base com-
position of the duplex (1–4). A classical study of Marmur and
Doty (1) on DNA polymer stability gives a linear relationship
between the GC content of the polymer and its melting tem-
perature. The simplest explanation of the linear dependence is
that AT- and GC-pairs differ in stability independently of
their neighbors. Accordingly, base-stacking interactions have
been thought to constitute only a small correction to the major
effect of the differences in GC and AT pair stabilities (5).
Nearest-neighbor stability parameters have been introduced to
account for sequence effects in DNA stability. These paramet-
ers are obtained from the analysis of the melting data for DNA
polymers (5), DNA oligomers (6–8) and DNA dumbbells
(9,10), and present the cumulative (base pairing and stacking)
contribution of each dinucleotide stack to the overall stability
of the molecule. In fact, DNA melting experiments do not
allow separation of the two contributions.
Partitioning of base pairing and stacking contributions to
DNA stability not only delivers a new aspect in the funda-
mental understanding of DNA structure and energetics, but
also it has significant implications in a number of biological
processes. Fluctuations in local helical conformation of DNA,
the phenomenon known as DNA breathing, lead to infrequent
events of base pair opening thus making normally buried
groups available for modification and interaction with proteins
(11,12). Fluctuational base pair opening implies disruption of
hydrogen bonds between the complementary bases and flip-
ping the base out of the helical stack disrupting two contacts.
Heterogeneous stacking at these contacts determine sequence
dependence of the base pair fluctuational motility. Moreover,
single-stranded break (a nick) in the DNA double helix is
stabilized by stacking interactions between base pairs flanking
the lesion; these interactions are sequence-dependent (13). In
the cell, DNA nicks are substrates for DNA damage-detecting
and DNA-repair proteins (14–17). In vitro, DNA nick-based
approaches are often used in DNA detection and amplification
protocols (18,19). Also, stabilization achieved through coaxial
stacking interactions has been put into effect to improve the
efficiency of short primer hybridization for standard sequen-
cing protocols (20) and within the format of sequencing by
hybridization approach (21). By using partially double-
stranded probe with a 5 nt overhang, the latter method
takes advantage of the enhancement of the stability of the
short duplex formed between the probe overhang and
single-stranded target by coaxial stacking with the duplex
interface of the probe. Another biotechnology application
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 617 353 8498; Fax: +1 617 353 8501; Email: mfk@bu.edu
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
564–574 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 2
doi:10.1093/nar/gkj454
 Published online January 31, 2006
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
involving nicked DNA is the formation of padlock probes via
ligation of a nick formed by two termini of artificial oligo-
nucleotide hybridized to single-stranded or locally opened
duplex DNA (22–24).
A number of theoretical studies addressed characterization
of stacking and base pairing contributions to the duplex sta-
bility (25–30). Experimentally, energetics of base-stacking
interactions in nucleic acids has been evaluated by studying
the effect of dangling (unpaired) terminal bases on the overall
stability of duplexes (31–35) and in the coaxial stacking
hybridization experiments where binding of a short oligonuc-
leotide to the single-stranded DNA template is assisted by
stacking interaction with the nearby duplex interface (36–
41). Both of these approaches rely on thermal denaturation
measurements of short duplex molecules.
We have recently introduced an entirely new approach for
characterization of stacking interactions in the DNA double
helix (13). For this purpose we study DNA molecules with
solitary nicks positioned in a strictly defined sequence context.
We subject these molecules to PAGE. Structurally, introduc-
tion of a break to one of the strands of DNA perturbs only
slightly the double helix conformation with stacking and base
pairing at the nick site remaining intact (42–49). Nicked
molecules have been shown to move somewhat slower during
PAGE than intact molecules of the same size; this retardation
is enhanced at higher temperatures (14,50,51).
The model of the DNA nick underlying our approach
involves an equilibrium between the two conformations as
shown in Figure 1a (13). One conformation is very close to
that of the intact double helix where stacking between the base
pairs flanking the nick is conserved. We assume that no optim-
ization of stacking interactions—like in case of duplexes with
dangling nucleotides (52)—occurs at the site of the nick in
DNA. The other conformation corresponds to complete loss of
stacking at the nick site thus inducing a kink in DNA. The fast
equilibration between stacked/straight and unstacked/bent
conformations of the nick directly affects the mobility of
DNA molecule during PAGE leading to a differential retarda-
tion characteristic to a particular dinucleotide carrying the
nick, i.e. KL. For each contact, stacking free energy parameter,
DGSTKL, is ascribed governing the distribution of the molecules
between the two conformations. Using PAGE mobility data of
DNA molecules with solitary nicks flanked by all possible
combinations of the base pairs we extract stacking parameters
of the DNA double helix (13). Using heterogeneous stacking
parameters and a well-known Marmur–Doty (1) dependence
of DNA stability on its content, we have previously arrived at a
revised set of the nearest-neighbor stability parameters which
is in full agreement with the DNA melting data (13).
Here we measure, for the first time, temperature dependence
and salt dependence of base-stacking contribution to the DNA
duplex stability. Contributions of AT and GC pairing are
estimated from the comparison of AT- and GC-containing
polymer stability parameters with the stacking terms. We find
that throughout the temperature range employed, base-
stacking interactions stabilize DNA double helix. Temperature
dependence of the base-stacking term fully determines the
temperature dependence of the DNA stability parameter.
Base pairing term is destabilizing in case of AT and some-
what stabilizing in case of GC pairs. Differential contribution
of base-stacking in AT- and GC-containing contacts is
responsible for 50% of the dependence of DNA stability on
its GC content. Salt conditions affect stacking parameters
leading to stabilization upon an increase in sodium concen-
tration. In this case, we also find that salt dependence of
stacking term determines the salt dependence of the DNA
stability term.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
DNA
The 300 bp-long DNA molecules used in this study are PvuII/
PvuII (all enzymes used in this study were purchased from
New England Biolabs, Ipswich MA) restriction fragments of
pUC19 derivatives described before (13). Briefly, pKL (were
K and L are DNA bases) carries recognition sites for
nicking endonucleases each of which introduces a single
nick to the forward (N.BstNB I) or reverse (N.Alw I) strand
of KL/K0L0 dinucleotide stack (or simply KL; K0 and L0 are
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 1. Urea-enhanced gel electrophoresis of nicked and gapped DNA. (a) Nicked DNA molecule undergoes stacked-unstacked transition governed by stacking
parameterDGSTKL. Stacked state is close to intact molecule; unstacked state is approximated by a molecule with a gap. (b) DNA molecules with solitary nicks and gaps
in forward (F) or reverse (R) strand were obtained by enzymatic digestion. Nicking enzymes and their recognition sites are shown in one color; cleavage sites are
indicated by arrowheads. In KL/F and KL/R fragments nick is positioned within KL/K0L0 dinucleotide stack. Fragments with 2 nt-long gaps, G2/F and G2/R, are the
result of sequential digestion by two nicking enzymes as shown. (c) Effect of temperature of PAGE on the separation of intact (I), nicked (N) and gapped (G) DNA
fragments. Nicked stacks are shown at the top of each lane; arrowheads point to the location of the nick. Gapped and nicked fragments resolved in one lane have
lesions in the same strand. PAGE was conducted in the presence of 2.3 M urea at temperatures indicated to the left of each panel.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 2 565
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
complementary to K and L) yielding KL/F and KL/R frag-
ments, respectively (Figure 1b). The nick is located 104 bp
apart from the terminus of PvuII/PvuII fragment. Molecules
with a single 2 nt gap in place of a nick are obtained by
digesting pG2F and pG2R by N.BbvC IA followed by N.Bst-
NBI digestion. As shown in Figure 1b, nicking sites of these
nicking endonucleases are 2 nt apart and located on the for-
ward strand of G2/F and reverse strand of G2/R. To remove 50
phosphoryl groups, nicked and gapped molecules were incub-
ated with Alkaline Phosphatase (CIP). Following treatment
with enzymes, all DNA samples were purified by phenol
extraction, precipitated with ethanol and resuspended in TE
buffer [10 mM Tris (pH 7.4) and 1 mM EDTA].
Gel electrophoresis
Nicked, gapped and intact DNA fragments 300 bp in length
were concurrently subjected to electrophoresis through 6.7%
(w/v) polyacrylamide gels run at 17 V/cm with 1· TBE
[90 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 90 mM boric acid and 1 mM
EDTA] as a running buffer. We have shown before that
under this set of PAGE conditions stacked-unstacked equilib-
rium at the nick site of DNA is not affected by specific experi-
mental design (13). Specifically, Figure 5 of (13) demonstrates
that the presence of the gel matrix and force applied to the
molecule during PAGE do not affect apparent free energy
parameters of stacked-unstacked equilibrium at the DNA
nick. We also conducted PAGE in the presence of increasing
concentrations of sodium by adding NaCl up to 85 mM to the
gel and to the running buffer; the strength of electric field for
these experiments was reduced to 12 V/cm. The gel electro-
phoresis was performed using Protean II xi Cell (BioRad,
Hercules, CA) where the gel-plate sandwich is mounted
against the temperature-controlling core connected to a circu-
lating water bath set to a desired temperature. The temperature
during PAGE was measured by a thermocouple (Oakton,
Vernon Hills, IL) with a type T wire probe inserted directly
into the gel. DNA band patterns were visualized by ethidium
bromide staining and detected by the CCD camera.
Relative mobilities of DNA fragments with a nick, m, were
calculated as a ratio of the distance migrated by the nicked
fragments to the distance migrated by the intact fragment
during PAGE. All experiments were conducted at least in
triplicates. To enhance the separation of the molecules with
solitary nicks from the intact molecules we added various
concentrations of urea (0.4 to 8 M) to the gel thus allowing
subsequent extrapolation of measured parameters to zero urea
(13). We also conducted PAGE in the presence of dimethyl-
formamide (DMF) in place of urea. In this case, a smaller
range of concentrations was used since the gels became fragile
at concentrations of DMF above 1.5 M.
Melting experiments
Two synthetic 65 nt-long complementary DNA strands (MWG
Biotech Inc., High Point, NC) were annealed in TE buffer
appended with a desired concentration of NaCl (from 20 to
200 mM) at 0.5 mM of each strand. The same duplex was also
prepared in the 1·TBE buffer. The purity of the duplex was
checked by PAGE. Melting curves of DNA duplexes were
collected using a CARY Bio100 spectrophotometer equipped
with the peltier thermocontroller (Varian Instruments, Walnut
Creek, CA). Both denaturation and renaturation curves were
collected at slow heating/cooling rate of at 0.08 /min; no
hysteresis between heating and cooling curves has been
observed. Melting temperature, TM, was estimated as a tem-
perature at the midpoint of the duplex-to-coil transition.
In melting studies we determined stabilities of four DNA
duplexes, which differed in GC content, c (DNA sequences
are listed in Supplementary Table 1). Salt dependence of AT-
containing duplex stability (c ¼ 0%) was measured directly
for 22 mM < [Na+] < 202 mM (i.e. 20–200 mM NaCl plus 1
mM EDTA). Salt dependence of more stable GC-containing
duplex was obtained by extrapolating TM’s measured for four
duplexes with c ¼ 0%, c ¼ 14%, 32% and 41.5% to
c ¼ 100%. Corresponding plots are shown in Figure 4a.
RESULTS
Stacked-unstacked equilibrium at DNA nick in
the presence of a denaturant
During gel electrophoresis, a 300 bp-long DNA molecule with
a solitary nick migrates slower with respect to the DNA frag-
ment without the lesion (Figure 1c). Retardation of nicked
fragments depends on the identity of the base pairs flanking
the nick like in case of the molecules with nicks flanked by As
and Ts shown in Figure 1c. Differential retardation of nicked
DNA is due to specific interactions characteristic to each
nicked dinucleotide stack. Quantitatively, equilibrium
between stacked/closed and unstacked/open conformations
at the nick site is governed by stacking free energy, DGST,
so that:
Nclosed
Nopen
¼ exp DG
ST
RT
 
‚ 1
where Nclosed and Nopen are occupancies of stacked and
unstacked conformations at the DNA nick, respectively, R
is the universal gas constant and T is the absolute temperature.
At a given temperature, due to fast equilibration between the
two states, mobility of nicked DNA is a weighted average of
the mobility of molecules in closed state and mobility of
molecules in open state (13). Since stacked conformation of
the DNA nick is very close to the DNA molecule without the
lesion mclosed is given by the mobility of the intact DNA frag-
ment. The presence of a single-stranded stretch in a DNA
molecule with a short gap prevents stacking interactions
between the base pairs flanking the gap thus forcing the
molecule into the open state. We use the mobility of molecules
with a single 2 nt-long gap to estimate mopen. Thus stacking
parameter DGST describing stacked-unstacked equilibrium at a
nick site can be calculated directly from the mobility data
using Equations 1 and 2 (13):
Nclosed
Nopen
¼ m  mopen
mclosed  m
2
Since the perturbations brought about by the nick are often
minor we introduce urea to the gel in order to enhance the
separation of nicked molecules from intact molecules
(Figure 2c) (13,51). Data obtained in urea-enhanced PAGE
is then extrapolated to zero urea concentration resulting in
566 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 2
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
stacking parameters for each nicked dinucleotide stack in the
absence of urea, DGSTKL (Figure 2d). The use of denaturant
during PAGE is an imperative part of our experimental
approach since it allows characterization of even subtle dif-
ferences in nicked molecule mobilities. To ensure that the
nature of the denaturant does not affect the resulting stacking
parameters we also conducted PAGE in the presence of vary-
ing concentrations of DMF (Figure 2d). Additionally, for the
least stable stacks, we can measure stacking parameters dir-
ectly at zero urea without extrapolating the mobility data col-
lected in the presence of denaturant; this parameter is also
plotted in Figure 2d. DMF-enhanced and urea-enhanced
PAGE yield quantitatively similar dependencies of apparent
stacking parameters on the concentration of the denaturant.
This finding is quite unexpected and is most likely due to a
narrow range of DMF concentrations used in PAGE; an
increase in DMF concentration could yield more significant
differences in apparent DGSTKL values measured in the presence
of the two denaturants. We are unable to conduct these experi-
ments since the gels containing more than 1.5 M DMF are too
fragile to handle. Extrapolation of the data obtained in DMF-
enhanced and urea-enhanced PAGE experiments to zero
denaturant concentration is consistent with DGSTKL values meas-
ured directly in the absence of denaturant.
Effect of temperature on stacked-unstacked equilibrium
Our further experiments involve conducting urea-enhanced
PAGE at different temperatures to obtain temperature depend-
ence of DNA stacking parameters. Molecules with solitary
nicks flanked by AT pairs shown in Figure 1c, display a
defined dependence of the electrophoretic shift towards the
molecules with a 2 nt gap when temperature increases from 22
to 52C. Relative electrophoretic mobilities of nicked AA/F
fragment and gapped G2/F fragment are plotted as a function
of temperature in Figure 2a. A 30 degrees increase in temper-
ature leads to gradually decreasing PAGE mobility of the
nicked fragment while mobility of the gapped fragment
remains largely unaffected. In terms of occupancies of the
two states of the nicked site, the shift in mobility is equivalent
to the shift in the equilibrium towards the open conformation
of the nicked stack. Similar results were obtained for the GC-
containing contacts. More narrow temperature range has been
employed in this case since molecules with nicks located in
more stable GC-containing stacks do not resolve well enough
from intact molecules at temperatures under 30C.
Stacking free energies were calculated from the mobility
data for all four AT- and four GC-containing nicked stacks
using Equations 1 and 2. For each stack, molecules with sol-
itary nicks located on the forward strand, KL/F and on the
reverse strand, KL/R, were examined. Our further analysis is
grounded on the assumption that the stacking free energies of
the stacked-unstacked equilibrium at the site of the DNA nick
are close to the stacking parameters of the intact DNA double
helix (13). In this case we calculate the DGSTKL by averaging
(i) the parameters obtained for KL/F and KL/R and (ii) the
parameters obtained for the stacks equivalent due to dyad
symmetry of the double helix (in our case there are two
pairs of stacks: AA/TT and TT/AA pair and GG/CC and
CC/GG pair). Individual stacking parameters are listed in Sup-
plementary Table 2 and are plotted as a function of temper-
ature in Figure 3a. Error bars on this plot correspond to the
scatter of individual stacking parameters around the mean. As
expected, throughout the temperature range employed, DGSTKL
values for both AT- and GC-containing contacts increase
(become less stable) gradually with increasing temperature.
Effect of salt concentration on
stacked-unstacked equilibrium
To address the effect of ionic strength on stacked-unstacked
equilibrium at the site of DNA nick we conducted urea-
enhanced PAGE at different salt concentrations by adding
NaCl to the gel and to the running buffer. Salt dependence
of relative PAGE mobilities of AA/F nicked fragment and
corresponding G2/F gapped fragment is shown in
Figure 2b. Unlike in case of increasing temperature
(Figure 2a), opposite tendencies are displayed by the two
molecules with increasing salt concentration. Mobility of
the fragment with a gap decreases. The decrease is likely
due to more efficient screening of phosphate charges reducing
electrostatic repulsion between the two double-stranded seg-
ments on either side of the gap thus making the gap more
flexible (53). Similar effect of the salt concentration is expec-
ted at the nick site in open conformation. Mobility of the
nicked fragment increases corresponding to the salt-assisted
shift towards stacked state of the nick.
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 2. Effect of ambient conditions on PAGE of nicked (open circles) and
gapped (closed circles) molecules. Relative mobilities of AA/F and G2/F
fragments are measured (a) at different temperatures, PAGE conditions: 1·
TBE, 2.3 M urea; (b) as a function of ionic strength, PAGE conditions: 37C,
3.5 M urea, 1·TBE appended with NaCl (total concentration of sodium assum-
ing 1· TBE to be equivalent to 15 mM Na+ is indicated, see Figure 4); (c) in the
presence of urea, PAGE conditions: 37C, 1· TBE. (d) Effect of denaturant
concentration on stacking parameters of AA/F calculated from mobility data
using Equations 1 and 2. PAGE was carried out in 1· TBE at 42C in the
presence of varying concentrations of urea (closed diamonds), DMF (open
diamonds) or in the absence of the denaturant (dotted diamond).
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 2 567
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
To facilitate the comparison of DNA stacking parameters
we determine experimentally, with the DNA stability para-
meters we have to account for the difference in salt conditions.
Our PAGE-based experiments were conducted in a standard
gel electrophoresis buffer 1· TBE. In order to find concentra-
tion of NaCl equivalent to PAGE conditions with respect to
DNA stability, we conducted melting experiments, i.e. we
determined TM of duplex DNA in 1· TBE and in the presence
of various concentrations of NaCl (Figure 4). For AT-
containing DNA, melting temperatures under different salt
conditions were determined directly. A DNA molecule con-
sisting only of guanines and cytosines is much more stable
and melts around or above 100C depending on the con-
centration of NaCl. Melting temperatures of GC-containing
DNA were obtained by extrapolating TM’s measured for
four DNA duplexes with different GC-contents (c ¼ 0,
14, 32 and 41.5%) to c ¼ 100% (Figure 4a). Thermal stabil-
ities of AT- and GC-containing DNA duplexes in the
presence of NaCl and in 1· TBE are compared in
Figure 4b. Melting temperatures of both molecules in 1·
TBE correspond to the TM of these molecules in the presence
of 15 mM [Na+].
We studied eight AT-containing and eight GC-containing
nicked dinucleotide stacks. Like in the experiments on the
temperature dependence of stacking parameters described
above, for each KL contact we examined KL/F and KL/R
molecules and the stacking parameter was obtained as their
average in case of unique contacts (AT, TA, GC and CG). In
case of stacks with dyad symmetry, we also average DGSTKL
values of equivalent stacks. Individual stacking parameters
are plotted in Figure 3b and listed in Supplementary
Table 3. Note that all DGSTKL values are plotted as a function
of the ‘effective’ concentration of sodium, i.e. the fist point
at [Na+] ¼ 15 mM corresponds to the experiment conducted
in 1· TBE, the last point at [Na+] ¼ 100 mM corresponds to
1· TBE appended with 85 mM of NaCl. All DGSTKL values
become more negative gradually as concentration of sodium
increases.
Effect of phosphate at the nick site on
stacked-unstacked equilibrium
Site-specific nicks in KL/F and KL/R fragments were
introduced enzymatically. Nicking enzymes, like any res-
triction enzymes, cleave DNA strand producing a 50 phosphate
and a 30 hydroxyl termini, which translate into two
negative charges at the nick site of the double helix. To
estimate the effect of the phosphate negative charges on the
stacked-unstacked equilibrium at the DNA nick we
considered DNA molecules where the phosphate has been
removed from the nick site. Dephosphorylated nicks carry
no charge.
The molecules with dephosphorylated nicks and gaps were
studied by urea-enhanced PAGE in the same manner as the
(a) (b)
Figure 3. Effect of ambient conditions—temperature (a) and ionic strength (b)—on DNA stacking parameters for AT- and GC-containing contacts. Dinucleotide
stacks are shown at the top of each panel. Error bars represent the scatter range of the experimentally determinedDGSTKL values of nicked stacks (see text). This data is
tabulated in Supplementary Tables 2 and 3.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4. Stability of DNA under different salt conditions. (a) Dependence of
TM of 65 bp-long DNA duplexes on their GC content in 1· TBE (triangles,
dashed line) and in 10 mM TE (pH 7.4) (circles, solid lines) appended with NaCl
at 20 mM (line 1), 50 mM (line 2), 100 mM (line 3) and 200 mM (line 4). Linear
extrapolation to c ¼ 100% is used to estimated TM of GC-containing DNA.
(b) Stability of AT-containing (open symbols) and GC-containing (closed
symbols) 65 bp-long duplex DNA as a function of sodium concentration (cir-
cles) and in 1·TBE (triangles). TM’s of AT-containing DNA were measured
directly; TM’s of GC-containing DNA were estimated by extrapolation shown
in (a). For both duplexes, stability in 1· TBE corresponds to the stability in the
presence of 15 mM Na+ (as plotted).
568 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 2
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
molecules with phosphates. As expected, treatment of DNA
fragments with Alkaline Phosphatase, which results in the
removal of terminal phosphates as well as dephosphorylation
of the gap, had no effect on PAGE mobility of intact and
gapped fragments (data not shown). DGST values obtained
for molecules with nicked stacks before and after dephos-
phorylation are compared in Figure 5a. A defined trend is
observed for both AT- and GC-containing contacts—
there is a significant 0.4–0.6 kcal/mol shift towards more
negative energies upon removal of a phosphate from the
nick site only if phosphorylated 50 nt is a purine nucleotide,
like in case of AA/F and TT/R, but not in case of AA/R or
TT/F. When the phosphate is located on a pyrimidine
nucleotide, its removal has no effect on DGST values. This
trend holds for 15 out of 16 nicked fragments shown in
Figure 5a; the only exception is GC/F. The origin of such
diverse behavior cannot be addressed by our approach and
it deserves a separate detailed study. We can only suppose
that removal of the phosphate from purine nucleotides allows
rearrangement—in a sequence-independent manner—of the
local structure benefiting stacked conformation. Alternatively,
differential effect of phosphate positioning on purines or
pyrimidines might be entropic in origin due to larger
conformational flexibility of purine nucleotides without 50
phosphates (54).
Note that DGST values of nicked stacks with and without
phosphate display similar dependences on salt concentration
(Figure 5b). For nicks flanked by AT pairs, this is the case for
AA/R, TT/F, AT/F and AT/R fragments which display no
change in DGST values upon removal of the phosphate from
50-T nt and for AA/F, TT/R, TA/F and TA/R fragments which
shift towards more negative DGST values upon dephosphoryla-
tion of 50-A nt. This result indicates that the phosphate charge
at the nick does not contribute to the salt dependence of the
measured stacking component; differences seen in Figure 5a
between the nicked stacks with or without phosphate on
50-purine nucleotides are not due to electrostatic interactions.
In our further analysis we consider only molecules carrying
phosphates at the nicks.
DISCUSSION
The nature of the free energy parameters governing
stacked-unstacked equilibrium at DNA nick
We obtain stacking free energy parameters by studying the
equilibrium between stacked and unstacked form of DNA nick
schematically presented in Figure 1a. The DNA molecule in
the stacked state is very close the molecule without the lesion
(42–49). Strictly speaking, the conformation of the unstacked
state is unknown and our analysis is based on the assumption
that unstacked state is close to the molecule with a short gap in
place of a nick. Indeed, presence of a single-stranded gap
precludes stacking interactions between two helical interfaces.
Note, that this is not the case for 1 nt gaps—it appears that
stacking between the base pairs flanking the gap is restored to
some degree leading to anisotropic, directional bending of the
molecule reducing the size of the gapped cavity (48,55).
Molecules with longer gaps however, have been shown to
possess isotropic bending flexibility which manifests itself
in the absence of helical periodicity in electrophoretic mobility
and cyclization kinetics measurements (50,53). Molecules
with gaps 2, 3 and 4 nt in length migrate very closely during
PAGE revealing similarity of their effective conformations
(13,50). Additional factors [i.e. sequence of single-stranded
linker (56)] come into effect once the gap size is longer than
persistent length of single chains—in this case, the gap is
likely to act as a hinge.
Thus, we use molecules with 2 nt-long gaps positioned in
forward or reverse strand to approximate the open state of the
nick; the site of the gap is thought of as a point of increased
isotropic bending flexibility, which leads to retardation of the
molecule during PAGE (57). Perturbations of DNA fragment
at the gap sites are largely unaffected by ambient conditions—
temperature, salt and denaturant concentration (Figure 2a–c).
Nicked DNA undergoes transition between the stacked
(closed or intact-like) and unstacked (open or gapped-like)
states (13). Note, that like in case of short gaps, perturbation
at the nick site has been shown to be isotropic with no pref-
erential directionality (50,58). The partitioning of molecules
(a) (b)
Figure 5. Effect of phosphorylation state of 50 nt at the nick site on stacked-unstacked equilibrium. (a) Stacking parameters measured in 1· TBE at 37C of
AT-containing (top panel) and GC-containing (bottom panel) nicked dinucleotide stacks before (circles) and after (triangles) dephosphorylation are compared.
White and gray fills are used for fragments with the nick in the forward and reverse strand, respectively. Nicked dinucleotide stacks with a purine at a 50-side of the
nick are underscored (see text). (b) Salt dependence of DGST values of nicked contacts indicated to the right of each panel before (circles) and after (triangles)
dephosphorylation. Total concentration of sodium assuming 1· TBE to be equivalent to 15 mM Na+ is indicated, see Figure 4.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 2 569
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
between these conformations determines the electrophoretic
mobility of the nicked fragment and is the basis for measuring
stacking parameters using Equations 1 and 2.
For further analysis we assume that the parameters describ-
ing the equilibrium at the nick site of DNA that we measure are
in fact the same stacking parameters that stabilize intact
double helix and determine the first term on the right-hand
side of Equation 3:
DGKL ¼ DGSTKL þ
1
2
DGBPK þ
1
2
DGBPL ‚ 3
where DGKL is the total melting free energy parameter (per
1 base pair) of a long DNA molecule (neglecting the end
effects) and DGBP terms are the free energy contributions
due to pairing between complementary bases (5). There are
two DGBP parameters DGBPAT and DG
BP
GC for AT and GC
pairs, respectively.
How accurate is the above assumption? Experimentally, the
assumption proves to stand a critical test when we compare the
DGSTKL values obtained for KL/F and KL/R series: these values
indeed are very close [see Figure 4b in ref. (13)]. The DGSTKL
values for dinucleotide stacks equivalent due to dyad axis of
symmetry of the double helix (e.g. AA/TT and TT/AA) are
close as well.
Let us examine the stacked-unstacked equilibrium at the
nick of the dinucleotide stack and compare it to the helix-
to-coil transition of a DNA doublet. The schematic in
Figure 6 depicts these two transitions. Hydrogen bonding
between complementary bases and stacking of pairs along
the helical axis are disrupted upon melting; duplex melting
to single strands is accompanied by the gain in conformational
entropy, release of counterions and change in interactions with
the solvent. Strictly speaking, partitioning of these effects
between DGST and DGBP terms is not known. For example,
base pairing terms in Equation 3 include breakage of hydrogen
bonds between bases and formation of hydrogen bonds with
water molecules rearranging the water structure around DNA
chains. Likewise, base-stacking interactions have electrostatic
and hydrophobic components.
The stacked-unstacked transition of a nicked DNA doublet
involves loss of stacking interactions while hydrogen bonding
between the complementary bases is preserved (Figure 6). It
also involves removal of structural constraints imposed in the
double helix making most of the conformational space of the
intact sugar-phosphate backbone accessible. This part of back-
bone conformational entropy gain is close to the gain per one
strand upon duplex melting. The conformation about the glyc-
osidic bond in an open stack, however, is preserved as in
duplex form. Nicked strand is lacking O30-P linkage; the
absence of this constraint allows for additional conformations
when second-order interactions (interactions depending on
two torsional angles) are repealed (59). Note that the backbone
conformational entropy change is independent of the particu-
lar sequence and does not affect heterogeneity of DGSTKL values.
We assume that conformation of base pairs flanking the nick is
preserved as in stacked duplex. Like in case of helix-to-coil
transition, other factors contributing to transition parameters
come from interactions with solvent and counterions.
We assign free energy difference to stacked-unstacked equi-
librium at the nick site of DNA—this parameter describes
interaction of two neighboring base pairs and is sequence-
dependent. As noted above, it also includes a part of conforma-
tional entropy change and other relevant interactions. These
factors are universal for all neighboring pairs and do not con-
tribute to heterogeneity of measured DGSTKL. We assume further
that this parameter represents the stacking term of intact DNA
duplex in Equation 3. Note that this assumption explicitly
implies that stacked/closed state of the nicked stack is equi-
valent to the stack in duplex without the lesion and no optim-
ization of the base pair stacking occurs upon introduction of
the nick like in case of dangling unpaired nucleotides (52). If
this assumption is valid, then parameters of stacked-unstacked
equilibrium at the nicks positioned on one or the other strand
of the each dinucleotide stack will be close. Indeed, we have
shown previously that stacking parameters for KL/F and KL/R
molecules are similar (13). Parameters obtained for stacks
equivalent due to dyad axis of symmetry, i.e. AA and TT,
GG and CC, are also similar. Note that marked difference is
observed in case of coaxial stacking parameters determined in
melting experiments (39).
Stability of DNA polymer under different
ambient conditions
Let us consider a DNA polymer comprised of adenines and
thymines. The set of nearest-neighbor stability parameters of
all AT-containing dinucleotides, i.e. DGAT, DGAA ¼ DGTT,
DGTA, fully describes the contacts found in this polymer.
According to Equation 3, stability parameter per 1 bp,
DGAT, of the AT-polymer with a random sequence is
(a)
(b)
Figure 6. Overall stability, stacking and base pairing contributions for DNA
polymers at different temperatures (a) Temperature dependence of the stacking
contributions to the stability of AT- (red circles) and GC- (blue circles)
containing polymers. Straight solid line of the same color gives the temperature
dependence of the stability parameter of corresponding polymer calculated
using Equations 5 and 6 at [Na+] ¼ 15 mM. (b) Temperature dependence
of AT (red) and GC (blue) base pairing parameters calculated as a
difference between stability and stacking terms using data in (a). Horizontal
broken lines correspond to mean values of DGBPAT ¼ 0.57 kcal/mol and
DGBPGC ¼ 0.11 kcal/mol.
570 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 2
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
given by [see ref. (13)]:
DGAT ¼ 1
4
X
AT‚ AA‚ TT‚ TA
DGKL
¼ 1
4
X
AT‚ AA‚ TT‚ TA
DGSTKL þ DGBPAT
4
Stacking contribution to the polymer stability is the first
term of the right-hand side of Equation. 4; the second term
presents the base pairing contribution. Experimentally determ-
ined stacking term is the mean of stacking parameters we
obtained for all AT-containing contacts. Stability parameter
for GC-containing polymer, DGGC, is calculated analog-
ously from stacking, DGSTGC‚DG
ST
GG ¼ DGSTCC‚DGSTCG and base
pairing DGBPG*C contributions:
DGGC ¼ 1
4
X
GC‚ GG‚ CC‚ CG
DGKL
¼ 1
4
X
GC‚ GG‚ CC‚ CG
DGSTKL þ DGBPGC
5
DNA stability parameters in terms of melting temperatures,
TATM and T
GC
M , are salt-dependent and are given by the fol-
lowing empirical equations for AT- and GC-containing
polymers, respectively (60):
TATM ¼ 355:55 þ 7:95 ln Naþ and
TGCM ¼ 391:55 þ 4:89 ln Naþ‚
6
where TATM and T
GC
M are in degrees Kelvin. Equation 6 trans-
lates into free energy difference stability parameters using
DS ¼ 24.85 cal/mol K (61) and Equation 7.
DG ¼ DSðTMTÞ 7
Stability parameters of AT-containing and GC-containing
polymers calculated for [Na+] ¼ 15 mM using Equations 6
and 7 are plotted in Figure 7a. Salt dependences of these
parameters calculated at 37C are presented in Figure 8a.
Temperature dependence of stacking and base
pairing contributions to DNA stability
Stability of a DNA polymer comprised only of A’s and T’s
arranged in a random order is given by two terms—the stack-
ing term and the base pairing term—that appear on the right-
hand side of Equation 4. Stacking term is calculated as an
average of stacking parameters of AT-containing contacts,
which we determine in PAGE experiments conducted under
certain set of ambient conditions (temperature and salt con-
centration). Stacking term of the GC-containing polymer is
obtained analogously.
Stacking contributions to the stability of AT- and GC-
containing polymers for different temperatures are plotted
in Figure 7a. Comparison of the temperature dependence
of stacking terms with the temperature dependence of
stability terms for both polymers reveals remarkable similar-
ity between the two. Linear regression analysis of the temper-
ature dependences of DGST values gives mean slope of
dDGST
dT ¼ 0:026 kcal/molK, which is very close to the slope
of temperature dependence of stability parameters described
by Equations 6 and 7. It is evident that temperature depend-
ence of stacking component fully determines the temperature
dependence of DNA stability parameters throughout the tem-
perature range employed in our experiments.
According to Equations 4 and 5, the difference between the
melting stability of the polymer and the stacking term gives the
contribution of AT or GC base pairing. The plots shown in
Figure 7b present the base pairing term calculated for different
temperatures by subtracting the experimentally determined
stacking term from the polymer stability parameter. With
good accuracy, the base pairing term is independent of temper-
ature within the temperature range used in our experiments. The
horizontal lines give the mean values of base pairing parameters
at 15 mM Na+ of DGBPAT ¼ 0:57kcal=mol and DGBPGC ¼0:11kcal=mol. We conclude that stability of the DNA poly-
mer with respect to strand separation is mainly determined by
stacking interactions with base pairing being destabilizing (AT
pairs) or contributing almost nothing (GC-pairs) (Table 1).
Furthermore, throughout the temperature range used in
our experiments, heterogeneity of base-stacking interac-
tions of AT- and GC-containing contacts, dDGST ¼
1
4
P
AT‚AA‚TT‚TA DG
ST
KL 14
P
GC‚GG‚CC‚CG DG
ST
KL, is responsible
for a substantial part of the difference in the stabilities
of AT- and GC-polymers, dDG ¼ DGATDGGC
(Figure 7a). In the presence of 15 mM Na+, heterogeneous
stacking accounts for dDGST ¼ 0.6 kcal/mol out of
dDG ¼ 1.2 kcal/mol stability difference of AT- and GC-
containing polymers. Thus, the dependence of DNA stability
on the GC content is not only due to the fact that GC pairs
are stronger than AT pairs (Figure 7b) but also is due to the
stronger stacking component of GC-containing contacts
(a)
(b)
Figure 7. Overall stability, stacking and base pairing contributions for DNA
polymers at different salt conditions. (a) Salt dependence of the stacking term in
the stability of AT- (red circles) and GC- (blue circles) containing polymers.
Straight solid lines of the same color correspond to the salt dependence of the
DNA polymer stability calculated using Equations 5 and 6 at 37C. (b) Salt
dependence of the base pairing parameters for AT (red) and GC (blue) pairs
calculated at each concentration as a difference between stability term and
stacking term using data from (a). Horizontal broken lines correspond to mean
values of DGBPAT ¼ 0:61kcal=mol and DGBPGC ¼ 0:01kcal=mol.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 2 571
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
(Figure 7a). This understanding of stacking domination con-
stitutes a paradigm shift in the view on DNA stability.
Salt dependence of stacking and base pairing
contributions to DNA polymer stability
Stacking terms of AT- and GC-containing polymers are
calculated from stacking parameters obtained in PAGE
experiments that have been carried out under different salt
conditions (Figure 8a). Salt dependences of the stability para-
meters of both polymers at 37C calculated using Equation 6
and 7, are also shown in Figure 8a. The two dependencies are
very similar indicating that salt dependence of stacking term
determines salt dependence of DNA stability parameters
throughout the range of salt concentration used in our experi-
ments. In case of AT-containing contacts, salt dependence of
stacking component reproduces salt dependence of DNA sta-
bility parameters with a great degree of accuracy. Salt depend-
ences of stacking terms of AT- and GC-containing contacts
are similar to dDG
ST
d ln ½Naþ ¼ 0:200kcal=mol. The dependence of
stacking parameters on salt concentration was unexpected. In
fact, in our original publication we assumed that base pairing
term is fully responsible for ionic strength dependence of DNA
melting stability (13). Figure 8a shows that this assumption is
incorrect and base pairing term plotted in Figure 8b is virtually
independent of salt concentration. Horizontal lines correspond
to the values of base pairing parameters averaged over the
whole range of salt concentrations: DGBPA*T ¼ 0:61 kcal=mol
and DGBPG*C ¼ 0:01 kcal=mol (Table 1).
What is the origin of the ionic strength dependence of stack-
ing parameters measured in PAGE experiments? It is clear that
stacking is a net phenomenon involving hydrophobic, electro-
static and dispersion components (28,29,62–65). There is no
agreement between researchers, however, what is the domin-
ant force in this interaction. Luo et al. (29) emphasize a dom-
inant role of nonelectrostatic interactions. Gellman and co-
workers (65,66) report that neither solvophobic effects nor
dispersion forces are important in aromatic stacking; stabil-
ization is achieved through attractive interactions between
positive and negative partial charges on bases. Guckian
et al. found that hydrophobic effects dominate stacking but
dispersion forces and electrostatic interaction between partial
charges contribute substantially to the total base-stacking as
well. This is particularly true for natural bases, which have
significant charge localization (28,67). In either case, electro-
static component of base-stacking interaction (substantial or
not) will depend on the ambient ionic strength through
local screening of partial charges at the solvent accessible
positions. In the context of the DNA double helix, however,
this effect is likely to be overwhelmed by the salt-dependent
(a)
(b)
Figure 8. Schematic representation of (a) helix-to-coil transition of a DNA dinucleotide stack and (b) stacked-unstacked equilibrium at a nick site.
Table 1. Stacking and base pairing contributions to DNA polymer stability under different ambient conditionsa
[Na+], mM Temperature, C AT-containing polymer GC-containing polymer
1
4
P
AT‚ AA‚ TT‚ TA
DGSTKL DG
BP
AT
1
4
P
GC‚ GG‚ CC‚ CG
DGSTKL DG
BP
GC
15 32/52 1.01/ 0.36b 0.57 1.48/1.02b 0.11
15/100 37 0.92/1.32b 0.61 1.44/1.83b 0.01
aAll free energy parameters are given in kcal/mol.
bThe two values correspond to the temperature or sodium concentration range as indicated.
572 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 2
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
interactions between highly negatively charged DNA back-
bones as described by the polyelectrolyte theory of DNA sta-
bility (68,69). Similarity between salt dependences of DNA
stacking parameters measured in PAGE experiments and DNA
stability parameters indicates that electrostatic component
contributes exclusively to DGSTKL of Equation 3. Note, that
charge of the phosphate at the 50 nt of the nicked stack
does not affect salt dependence of measured DGSTKL parameters.
CONCLUSIONS
Separation of the two contributions to thermal stability of the
DNA double helix is achieved by studying PAGE of DNA
molecules with solitary nicks and gaps. For the first time, the
dependence of DNA stacking parameters on ambient condi-
tions (temperature and salt concentration) is determined.
Throughout the temperature and salt concentration range of
our experiments, base-stacking interactions are always stabil-
izing for both AT- and GC-containing contacts in the DNA
double helix. In fact, DNA stability is mainly determined by
base-stacking interactions. GC pairing does not contribute to
stabilization of DNA duplex, while AT pairing is always
destabilizing. This finding presents a paradigm shift in the
understanding of the interplay of the forces stabilizing
DNA double helix. For all temperatures heterogeneity of
stacking interactions in AT- and GC-containing contacts
accounts for at least half of heterogeneity in the stability of
AT- and GC-polymers; the other half is due to the difference
in the energetics of AT and GC base pairing. The data on
separation of stacking and base pairing contributions have
made it possible to describe sequence-dependent fluctuational
opening of the DNA double helix (70).
SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Supplementary Data are available at NAR Online.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank Dr R.M. Georgiadis for providing access
to spectrophotometer and Ms J. Ruemmele for technical
assistance with melting experiments. The authors thank Dr
Y. Mamasakhlisov and Dr P. E. Nielsen for fruitful discussions.
Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this
article was provided by NIH.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Marmur,J. and Doty,P. (1962) Determination of the base composition of
dioxyribonucleic acid from its thermal melting temperature. J. Mol. Biol.,
5, 109–118.
2. Wartell,R.M. and Benight,A.S. (1985) Thermal denaturation of
DNA molecules. Phys. Rep., 126, 67–107.
3. SantaLucia,J.,Jr and Hicks,D. (2004) The thermodynamics of DNA
structural motifs. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct., 33, 415–440.
4. Williams,M.C. and Rouzina,I. (2002) Force spectroscopy of single DNA
and RNA molecules. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., 12, 330–336.
5. Vologodskii,A.V., Amirikyan,B.R., Lyubchenko,Y.L. and
Frank-Kamenetskii,M.D. (1984) Allowance for heterogeneous stacking
in the DNA helix-coil transition theory. J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn., 2,
131–148.
6. SantaLucia,J.,Jr, Allawi,H.T. and Seneviratne,P.A. (1996) Improved
nearest-neighbor parameters for predicting DNA duplex stability.
Biochemistry, 35, 3555–3562.
7. SantaLucia,J.,Jr (1998) A unified view of polymer, dumbbell, and
oligonucleotide DNA nearest-neighbor thermodynamics. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA, 95, 1460–1465.
8. Sugimoto,N., Nakano,S., Yoneyama,M. and Honda,K. (1996) Improved
thermodynamic parameters and helix initiation factor to predict stability
of DNA duplexes. Nucleic Acids Res., 24, 4501–4505.
9. Doktycz,M.J., Goldstein,R.F., Paner,T.M., Gallo,F.J. and Benight,A.S.
(1992) Studies of DNA dumbbells. I. Melting curves of 17 DNA
dumbbells with different duplex stem sequences linked by T4 endloops:
evaluation of the nearest-neighbor stacking interactions in DNA.
Biopolymers, 32, 849–864.
10. Owczarzy,R., Vallone,P.M., Goldstein,R.F. and Benight,A.S. (1999)
Studies of DNA dumbbells VII: evaluation of the next-nearest-neighbor
sequence-dependent interactions in duplex DNA. Biopolymers, 52,
29–56.
11. Frank-Kamenetskii,M.D. (1987) How the double helix breathes.
Nature, 328, 17–18.
12. Gueron,M., Kochoyan,M. and Leroy,J.L. (1987) A single mode of DNA
base-pair opening drives imino proton exchange. Nature, 328, 89–92.
13. Protozanova,E., Yakovchuk,P. and Frank-Kamenetskii,M.D. (2004)
Stacked-unstacked equilibrium at the nick site of DNA. J. Mol. Biol.,
342, 775–785.
14. Le Cam,E., Fack,F., Menissier-de Murcia,J., Cognet,J.A., Barbin,A.,
Sarantoglou,V., Revet,B., Delain,E. and de Murcia,G. (1994)
Conformational analysis of a 139 base-pair DNA fragment containing a
single-stranded break and its interaction with human poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase. J. Mol. Biol., 235, 1062–1071.
15. de Murcia,G. and Menissier de Murcia,J. (1994) Poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase: a molecular nick-sensor. Trends Biochem. Sci., 19,
172–176.
16. Petrucco,S., Volpi,G., Bolchi,A., Rivetti,C. and Ottonello,S. (2002) A
nick-sensing DNA 30-repair enzyme from Arabidopsis. J. Biol. Chem.,
277, 23675–23683.
17. Timson,D.J., Singleton,M.R. and Wigley,D.B. (2000) DNA ligases in the
repair and replication of DNA. Mutat. Res., 460, 301–318.
18. Nuovo,G.J. (2000) In situ strand displacement amplification: an improved
technique for detection of low copy nucleic acids. Diagn. Mol. Pathol.,
9, 195–202.
19. Van Ness,J., Van Ness,L.K. and Galas,D.J. (2003) Isothermal reactions
for the amplification of oligonucleotides. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA,
100, 4504–4509.
20. Kotler,L.E., Zevin-Sonkin,D., Sobolev,I.A., Beskin,A.D. and
Ulanovsky,L.E. (1993) DNA sequencing: modular primers assembled
from a library of hexamers or pentamers. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA,
90, 4241–4245.
21. Broude,N.E., Sano,T., Smith,C.L. and Cantor,C.R. (1994) Enhanced
DNA sequencing by hybridization. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 91,
3072–3076.
22. Nilsson,M., Malmgren,H., Samiotaki,M., Kwiatkowski,M.,
Chowdhary,B.P. and Landegren,U. (1994) Padlock probes:
circularizing oligonucleotides for localized DNA detection.
Science, 265, 2085–2088.
23. Kuhn,H., Demidov,V.V. and Frank-Kamenetskii,M.D. (2002)
Rolling-circle amplification under topological constraints. Nucleic
Acids Res., 30, 574–580.
24. Hardenbol,P., Baner,J., Jain,M., Nilsson,M., Namsaraev,E.A.,
Karlin-Neumann,G.A., Fakhrai-Rad,H., Ronaghi,M., Willis,T.D.,
Landegren,U. et al. (2003) Multiplexed genotyping with
sequence-tagged molecular inversion probes. Nat. Biotechnol.,
21, 673–678.
25. Danilov,V.I. and Tolokh,I.S. (1984) Nature of the stacking of nucleic acid
bases in water: a Monte Carlo simulation. J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn., 2,
119–130.
26. Cieplak,P. and Kollman,P.A. (1988) Calculation of the free energy
of association of nucleic acid bases in vacuo and water solutions.
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 110, 3734–3739.
27. Dang,L.X. and Kollman,P.A. (1990) Molecular dynamics simulations
study of the free energy of association of 9-methyladenine and
1-methylthymine bases in water. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 112, 503–507.
28. Hunter,C.A. (1993) Sequence-dependent DNA structure. The role of base
stacking interactions. J. Mol. Biol., 230, 1025–1054.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 2 573
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
29. Luo,R., Gilson,H.S., Potter,M.J. and Gilson,M.K. (2001) The physical
basis of nucleic acid base stacking in water. Biophys. J., 80, 140–148.
30. Sponer,J., Jurecka,P. and Hobza,P. (2004) Accurate interaction energies
of hydrogen-bonded nucleic acid base pairs. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 126,
10142–10151.
31. Burkard,M.E., Kierzek,R. and Turner,D.H. (1999) Thermodynamics of
unpaired terminal nucleotides on short RNA helixes correlates with
stacking at helix termini in larger RNAs. J. Mol. Biol., 290, 967–982.
32. Bommarito,S., Peyret,N. and SantaLucia,J.,Jr (2000) Thermodynamic
parameters for DNA sequences with dangling ends. Nucleic Acids Res.,
28, 1929–1934.
33. Petersheim,M. and Turner,D.H. (1983) Base-stacking and base-pairing
contributions to helix stability: thermodynamics of double-helix
formation with CCGG, CCGGp, CCGGAp, ACCGGp, CCGGUp and
ACCGGUp. Biochemistry, 22, 256–263.
34. Freier,S.M., Alkema,D., Sinclair,A., Neilson,T. and Turner,D.H. (1985)
Contributions of dangling end stacking and terminal base-pair formation
to the stabilities of XGGCCp, XCCGGp, XGGCCYp, and XCCGGYp
helixes. Biochemistry, 24, 4533–4539.
35. Freier,S.M., Kierzek,R., Jaeger,J.A., Sugimoto,N., Caruthers,M.H.,
Neilson,T. and Turner,D.H. (1986) Improved free-energy parameters for
predictions of RNA duplex stability. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 83,
9373–9377.
36. Lane,M.J., Paner,T., Kashin,I., Faldasz,B.D., Li,B., Gallo,F.J. and
Benight,A.S. (1997) The thermodynamic advantage of DNA
oligonucleotide ‘stacking hybridization’ reactions: energetics of a
DNA nick. Nucleic Acids Res., 25, 611–617.
37. Vasiliskov,V.A., Prokopenko,D.V. and Mirzabekov,A.D. (2001) Parallel
multiplex thermodynamic analysis of coaxial base stacking in DNA
duplexes by oligodeoxyribonucleotide microchips. Nucleic Acids Res.,
29, 2303–2313.
38. Pyshnyi,D.V., Pyshnaya,I., Levina,A., Goldberg,E., Zarytova,V.,
Knorre,D. and Ivanova,E. (2001) Thermodynamic analysis of stacking
hybridization of oligonucleotides with DNA template. J. Biomol. Struct.
Dyn., 19, 555–570.
39. Pyshnyi,D.V., Goldberg,E.L. and Ivanova,E.M. (2003) Efficiency of
coaxial stacking depends on the duplex structure. J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn.,
21, 459–468.
40. Walter,A.E., Turner,D.H., Kim,J., Lyttle,M.H., Muller,P., Mathews,D.H.
and Zuker,M. (1994) Coaxial stacking of helixes enhances binding of
oligoribonucleotides and improves predictions of RNA folding.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 91, 9218–9222.
41. Walter,A.E. and Turner,D.H. (1994) Sequence dependence of stability for
coaxial stacking of RNA helixes with Watson–Crick base paired
interfaces. Biochemistry, 33, 12715–12719.
42. Pieters,J.M., Mans,R.M., van den Elst,H., van der Marel,G.A., van
Boom,J.H. and Altona,C. (1989) Conformational and thermodynamic
consequences of the introduction of a nick in duplexed DNA fragments: an
NMR study augmented by biochemical experiments. Nucleic Acids Res.,
17, 4551–4565.
43. Shore,D. and Baldwin,R.L. (1983) Energetics of DNA twisting. I.
Relation between twist and cyclization probability. J. Mol. Biol., 170,
957–981.
44. Erie,D.A., Jones,R.A., Olson,W.K., Sinha,N.K. and Breslauer,K.J. (1989)
Melting behavior of a covalently closed, single-stranded, circular DNA.
Biochemistry, 28, 268–273.
45. Snowden-Ifft,E.A. and Wemmer,D.E. (1990) Characterization of the
structure and melting of DNAs containing backbone nicks and gaps.
Biochemistry, 29, 6017–6025.
46. Aymami,J., Coll,M., van der Marel,G.A., van Boom,J.H., Wang,A.H. and
Rich,A. (1990) Molecular structure of nicked DNA: a substrate for DNA
repair enzymes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 87, 2526–2530.
47. Singh,S., Patel,P.K. and Hosur,R.V. (1997) Structural polymorphism and
dynamism in the DNA segment GATCTTCCCCCCGGAA: NMR
investigations of hairpin, dumbbell, nicked duplex, parallel strands,
and i-motif. Biochemistry, 36, 13214–13222.
48. Roll,C., Ketterle,C., Faibis,V., Fazakerley,G.V. and Boulard,Y. (1998)
Conformations of nicked and gapped DNA structures by NMR and
molecular dynamic simulations in water. Biochemistry, 37,
4059–4070.
49. Kozerski,L., Mazurek,A.P., Kawecki,R., Bocian,W., Krajewski,P.,
Bednarek,E., Sitkowski,J., Williamson,M.P., Moir,A.J. and Hansen,P.E.
(2001) A nicked duplex decamer DNA with a PEG(6) tether.
Nucleic Acids Res., 29, 1132–1143.
50. Mills,J.B., Cooper,J.P. and Hagerman,P.J. (1994) Electrophoretic
evidence that single-stranded regions of one or more nucleotides
dramatically increase the flexibility of DNA. Biochemistry, 33,
1797–1803.
51. Kuhn,H., Protozanova,E. and Demidov,V.V. (2002) Monitoring of single
nicks in duplex DNA by gel electrophoretic mobility-shift assay.
Electrophoresis, 23, 2384–2387.
52. Turner,D.H., Sugimoto,N., Kierzek,R. and Dreiker,S.D. (1987) Free
energy increments for hydrogen bonds in nucleic acid base pairs.
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 109, 3783–3785.
53. Du,Q., Vologodskaia,M., Kuhn,H., Frank-Kamenetskii,M. and
Vologodskii,A. (2005) Gapped DNA and cyclization of short DNA
fragments. Biophys. J., 88, 4137–4145.
54. Petersheim,M. and Turner,D.H. (1983) Proton magnetic resonance
melting studies of CCGGp, CCGGAp, ACCGGp, CCGGUp and
ACCGGUp. Biochemistry, 22, 269–277.
55. Guo,H. and Tullius,T.D. (2003) Gapped DNA is anisotropically bent.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 100, 3743–3747.
56. Mills,J.B., Vacano,E. and Hagerman,P.J. (1999) Flexibility of
single-stranded DNA: use of gapped duplex helices to determine
the persistence lengths of poly(dT) and poly(dA). J. Mol. Biol.,
285, 245–257.
57. Kahn,J.D., Yun,E. and Crothers,D.M. (1994) Detection of localized
DNA flexibility. Nature, 368, 163–166.
58. Furrer,P., Bednar,J., Stasiak,A.Z., Katritch,V., Michoud,D., Stasiak,A.
and Dubochet,J. (1997) Opposite effect of counterions on the
persistence length of nicked and non-nicked DNA. J. Mol. Biol.,
266, 711–721.
59. Cantor,C.R. and Schimmel,P.R. (1980) Biophysical Chemistry Part I:
The Conformation of Biological Macromolecules. W. H. Freeman,
San Francisco.
60. Frank-Kamenetskii,M.D. (1971) Simplification of the empirical
relationship between melting temperature of DNA, its GC content and
concentration of sodium ions in solution. Biopolymers, 10,
2623–2624.
61. Delcourt,S.G. and Blake,R.D. (1991) Stacking energies in DNA.
J. Biol. Chem., 266, 15160–15169.
62. Guckian,K.M., Schweitzer,B.A., Ren,R.X.-F., Sheils,C.J.,
Tahmassebi,D.C. and Kool,E.T. (2000) Factors contributing to aromatic
stacking in water: evaluation in the context of DNA. J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
122, 2213–2222.
63. Friedman,R.A. and Honig,B. (1995) A free energy analysis of nucleic acid
base stacking in aqueous solution. Biophys. J., 69, 1528–1535.
64. Sponer,J., Leszczynski,J. and Hobza,P. (2001) Electronic properties,
hydrogen bonding, stacking, and cation binding of DNA and RNA bases.
Biopolymers, 61, 3–31.
65. Newcomb,L.F. and Gellman,S.H. (1994) Aromatic stacking
interactions in aqueous-solution: evidence that neither classical
hydrophobic effects nor dispersion forces are important. J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 116, 4993–4994.
66. Mckay,S.L., Haptonstall,B. and Gellman,S.H. (2001) Beyond the
hydrophobic effect: attractions involving heteroaromatic rings in aqueous
solution. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 123, 1244–1245.
67. Packer,M.J., Dauncey,M.P. and Hunter,C.A. (2000) Sequence-dependent
DNA structure: dinucleotide conformational maps. J. Mol. Biol., 295,
71–83.
68. Frank-Kamenetskii,M.D., Anshelevich,V.V. and Lukashin,A.V. (1987)
Polyelectrolyte model of DNA. Sov. Phys. Uspekhi, 30, 317–330.
69. Bond,J.P., Anderson,C.F. and Record,M.T.,Jr (1994)
Conformational transitions of duplex and triplex nucleic acid
helices: thermodynamic analysis of effects of salt concentration on
stability using preferential interaction coefficients. Biophys. J., 67,
825–836.
70. Krueger,A., Protozanova,E. and Frank-Kamenetskii,M.D. (2006)
Sequence-dependent base pair opening in DNA double helix. Biophys. J.
in press.
574 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 2
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
