  
 2005;65:4020-4030. Published online May 16, 2005.Cancer Res
 
Huichen Wang, Bustanur Rosidi, Ronel Perrault, et al.
 
Pathways of Nonhomologous End Joining
DNA Ligase III as a Candidate Component of Backup
 
 
 
 
Updated Version
 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-3055doi:
Access the most recent version of this article at: 
 
 
Cited Articles
 http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/65/10/4020.full.html#ref-list-1
This article cites 60 articles, 38 of which you can access for free at:
Citing Articles
 http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/65/10/4020.full.html#related-urls
This article has been cited by 65 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
 
 
E-mail alerts  related to this article or journal.Sign up to receive free email-alerts
Subscriptions
Reprints and
.pubs@aacr.orgPublications Department at
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR
Permissions
.permissions@aacr.orgDepartment at 
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
 American Association for Cancer Research Copyright © 2005 
 on February 21, 2013cancerres.aacrjournals.orgDownloaded from 
DOI:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-3055
DNA Ligase III as a Candidate Component of Backup Pathways
of Nonhomologous End Joining
Huichen Wang,
1
Bustanur Rosidi,
2
Ronel Perrault,
1
Minli Wang,
2
Lihua Zhang,
2
Frank Windhofer,
2
and George Iliakis
1,2
1Department of Radiation Oncology, Division of Experimental Radiation Oncology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Jefferson Medical College,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and 2Institute of Medical Radiation Biology, University Duisburg-Essen Medical School, Essen, Germany
Abstract
Biochemical and genetic studies support the view that the
majority of DNA double-strand breaks induced in the genome
of higher eukaryotes by ionizing radiation are removed by two
pathways of nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) termed D-
NHEJ and B-NHEJ. Whereas D-NHEJ depends on the activities
of the DNA-dependent protein kinase and DNA ligase IV/
XRCC4, components of B-NHEJ have not been identified. Using
extract fractionation, we show that the majority of DNA end
joining activity in extracts of HeLa cells derives from DNA
ligase III. DNA ligase III fractionates through two columns with
the maximum in DNA end joining activity and its depletion
from the extract causes loss of activity that can be recovered by
the addition of purified enzyme. The same fractionation
protocols provide evidence for an additional factor strongly
enhancing DNA end joining and shifting the product spectrum
from circles to multimers. An in vivo plasmid assay shows that
DNA ligase IV–deficient mouse embryo fibroblasts retain
significant DNA end joining activity that can be reduced by
up to 80% by knocking down DNA ligase III using RNA
interference. These in vivo and in vitro observations identify
DNA ligase III as a candidate component for B-NHEJ and point
to additional factors contributing to NHEJ efficiency. (Cancer
Res 2005; 65(10): 4020-30)
Introduction
Endogenous cellular processes and exogenous factors such as
ionizing radiation generate double-strand breaks (DSB) in the DNA
that undermine genomic integrity. Three enzymatically distinct
processes, homology-directed repair, single-strand annealing, and
nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) can, in principle, repair DNA
DSBs (1–4). In cells of higher eukaryotes, repair of ionizing
radiation–induced DNA DSBs is dominated by NHEJ, which as a
first approximation can be classified in two pathways. The first
pathway, DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK)–dependent
NHEJ (D-NHEJ), is responsible for a large proportion of the fast
component of rejoining observed in wild-type cells and requires the
activities of DNA-PK and DNA ligase IV/XRCC4. The second
component, backup NHEJ (B-NHEJ), corresponds to the slow
rejoining observed in wild-type cells, as well as to the majority of
end joining in cells with defects in factors required for D-NHEJ and
is supported by as of yet unidentified factors (5–7).
Recent biochemical studies focus on the coordination between
these pathways of NHEJ using as a model in vitro end joining by
cell extracts of restriction endonuclease–linearized plasmid DNA.
Efficient DNA end joining can be observed in vitro , which is
inhibited by anti-Ku antibodies if DNA-PKcs is present (5). Strong
inhibition of DNA end joining is also mediated by wortmannin, an
inhibitor of DNA-PKcs, in the presence but not in the absence of
Ku (5, 7). These results suggest that Ku and DNA-PKcs act in a
coordinated manner to direct end joining to a DNA-PK–dependent
pathway. On the other hand, efficient end joining is observed in
extracts of cells lacking DNA-PKcs, as well as in Ku-depleted
extracts in line with the operation of alternative pathways
equivalent to B-NHEJ (5, 7). It is thus conceivable that in vivo ,
DNA ends are quickly captured by Ku cooperating with DNA-PKcs
and are directed to D-NHEJ for rapid joining, kinetically suppressing
thus slower backup pathways such as B-NHEJ (5). Alternative
pathways of end joining such as B-NHEJ are expected to contribute
significantly to the overall repair of DNA DSBs when components
of D-NHEJ are either absent from the vicinity of the break, or
genetically/chemically compromised, and may therefore contribute
to genome maintenance and stability. Evidence in vivo and in vitro
suggests that backup pathways of NHEJ are error prone, and that
this characteristic is the cause of translocations leading to tumor
induction in mice with defects in D-NHEJ (8–12).
Despite the significance of backup pathways such as B-NHEJ in
the repair of DNA DSBs and genomic stability, information on the
factors involved is lacking. Here we report biochemical studies
designed to characterize components of B-NHEJ. Using extract
fractionation, we show that the majority of end joining activity in
extracts of HeLa cells derives from DNA ligase III. The same
fractionation protocols provide evidence for additional factors
enhancing end joining. These observations and in vivo plasmid end
joining results point to DNA ligase III as a candidate component
of B-NHEJ.
Materials and Methods
Cell lines and extract preparation. HeLa cells were grown either as
monolayer or suspension cultures in Joklik’s modified MEM (S-MEM)
supplemented with 5% bovine calf serum. 180BRM is a cell line derived in
our laboratory from 180BR primary fibroblasts by transfection with plasmid
pRNS-1 containing a replication deficient form of SV40 virus and the neo
gene that confers resistance to G418 (70 Ag/mL). 180BRM cells have an
extended life span that allows maintenance in culture under active growth
for several months (30-40 passages) but are not truly immortalized. Primary
180BR fibroblasts were established from a patient with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia who died from radiation morbidity (13). The cells carry a
homozygous, hypomorphic mutation in DNA ligase IV causing the
Note: H. Wang and B. Rosidi contributed equally to the work.
H. Wang is currently at the Center for Neurovirology and Cancer Biology, College of
Science and Technology, Temple University, 1900 North 12th Street, 015-96,
Philadelphia, PA 19122.
R. Perrault is currently at the Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Drexel
University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19129.
Requests for reprints: George Iliakis, Institute of Medical Radiation Biology,
University Duisburg-Essen Medical School, Hufelandstr. 55, 45122 Essen, Germany.
Phone: 49-201-723-4152; Fax: 49-201-723-5966; E-mail: georg.iliakis@uni-essen.de.
I2005 American Association for Cancer Research.
Cancer Res 2005; 65: (10). May 15, 2005 4020 www.aacrjournals.org
Research Article
 American Association for Cancer Research Copyright © 2005 
 on February 21, 2013cancerres.aacrjournals.orgDownloaded from 
DOI:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-3055
substitution of His278 for arginine (R278H) within a motif close to the
conserved active lysine site (14, 15). Although this mutation does not
confer a null phenotype, 180BR cells are radiosensitive to killing and
defective in the repair of DNA DSB (16). 180BRM cells were grown as
monolayer in MEM supplemented with 10% bovine calf serum. Mouse
embryo fibroblasts (MEF) from LIG4//p53/ animals (called here
as LIG4/ MEF; 17) were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum and antibiotics.
Experiments were done either with whole cell extract (WCE) or with
nuclear extract. For the preparation of HeLa cell extracts a 1- to 30-liter
suspension of cells was grown in spinner flasks to 0.5 to 1  106 cells/mL
and collected by centrifugation. For 180BRM extract preparation, 100 dishes
(100 mm, 20 mL growth medium, 0.5  106 cells) were prepared and cells
were allowed to grow up to f5  106 cells per dish before harvesting by
trypsinization. For further processing, cells from both cell lines were washed
once in ice-cold PBS and subsequently in five packed cell volumes of cold
hypotonic buffer [10 mmol/L HEPES (pH 7.5), 5 mmol/L KCl, 1.5 mmol/L
MgCl2, 0.2 mmol/L phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), and 0.5 mmol/L
DTT]. The cell pellet was resuspended in two volumes of hypotonic buffer
and after 10 minutes in ice, disrupted in a Dounce homogenizer (15 strokes
with a ‘‘B’’ pestle). For the preparation of WCE, 3 mol/L KCl were slowly
added to the homogenate to a final concentration of 0.5 mol/L KCl and after
30 minutes on ice, centrifuged for 40 minutes at 14,000 rpm at 4jC.
To remove DNA from the extract, one tenth extract volume of DEAE
Sepharose, equilibrated in dialysis buffer [25 mmol/L HEPES (pH 7.5),
100 mmol/L KCl, 1 mmol/L EDTA, 10% glycerol, 0.2 mmol/L PMSF, and
0.5 mmol/L DTT], was added and the mixture was gently rotated at 4jC for
30 minutes. Extract was cleared by centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for
20 minutes and dialyzed overnight in dialysis buffer. After centrifugation,
aliquots of the extract were snap frozen and stored at 80jC.
For nuclear extract preparation, cells were homogenized as above and
3 mol/L KCl were slowly added to a final concentration of 50 mmol/L KCl.
The extract was incubated for 10 minutes on ice and centrifuged for
30 minutes at 3,300  g at 4jC. Supernatant was collected as cytoplasmic
extract. Nuclear pellet was resuspended in two packed nuclear volumes
(pnv) of low salt buffer [20 mmol/L HEPES (pH 7.9), 20 mmol/L KCl,
1.5 mmol/L MgCl2, 0.2 mmol/L EDTA, 0.2 mmol/L PMSF, and 0.5 mmol/L
DTT] and 1 pnv of high salt buffer [10 mmol/L HEPES (pH 7.5), 1.6 mol/L
KCl, and 1.5 mmol/L MgCl2] was slowly added to a final concentration of
400 mmol/L KCl. Extract was incubated for 30 minutes at 4jC under gentle
shaking and centrifuged for 30 minutes at 50,000  g at 4jC. The
supernatant was collected as nuclear extract. In some preparations of
nuclear extract, DEAE Sepharose (0.1 volume) was added to remove DNA as
described above for WCE, and subsequently nuclear extract was dialyzed
overnight in dialysis buffer [20 mmol/L HEPES (pH 7.9), 10% to 20%
glycerol, 100 mmol/L KCl, 0.2 mmol/L EDTA, 0.2 mmol/L PMSF, and
0.5 mmol/L DTT] before aliquoting, snap freezing, and storing at 80jC.
In a series of experiments designed to optimize end joining in nuclear
extract, we observed extensive protein precipitation and loss of DNA end
joining activity after dialysis in buffer containing 100 mmol/L KCl
(see above), particularly when extract concentration was relatively high
(3-6 mg/mL). This adverse effect was practically eliminated by dialyzing
against 400 mM KCl, which was therefore adopted as routine preparation
procedure in later experiments. Extracts prepared under these conditions
are designated nuclear extract/high salt to indicate their dialysis against
a high salt buffer. Finally, because DNA end joining activity remained
partially bound on DEAE Sepharose used to remove DNA from nuclear
extract, we chose to omit this step in more recent extract preparations.
The outlined modifications resulted in quantitative rather than
qualitative improvements in extract preparation and, with this in mind,
results obtained using early or late preparations of extract can be
compared with each other.
Extract fractionation. Fractionation of DNA end joining factors was
achieved over a dsDNA-cellulose (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) followed by
a Mono-S (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ) column. Initial
fractionations on dsDNA cellulose (5-10 mL volume, D = 1.6 cm) were
carried out using 20 to 30 mL nuclear extract (50-150 mg) loaded at a
flow rate of 0.5 mL/min after equilibration with buffer A [20 mmol/L
HEPES (pH 7.9), 10% glycerol, 0.2 mmol/L EDTA, 0.2 mmol/L PMSF, and
0.5 mmol/L DTT] containing 100 mmol/L KCl. In addition to the flow
through (peak I), fractions were collected after increasing, stepwise, KCl
concentration to 250 mmol/L (peak II) and 750 mmol/L (peak III).
Because the vast majority of activity bound the column and eluted in the
750 mmol/L step (peak III), later fractionations using nuclear extract/
high salt that was dialyzed against 400 mmol/L KCl to preserve activity
(see above), were initiated by diluting nuclear extract/high salt with
buffer A to 300 mmol/L KCl and loading to dsDNA cellulose column
after equilibration at the same concentration of KCl. The flow through
obtained under these conditions was designated peak I/II to maintain
previous nomenclature. DNA end joining activity was again predominantly
eluted at 750 mmol/L KCl (peak III). The end joining activity obtained
with these two protocols was qualitatively equivalent, but quantitatively
more overall activity was recovered with the latter protocol due to the
higher initial activity of the nuclear extract/high salt.
Active fractions of peak III were pooled and dialyzed against buffer A
containing 100 mmol/L KCl and loaded, at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min, onto
a 1 mL Mono S HR 5/5 column equilibrated in the same buffer. A linear
gradient over 10 column volumes was applied up to 300 mmol/L KCl,
followed by three stepwise increases to 500, 700, and 1,000 mmol/L KCl,
each over 5 to 10 column volumes. Fractions obtained from all
fractionation steps were tested for protein concentration using the
Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA), and for in vitro DNA end joining
activity (see below).
Proteins and antibodies. Antibodies against DNA ligase III, clones 1F3,
4C11, 6G9, and a mouse polyclonal were from GeneTex (San Antonio, TX); a
rabbit polyclonal antibody against DNA ligase IV, raised against the COOH-
terminal residues 550 to 844, from Acris (Hiddenhausen, Germany); a mouse
monoclonal antibody against DNA ligase I, clone 10H5, from GeneTex; a
mouse monoclonal antibody against Ku70, clone N3H10, from Kamiya
Biomedical Co. (Seattle, WA); a mouse monoclonal antibody against Ku80,
clone 111, from Kamiya Biomedical; a rabbit polyclonal antibody against
DNA-PKcs, raised by an 11 residue synthetic peptide, from Calbiochem
(La Jolla, CA); a rabbit polyclonal antibody, raised against the full length
human XRCC4, from Acris; a mouse monoclonal antibody against PARP-1,
clone C2-10, was from Sigma; and a mouse monoclonal antibody against
XRCC1, clone 33-2-5, from Abcam (Cambridge, United Kingdom).
Western blot analysis and immunodepletion. For Western blot, cell
extracts were electrophoresed on 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gels, transferred
to a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane, and probed by the enhanced
chemiluminescence-Plus kit as recommended by the manufacturer
(Amersham Biosciences). Signal was detected using the ‘‘Storm,’’ the
‘‘Typhoon’’ (Amersham Biosciences), or the VersaDoc (Bio-Rad).
For DNA ligase III immunodepletion, 20 AL of anti DNA ligase III antibody,
or normal human serumwere added to 50 AL of protein A-Sepharose beads in
250 AL of DB buffer [20 mmol/L HEPES (pH 7.9), 100 mmol/L KCl, 20%
glycerol, 0.2 mmol/L EDTA, 0.5 mmol/L DTT, and 0.5 mmol/L PMSF] with
50 Ag/mL bovine serum albumin (18). Mixture was incubated under constant
rotation at 4jC overnight. Subsequently, beads were washed thrice with
dialysis buffer, and incubated with 100 to 200 AL HeLa or 180BRMWCE for
2 hours at 4jC. After centrifugation, the supernatants were used for
quantification of depletion and DNA end joining, whereas the beads were
washed thrice with dialysis buffer before analysis by Western blotting. When
necessary, additional depletion cycles were carried out until depletion was
nearly complete.
DNA end joining and DNA ligase assays. Supercoiled plasmid pSP65
(3 kb; Promega, Madison, WI) was prepared using CsCl2/EtBr gradients.
It was used as a substrate in DNA end joining reactions following digestion
with SalI to generate linearized DNA. Details have been presented
elsewhere (5, 7). DNA ligase III activity was measured according to
published protocols with slight modifications (19). DNA ligase IIIh was
purified using methods and constructs as previously described (20).
Digestion of DNA end joining products with nuclease S1. In some
experiments, products of the end joining reaction were digested with
Nuclease S1 from Aspergillus oryzae (EC 3.1.30.1; Roche, Nutley, NJ). DNA
DNA Ligase III in Nonhomologous End Joining
www.aacrjournals.org 4021 Cancer Res 2005; 65: (10). May 15, 2005
 American Association for Cancer Research Copyright © 2005 
 on February 21, 2013cancerres.aacrjournals.orgDownloaded from 
DOI:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-3055
was incubated at 37jC for 30 minutes with the indicated amount of
nuclease S1 in a buffer containing 33 mmol/L sodium acetate, 50 mmol/L
NaCl, and 0.033 mmol/L ZnSO4 (pH 4.5). Under these reaction
conditions, nuclease S1 exerts exonucleolytic and endonucleolytic activity
on ssDNA.
In vivo DNA end joining. To document a role for DNA ligase III in
DNA end joining in vivo , we employed a recently developed fast-readout
plasmid-rejoining assay using the plasmid pEGFP-Pem1-Ad2 (21). The
plasmid is a derivative of pEGFP-Pem1 (7,139 bp) that was generated
by L. Li from pEGFP-N1 (Clontech, Palo Alto, CA) by interrupting the
enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) sequence with the Pem1
intron. It was constructed by inserting the wild-type adenoviral major late
mRNA leader sequence (adenoviral exon 2, Ad2) into the polylinker site
within the Pem1 intron of pEGFP-Pem1 after appropriate modifications
to generate HindIII and I-SceI cutting sites, as well as splice sites on both
sides of Ad2 (Fig. 6). In this configuration, the EGFP gene is normally
disrupted by the Ad2 exon and therefore transfection of supercoiled
plasmid generates no EGFP signal. When Ad2 is removed before
transfection by digestion at both sides either with HindIII or I-SceI,
EGFP activity can be recovered if the transfected cell possesses end
joining activity to recircularize the linear plasmid. Partly digested plasmid
that retains the Ad2 sequence generates no signal. In experiments
reported here, the pEGFP-Pem1-Ad2 plasmid was digested with HindIII to
remove Ad2 and generate cohesive ends with 4-bp 5V protruding single
strands. Supercoiled pEGFP-Pem1 was used as a positive control to
standardize the transfection and analysis conditions. The pDsRed2-N1
plasmid (Clontech) was cotransfected with either linearized pEGFP-Pem1-
Ad2 or supercoiled pEGFP-Pem1 to evaluate the transfection efficiency.
All plasmids were prepared in XL-1 blue cells and purified using either
CsCl2/EtBr gradients, or the Qiagen Midi Plasmid purification kit. The
HindIII linearized pEGFP-Pem1-Ad2 was purified by gel electrophoresis to
remove the Ad2 fragment.
Plasmid rejoining was tested in LIG4/ MEF. The appropriate plasmids
were transfected using the MEF1 nucleofector kit in the Nucleofector devise
(Amaxa, Cologne, Germany) according to the instructions of the manufac-
turer. Typically, a suspension of 2  106 cells was transfected by electro-
poration with 0.2 Ag pEGFP-Pem1, or HindIII linearized pEGFP-Pem1-Ad2
substrate, together with 0.2 Ag of the transfection efficiency marker
pDsRed2-N1. Green (EGFP) and Red (DsRed) fluorescence were measured
by flow cytometry 24 hours later. For this purpose, cells were trypsinized
and resuspended in fresh growth medium at 106 per mL. Analysis was
carried out in a Beckman Coulter Epics XL-MCL flow cytometer equipped
with an argon ion laser emitting at 488 nm. Red fluorescence was collected
at 540 nm with 740 V PMT gain, whereas green fluorescence at 490 nm with
490V PMT gain. Electronic compensation was 12.8% of green signal for red
and 6.7% of red signal for green. Transfection with supercoiled pEGFP-Pem1
was used to calibrate the system. To include the transfection efficiency
in the calculation of percent rejoining the EGFP+/dsRed+ ratio was
calculated and compared between treated and nontreated cells. Results
have been confirmed in three or more independent experiments.
DNA ligase III knock down. RNA interference (RNAi) mediated by small
interfering RNAs (siRNA) was used to knock down DNA ligase III (LIG3) in
LIG4/ MEF. For this purpose, the sequences S1, GGAACAGATAAGC-
CAGCAT (522 nucleotides downstream); S2, GCACAAAGATTGTCTGCTA
(774 nucleotides downstream); S3, GGATGTGAAGGGTACATAT (1,989
nucleotides downstream), as well as the unique negative control duplex
(OR-0030-neg05) were synthesized (Eurogentec, Ouree, Belgium) and tested
by transfection with electroporation under the conditions described above
using 5  106 cells and 10 Ag LIG3 or control siRNA per transfection
reaction. After transfection, cells were returned to normal growth
conditions and the level of knock down evaluated at the indicated times
by Western blotting. Whereas all sequences tested showed knock down
activity, S2 was the most effective and was therefore primarily employed in
further experiments. To test the effect of DNA ligase III knock down on DNA
DSB repair, siRNA-treated cells were transfected with test and control
plasmids as described above and rejoining efficiency was measured 24 hours
later.
Results
Fractionation of DNA end joining activities from nuclear
extract. In the course of the experiments described here, we
observed loss of DNA end joining activity in the extracts which, we
suspected, it was caused by protein precipitation during the last
dialysis step of the standard preparation protocol (see Materials
and Methods). Figure 1A shows that nondialyzed nuclear extract
has a much higher DNA end joining activity than the same extract
after dialysis against 100 mmol/L KCl. In fact, the activity measured
with 2 Ag nondialyzed nuclear extract is approximately equivalent
to that of 10 Ag nuclear extract dialyzed against 100 mmol/L KCl.
Importantly, when extract was dialyzed against 400 mmol/L KCl,
a practically complete preservation of end joining activity was
achieved. We observed that this modification in the dialysis
conditions minimizes protein precipitation and thus maximizes the
preservation of DNA end joining activity. This is illustrated by the
Western blot for DNA ligase III shown in the top part of the figure.
Nondialyzed nuclear extract and nuclear extract dialyzed against
400 mmol/L KCl have equivalent amounts of DNA ligase III.
Nuclear extract dialyzed against 100 mmol/L KCl, on the other
hand, has much reduced DNA ligase III levels, and a large amount
of DNA ligase III can be found with the precipitated material.
Dialysis is important for the retention of activity in the extracts
during storage at 80jC. Below, experiments of earlier date use
extracts (WCE or nuclear extract) prepared according to the
standard protocol; whereas recent experiments use nuclear extract
dialyzed against 400 mmol/L KCl (nuclear extract/high salt).
The goal of the present studies was the development of
appropriate fractionation strategies for the purification and
characterization of factors involved in DNA end joining. We
reasoned that proteins involved in DNA end joining are likely to
bind to DNA and tested therefore dsDNA cellulose, because
preliminary experiments showed strong binding to this resin of
DNA end joining factors. A fractionation scheme was developed for
nuclear extract prepared under standard conditions that involves
loading at 100 mmol/L KCl ( flow through; peak I) and elution at
250 mmol/L (peak II) and 750 mmol/L (peak III) KCl. For the
fractionation of nuclear extract/high salt, KCl concentration in the
extract is reduced to 300 mmol/L by dilution with buffer before
loading, generating the combined peak I/II as flow through and
peak III by elution at 750 mmol/L KCl (Fig. 1B and C). Under all
conditions, the majority of DNA end joining activity is recovered in
the fractions of peak III (Fig. 1D ; data not shown), which is
therefore used for further fractionation. Fractions from peaks I, II,
or I/II, alone or in combination with fractions from peak III, do not
produce more than additive effects (data not shown), suggesting
that peak III contains the essential DNA end joining factors.
Because fraction III contains only about 3% of the input protein
(Fig. 1B), the scheme achieves a high degree of fractionation of
DNA end joining activities.
Protein from active fractions of peak III was dialyzed, loaded on
Mono-S, and eluted according to the scheme shown in Fig. 1B .
Figure 2A shows a typical chromatogram. In addition to the flow-
through peak IIIA, protein peaks IIIB1 and IIIB2 elute within the
100 to 300 mmol/L KCl gradient, and peaks IIIC and IIID at the 500
and 700 mmol/L KCl steps, respectively. Peaks IIIA and IIIC do not
contain DNA end joining activities, either when tested alone or
when combined with other active fractions (data not shown). Peak
IIIB1 shows a very low level of activity, whereas peak IIIB2 is very
active (Fig. 2B). Fraction IIID is not active when tested alone
Cancer Research
Cancer Res 2005; 65: (10). May 15, 2005 4022 www.aacrjournals.org
 American Association for Cancer Research Copyright © 2005 
 on February 21, 2013cancerres.aacrjournals.orgDownloaded from 
DOI:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-3055
(Fig. 2B). However, when fraction IIID is combined with fractions of
IIIB1 and particularly of IIIB2 peak an enhancement in DNA end
joining activity is observed (Fig. 2C). Notably, when combined with
IIIB2, end joining activity increases steadily up to 0.5 AL IIID but
drops sharply at higher concentrations suggesting that the active
factor(s) in IIID has an optimum in its mode of action (Fig. 2C).
SDS-PAGE and Western blotting were carried out in an effort to
identify candidates for the activity observed in the above fractions
and the results are summarized in Fig. 3A and B . A few dominant
bands are visible in fractions IIIB1 and IIIB2, but only two or three
prominent bands are seen in IIID (Fig. 3A). Western blot analysis
for the three known ligases and the components of DNA-PK show
that DNA ligase I fractionates practically exclusively in peak I/II
(Fig. 3B). DNA ligase III fractionates from dsDNA cellulose
practically exclusively in fraction III and from Mono-S in fraction
IIIB2. The bulk of DNA ligase IV and XRCC4 is in dsDNA cellulose
fraction I/II, but a considerable amount also binds the resin and
elutes with fraction III; from Mono-S these proteins fractionate
preferentially in IIIB1. Similar fractionation characteristics are also
observed for DNA-PKcs. The majority of Ku70/Ku80 is, as
expected, in fraction III, and shows preferential fractionation from
Mono-S in IIIB1. On the other hand, PARP-1 and XRCC1
fractionate preferentially in IIIB2. Thus, all major components of
D-NHEJ, DNA-PKcs, Ku, DNA ligase IV, and XRCC4, elute
preferentially from Mono-S in IIIB1. The low amounts of activity
observed in this fraction despite the presence of all these factors is
consistent with the previously shown requirement for additional
factors for efficient end joining (22–24). Notably, the majority of
DNA end joining activity fractionates in IIIB2 together with DNA
ligase III, PARP-1, and XRCC1.
DNA ligase III is involved in DNA end joining. The above
fractionation and precipitation data implicate DNA ligase III in
DNA end joining. To evaluate further a possible role for this ligase
in DNA end joining, we studied the effect of antibodies raised
against this protein in nonfractionated HeLa cell extracts. In
contrast to reactions assembled with increasing amount of
nonspecific immunoglobulin G or PBS (PBS data not shown),
reactions assembled with the DNA ligase III–specific monoclonal
antibodies 4C11, and 1F3 show substantial inhibition of DNA end
joining with increasing antibody concentration (Fig. 4A ).
In addition, a mouse polyclonal antibody (pAb) shows a strong
inhibition of DNA end joining (Fig. 4A). The strong and at times
complete inhibition achieved with three different antibodies
suggests a dominant role for DNA ligase III in DNA end joining
under the reaction conditions employed here. On the other hand,
the anti DNA ligase III monoclonal antibody 6G9 has no detectable
effect on DNA end joining suggesting that the inhibition depends
on the location of the epitope recognized by the antibody.
Figure 1. Extract preparation conditions and fractionation over
dsDNA cellulose. A, DNA end joining activity in reactions
assembled with different amounts of nondialyzed nuclear extract
(NE ), as well as of extract dialyzed against either 400 or 100
mmol/L KCl. Nuclear extract was prepared by treatment of nuclei
in 400 mmol/L KCl, and dialysis was carried out overnight in a
buffer containing the indicated amounts of KCl (see Materials
and Methods for details). The numbers at the bottom of the gel
indicate percent end joining. Top, Western blot for DNA ligase
III of the same extract preparations. Lane 1, nondialyzed nuclear
extract; lane 2, nuclear extract dialyzed against 400 mmol/L KCl;
lane 3, nuclear extract dialyzed against 100 mmol/L KCl; lane 4,
precipitated material after dialysis of nuclear extract in 100
mmol/L KCl. B, fractionation scheme of nuclear extracts (nuclear
extract/high salt, NE-HS ) over dsDNA cellulose followed by
further fractionation of active fractions (fraction III) over Mono S.
The scheme indicates the conditions used to generate the
designated fractions and shows in brackets the amount of
protein in selected fractions from a typical experiment. C, typical
chromatogramme (absorption versus fraction number) of nuclear
extract/high salt fractionated over dsDNA cellulose.
The dashed line shows the steps in KCl concentration employed
to generate the indicated fractions (fraction sizes: FT 1.5 mL
and eluted fractions 0.5 mL). D, DNA end joining activity of
fractions I/II and III. Reactions were assembled with 1 AL of
the indicated fraction. Numbers at the top of the gel indicate
tested fractions, whereas those at the bottom of the gel the
percent end joining measured. The difference in activity between
flow through fraction I/II and fraction III is even greater
when reactions are assembled with smaller volumes of the
individual fractions. Input linear substrate, as well as dimers and
multimers produced by end joining. Position of the relaxed
plasmid (oc ). Based on our observations (see nuclease S1
results in Fig. 5), this product does not correspond to nicked
plasmid, but rather to a covalently closed yet not supercoiled
form.
DNA Ligase III in Nonhomologous End Joining
www.aacrjournals.org 4023 Cancer Res 2005; 65: (10). May 15, 2005
 American Association for Cancer Research Copyright © 2005 
 on February 21, 2013cancerres.aacrjournals.orgDownloaded from 
DOI:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-3055
Similar results were also obtained in reactions assembled with
extracts prepared from 180BRM cells. Although these cells have
reduced DNA ligase IV activity, they show nearly normal DNA
end joining activity under the in vitro conditions employed here
and are therefore a useful system for the evaluation of a possible
effect DNA ligase III on DNA end joining because they reduce
interference from DNA ligase IV (25). Figure 4B shows that the
mouse polyclonal anti–DNA ligase III antibody inhibits, practi-
cally completely, end joining in reactions assembled with WCE
of 180BRM cells. An antibody against DNA ligase I (26) and a
control antibody (mIgG) show no effect on DNA end joining
(Fig. 4B).
To confirm the role of DNA ligase III in DNA end joining,
we immunodepleted DNA ligase III from WCE of HeLa and
180BRM cells using the mouse polyclonal antibody pAb. Figure 4C
shows that DNA ligase III is undetectable in immunodepleted
extracts of 180BRM cells, and Fig. 4D shows that DNA end joining
is barely detectable in these extracts. To establish that depletion of
DNA ligase III is the reason for DNA end joining activity loss,
purified DNA ligase IIIh was added back to the reactions.
Although, this form of DNA ligase III lacks the COOH-terminal
BRCT domain and is therefore unable to interact with XRCC1, it has
been shown to effectively substitute for DNA ligase IIIa in several
assays (27). The purity of the enzyme used is shown in Fig. 4E .
Figure 4F shows that added DNA ligase IIIh in immunodepleted
extracts of 180BRM cells completely restores DNA end joining
activity. Although purified DNA ligase IIIh by itself shows end
joining activity, the spectrum of products strongly shifts from open
and supercoiled rings to linear multimers in DNA ligase III
supplemented extracts. Similar results were also obtained with
immunodepleted extracts of HeLa cells (see Fig. 4C and D),
although the inhibition of DNA end joining was in this case less
pronounced, probably due to the presence in the extracts in
addition to DNA ligase IV also of residual DNA ligase III (see
Fig. 4C).
DNA ligase III joins both DNA strands practically
simultaneously. In the end joining assay employed here, open
circles and multimers can be formed by joining only one strand of
the participating double-stranded plasmid DNA molecules. It is,
therefore, formally possible that the activity actually measured
reflects single rather than double strand DNA joining, an activity
commonly attributed to DNA ligase III (28–30). We exploited the
properties of nuclease S1 to test this possibility. Nuclease S1 is
known to endonucleolytically and exonucleolytically digest ssDNA,
and to preferentially cut double-stranded DNA opposite nick sites.
We reasoned that if open circles and polymers produced in the end
joining reaction derive from single-strand ligation, treatment with
nuclease S1 should be able to digest opposite the remaining nick
and regenerate the original substrate. If, on the other hand, open
circles and polymers are generated by the joining of both DNA
Figure 2. Fractionation of DNA end joining activities over Mono S.
A, typical chromatogramme of fractionation through Mono S of
fraction III from dsDNA cellulose. The dashed line shows the
steps in KCl concentration employed to generate the indicated
fractions. B, DNA end joining activity of the indicated fractions from
Mono S. Reactions were assembled with 1 AL of the indicated
fraction. Numbers at the top of the gel indicate tested fractions,
whereas those at the bottom of the gel the percent end joining
measured. C, peak fractions IIIB1 (1 AL) and IIIB2 (0.2 AL) were
tested for DNA end joining in reactions assembled with increasing
amount of IIID (0.1-2 AL). Numbers at the top of the gel indicate
tested fractions, whereas those at the bottom of the gel the percent
end joining measured. Other details as in Fig. 1.
Cancer Research
Cancer Res 2005; 65: (10). May 15, 2005 4024 www.aacrjournals.org
 American Association for Cancer Research Copyright © 2005 
 on February 21, 2013cancerres.aacrjournals.orgDownloaded from 
DOI:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-3055
strands, products of the reaction should show sensitivity to nuclease
S1 similar to that of the unligated substrate.
Figure 5A shows the substrate specificity of nuclease S1 under
the conditions employed. SalI-linearized plasmid DNA used as
substrate in the end joining reactions remains resistant to
digestion up to 1 unit of enzyme. At higher levels of S1 activity,
nonspecific digestion is observed giving rise to a low molecular
weight smear. Supercoiled plasmid, on the other hand, is
efficiently converted to the relaxed form at levels of S1 activity
as low as 0.01 unit, presumably by endonucleolytic digestion at
single-stranded areas transiently generated by negative super-
coiling. Following this initial step that leads to the relaxation of
the plasmid, a second specific cut opposite the nick generates
linear molecules of substrate size at enzyme concentrations up to
1 unit per reaction. At higher enzyme concentrations nonspecific
digestion occurs generating a low molecular weight smear.
Similar results were also obtained when the relaxed form of
pSP65 was purified and used as S1 substrate (data not shown).
The above observations confirm the expected specificity of
nuclease S1 under our reaction conditions and serve as a positive
control for the following reactions.
Purified products of end joining reactions exposed to increasing
amounts of nuclease S1 (Fig. 5B) are initially resistant to digestion,
and when digestion occurs, a smear rather than the original
substrate is generated. This is consistent with the absence of nicks
at the sites of end joining and suggests that DNA ligase III joins
both DNA strands when it forms higher order multimers.
Because the purified products tested in the above experiment
were formed after a 1-hour end joining, it was possible that
double-stranded joining occurred in two steps, well separated in
time, each involving the independent joining of DNA single
strands. To test this possibility, we allowed DNA end joining for
periods of time between 2 and 20 minutes and tested nuclease
S1 digestion of the products. We reasoned that if two, timely
well-separated events, lead to the double strand DNA joining, the
digestibility of the products will be high after short periods of
incubation when only one of the two ligation events is likely to
have taken place.
In these experiments, nuclease S1 treatment followed end
joining without product purification and was initiated by first
adding acetate to the end joining reaction mixture to establish
optimal pH for nuclease S1 function, followed by incubation at
37jC for 30 minutes. In separate control experiments, we
established that addition of acetate completely stops DNA end
joining and that the substrate specificity of nuclease S1 is not
altered by the components of the end joining buffer. Figure 5C
shows the results of a typical experiment. There is no increased
nuclease S1 sensitivity even when digestibility is tested after
2 minutes of end joining.
As a further test, end joining efficiency was measured in
reactions where nuclease S1 up to 1 unit was included during the
end joining reaction and was therefore able to act immediately
after the first rejoining step, albeit under suboptimal digestion
conditions. There was no detectable effect on the efficiency of end
joining under these conditions, and higher concentrations of
nuclease S1 (up to 100 units) only generated nonspecific substrate
degradation (data not shown).
To examine whether the above indicated resistance of the DNA
end joining products to nuclease S1 is partly due to traces of
protein remaining bound on DNA after purification from the gel
and despite treatment with proteinase E, we purified DNA from
end joining reactions using phenol/chloroform extraction followed
by ethanol precipitation. Subsequently, we separated the products
from unligated substrate by gel electrophoresis and tested their
nuclease S1 sensitivity. The results (not shown) are similar to those
shown in Fig. 5B and indicate that blocking of the end joining site
by remaining protein cannot be invoked to explain the observed
resistance to nuclease S1.
The above results in aggregate are compatible with DNA ligase
III joining the two strands of the DNA substrate during multimer
production either simultaneously, or with a temporal separation of
<1 minute; it therefore can be considered as being practically
simultaneous.
Knock down of LIG3 in LIG4/ mouse embryo fibroblasts
compromises DNA end joining. The biochemical experiments
described above suggest a role for DNA ligase III in the rejoining of
DNA DSBs. Because DNA-PK–dependent end joining is thought to
depend exclusively on DNA ligase IV, we postulated that DNA ligase
III functions in backup pathways of NHEJ, such as B-NHEJ. To
experimentally test this possibility, we introduced a plasmid DNA
end joining assay similar to the one employed in the biochemical
experiments described above but developed for direct reporting
in vivo over EGFP expression (21). Because the dominance of DNA
ligase IV in vivo was expected to make it difficult to discern a role
for DNA ligase III in wild type cells, we designed these experiments
using LIG4/ MEF (17). We reasoned that in the absence of DNA
Figure 3. Analysis by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting of active fraction
from Mono S. A, SDS PAGE of indicated fractions surrounding peaks
IIIB1 and IIIB2. For IIIB1 and IIIB2 lanes, 10 AL aliquots of each fraction were
used and the gel (10%) was stained with silver. For IIID 20 AL aliquots of the
indicated fractions were used and the gel (15%) was stained with Coomassie.
B, Western blots of peak fractions of dsDNA cellulose and Mono S using
antibodies against the indicated proteins. See Materials and Methods for details.
DNA Ligase III in Nonhomologous End Joining
www.aacrjournals.org 4025 Cancer Res 2005; 65: (10). May 15, 2005
 American Association for Cancer Research Copyright © 2005 
 on February 21, 2013cancerres.aacrjournals.orgDownloaded from 
DOI:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-3055
ligase IV, the dependence of DNA end joining on DNA ligase III
would be more pronounced and that it could be experimentally
shown by RNAi.
Figure 6A shows the pEGFP-Pem1-Ad2 plasmid used in the
experiments (21). The plasmid is linearized by HindIII digestion
that removes, when complete on both sides, the Ad2 exon and
enables upon successful intracellular circularization EGFP expres-
sion that can be detected and quantitated by flow cytometry.
Supercoiled pEGFP-Pem1 plasmid is used to evaluate the EGFP
signal without requirement for rejoining, whereas the pDsRed2-N1
is used as transfection control. Figure 6B , panel 1 shows the
autofluorescence of sham-transfected cells, whereas panels 2 and
3 the green and red fluorescence detected 24 hours after
transfection with 0.2 Ag pEGFP-Pem1, or 0.2 Ag pDsRed2-N1,
respectively. These flow cytometry measurements, which were
carried out under the conditions outlined in Materials and
Methods, allowed the setting of the indicated gates for the
quantitative analysis of the following end joining results. Signals
generated in cells transfected with both plasmids simultaneously
and measured 24 hours later are shown in panel 4.
When LIG4/ MEF are transfected with linearized pEGFP-
Pem1-Ad2, the signal shown in Fig. 6C , panel 3 is obtained.
Although reduced compared with the signal generated by an
equal amount of supercoiled pEGFP-Pem1 (Panel 1) it is clearly
detectable suggesting considerable end joining efficiency in the
absence of DNA ligase IV activity. To evaluate the contribution of
DNA ligase III in this reaction, LIG4/ MEF were treated with
LIG3 siRNA. The Western blot in Fig. 6D indicates efficient knock
down of DNA ligase III to about 20% of LIG4/ MEF treated
with a control siRNA sequence. Whereas the knock down
efficiency varied from experiment to experiment, we consistently
observed reductions in DNA ligase III level between 50% to 80%.
Whereas expression of EGFP from supercoiled pEGFP-Pem1
was not affected by treatment with LIG3 siRNA (Fig. 6C , panel 2),
the signal obtained with an equal amount of linearized pEGFP-
Pem1-Ad2 was reduced by nearly 70% compared with cells treated
with control siRNA (Fig. 6C , panel 4 and Fig. 6D). In four
independent experiments, a reduction in end joining between 40%
and 70% was observed that correlated with the levels of DNA
ligase III knock down in each of the experiments (50-80%). These
results in aggregate provide direct support for an in vivo function
of DNA ligase III in DSB end joining.
Discussion
The results described above identify DNA ligase III as the main
activity contributing to the joining of plasmid DNA ends in
extracts of HeLa and 180BR cells. Several observations support
this conclusion: DNA ligase III fractionates with the maximum
of DNA end joining activity through two columns and its
immunodepletion causes a practically complete inhibition of
Figure 4. DNA ligase III is involved in vitro DNA end joining.
A, the effect of antibodies raised against human DNA ligase III
(4C11, 1F3, 6G9, pAb) was tested in DNA end joining reactions
assembled with 10 Ag HeLa WCE. Antibodies at the indicated
amounts were incubated for 10 minutes at 25jC in 10 AL NHEJ
buffer and all reaction components, except DNA and ATP.
Subsequently, 10 AL of the same buffer containing 0.25 Ag of
substrate DNA and 2 mmol/L ATP were added to start the
reaction. End joining was allowed to take place for 1 hour at
25jC. mIgG indicates an unrelated antibody used as control.
The numbers at the bottom of the gel indicate percent end
joining. B, similar to (A ) but for WCE from 180BRM cells (10 Ag).
In addition to the mouse polyclonal antibody raised against
human DNA ligase III (pAb), an unrelated antibody (mIgG) and a
monoclonal antibody raised against DNA ligase I were tested.
Other details as in (A). C, Western blot of control and
DNA ligase III immunodepleted (ID) extracts used in the
reactions shown in (D ). 50 Ag of control (C ) or immunodepleted
extracts were loaded on 10% SDS-PAGE and probed with
anti–ligase III serum. DNA ligase III is undetectable in
immunodepleted extract of 180BR cells, and only a faint band
can be seen in ID extracts of HeLa cells. D, DNA end joining
activity of DNA ligase III depleted HeLa or 180BRM WCE.
Reactions were assembled with 5 Ag of extract depleted either
with an unrelated mouse IgG (C ), or with the anti–DNA ligase III
polyclonal antibody (pAb; ID ). Other details as in (A ). E,
Coomassie-stained gel with purified DNA Ligase III (lane 3 ). For
comparison, the initial sf9 cell extract is shown on lane 2 and
size markers on lane 1 . F, Purified recombinant human DNA
ligase IIIh restores DNA end joining activity in immunodepleted
180BRM WCE (10 Ag). DNA end joining reactions were
assembled with 20 ng purified DNA ligase III (lane 2 ), 10 Ag
of control extract (C , lane 3), 10 Ag of immunodepleted extract
(lane 4), 10 Ag of control and 20 ng of purified DNA ligase III
(lane 5 ), or 10 Ag of immunodepleted and 20 ng of purified DNA
ligase III (lane 6 ). Other details as in Fig. 1.
Cancer Research
Cancer Res 2005; 65: (10). May 15, 2005 4026 www.aacrjournals.org
 American Association for Cancer Research Copyright © 2005 
 on February 21, 2013cancerres.aacrjournals.orgDownloaded from 
DOI:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-3055
DNA end joining that is restored by purified, recombinant enzyme.
In addition, the loss of end joining activity in crude cell extracts
dialyzed in low salt buffers seems caused by precipitation of DNA
ligase III (Fig. 1A). Interestingly, the dependence of DNA end
joining on DNA ligase III holds not only in the few fractions
containing exclusively this ligase activity but also in the crude
extracts, where other DNA ligase activities are present and could
contribute to the overall effect.
The biological significance of these biochemical observations is
corroborated by the in vivo results obtained using EGFP rescue in
LIG4/ MEF. The 70% reduction in end joining activity after
treatment with siRNA is in line with an involvement of this DNA
ligase in DSB repair and makes it an excellent candidate factor for
backup pathways of NHEJ.
Although DNA ligase III is predominantly considered a
component of single-strand break and base excision repair, where
it interacts with XRCC1, PARP-1, and pol h (20, 31–34), our
observations hint to a potential role in DNA DSB rejoining as well.
The resistance of the reaction products to nuclease S1 after only
minutes of end joining excludes simple SSB rejoining as the process
leading to their formation. Thus, DNA ligase III may be a bona fide
component of DNA DSB repair by NHEJ, where it may function
either alone or together with XRCC1 and PARP-1. This is in line
with the ability of the purified enzyme to ligate plasmid DNA under
physiologic conditions (35–37) and is directly supported by recent
in vivo and in vitro results (38). Backup pathways of NHEJ
operating independently of DNA ligase IV were also suggested by
recent genetic experiments in Drosophila melanogaster and shown
involved in the repair of DSBs induced either after exposure to
radiation, or after excision of a P element on a DmRad51-deficient
genetic background (39). Evidence is thus mounting that NHEJ
pathways operating independently of DNA-PK and DNA ligase IV
operate in a variety of organisms (5, 7, 25, 40–42). The results
presented here and those of the recent report by Audebert et al.
(38) further suggest potential role of DNA ligase III in these backup
pathways.
Earlier reports have also provided circumstantial evidence for an
involvement of DNA ligase III in DNA DSB rejoining. Fractionation
of Xenopus extracts identified DNA ligase III in an active fraction,
devoid of DNA-PK, that promoted an error-prone, microhomology-
driven form of NHEJ (43). These observation suggests similar roles
for this ligase in a variety of organisms from Xenopus to man. In
addition, reduction of DNA ligase III levels by antisense technology
in human tumor cells reduces by 78% the DNA end joining activity
of the corresponding extracts (37, 44), in line with a role of
DNA ligase III in DNA end joining under in vitro conditions.
Furthermore, a mitochondrial form of DNA ligase III has been
documented in human cells (44) and in Xenopus laevis oocytes (45)
operating independently of XRCC1 (46) and synthesized from an
alternative initiation site on the LIG3 cDNA. This form of DNA
ligase III is the only detectable DNA ligase activity in the
mitochondria of higher eukaryotes and its down regulation with
anti sense oligonucleotides reduces DNA end joining activity in
mitochondria extracts (37, 47).
The above summarized observations corroborate our results
and indicate that DNA ligase III plays a dominant role in DNA
DSB rejoining in vitro , thus implying essential functions in vivo
as well. Because in vivo DNA ligase IV is an integral component
of the dominant DNA-PK–dependent pathway of NHEJ, D-NHEJ,
DNA ligase III is likely to be involved in backup pathways such
as B-NHEJ. However, because backup pathways of NHEJ may be
suppressed by D-NHEJ (5, 7), the contribution of DNA ligase III
in the process may not be easily discernible in cells with wild-
type levels of D-NHEJ function. This probably explains why
studies in cells with reduced levels of DNA ligase III, such as the
EM9 mutant, fail to show reduced rejoining of DNA DSBs
(48, 49). In addition, in our in vivo experiments, a clear inhibition
of DNA end joining after LIG3 knock down could only be
documented in LIG4/ MEF (Fig. 6).
The dominance of DNA ligase III in DNA end joining in vitro is
noteworthy vis-a`-vis the dominance of DNA ligase IV under in vivo
conditions and raises several important questions. It is not
obvious by what mechanism a ligase with such dominant activity
in DNA end joining in vitro relinquishes this dominant position to
DNA ligase IV in vivo . This is particularly intriguing because DNA
ligase III maintains dominance in DNA end joining even when
other components of D-NHEJ such as DNA-PKcs, Ku, and XRCC4
are present in the extract and are, therefore, able to interact and
cooperate with DNA ligase IV. Furthermore, the inhibitory effects
of wortmannin and anti-Ku antibodies in vitro (5, 7) suggest that
Figure 5. Product formation during DNA end joining involves the ligation of both
strands of the DNA substrate. A, the specificity of nuclease S1. Sal I cut pSP65
plasmid (250 ng, used as substrate for DNA end joining) and uncut pSP65
plasmid were incubated for 30 minutes at 37jC with increasing amount of
nuclease S1 and separated by gel electrophoresis (see Materials and Methods).
B, products of the reaction (first lane ) were purified from a preparative gel and
incubated with increasing amounts of nuclease S1 for 30 minutes at 37jC.
Reaction products were examined by gel electrophoresis. C, incubation with
different amounts of nuclease S1 of DNA end joining reactions that were allowed
to proceed for the indicated periods of time. DNA end joining was either stopped
using the standard protocol (left), or with nuclease S1 buffer (pH 4.5; right ). The
latter set of reactions was subsequently incubated for 30 minutes at room
temperature with 1 unit nuclease S1 and treated with proteinase E, 0.5% SDS,
and EDTA before fractionation by agarose gel electrophoresis.
DNA Ligase III in Nonhomologous End Joining
www.aacrjournals.org 4027 Cancer Res 2005; 65: (10). May 15, 2005
 American Association for Cancer Research Copyright © 2005 
 on February 21, 2013cancerres.aacrjournals.orgDownloaded from 
DOI:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-3055
these NHEJ factors exert at least partly their expected activities in
DNA end joining, yet without detectably impeding the function of
DNA ligase III. The simplest interpretation of this apparent
discrepancy, that also considers the limitations of the in vitro
assay, is that DNA ligase IV and the associated D-NHEJ factors
operate optimally in the context of chromatin rather than in free
DNA in solution. We have proposed a model in which the
juxtaposition of DNA ends generated as a result of the DSB in the
context of chromatin is invoked to explain the high efficiency of
D-NHEJ in vivo , as well as some of the discrepancies in the
kinetic characteristics between main and backup pathways in vivo
and in vitro (5, 6, 41). This chromatin based explanation is in line
with the function of DNA ligase III in back-up pathways of NHEJ
that have also been suggested from results obtained LIG4/
DT40 cells (50).
The involvement of DNA ligase III in backup pathways of NHEJ
does not only explain residual DNA DSB rejoining in cells with
defects in DNA ligase IV but also hints to the possible involvement
of DNA ligase III interacting proteins such as PARP-1 in the
process. Indeed, there is circumstantial evidence for the involve-
ment of PARP-1 in DNA DSB rejoining (51, 52), but this
involvement could not be conclusively and universally shown
(53–55). However, if the role of PARP-1 is limited to a contribution
in backup pathways of NHEJ, it is easy to see why this contribution
will be difficult to detect for as long as the primary pathways of end
joining remain active. In addition, competition with other DNA
lesions may mask this contribution when damage is induced by
agents such as ionizing radiation that induce on top of DSBs over
an order of magnitude more single-strand breaks and base
damages that need to be repaired by the same system. Recent
results suggest an involvement of PARP-1 in conjunction with DNA
ligase III in the rejoining of DSB (38), but a specific contribution to
backup pathways of NHEJ has not been formally shown. It remains
to be established how the balance between the DNA ligase IV and
DNA ligase III–dependent pathways of NHEJ is maintained in the
cell nucleus. Addressing these questions will likely be a fruitful area
for future research.
Mammalian cells show an extraordinary ability to join trans-
fected DNA maintained extrachromosomally, either by direct
ligation or by using microhomologies (56, 57). Our in vivo results
(Fig. 6) suggest that in the absence of DNA ligase IV and probably
also of D-NHEJ in general, this rejoining relies to a significant
degree on DNA ligase III. Such involvement of DNA ligase III can
explain the efficient end joining of transfected DNA in cells
deficient in DNA-PKcs (12, 58, 59), Ku (12, 60), XRCC4 (12, 60), or
DNA ligase IV (12) and may help to understand the observed
preference in the use of microhomologies in some of these mutants
(12, 60). It is also possible that in vitro experiments implicating Ku
in the fidelity of end joining, as well as in the inhibition of the
pathway using microhomologies (12, 18, 61, 62) have been carried
Figure 6. DNA ligase III contributes to DNA end joining
in vivo . A, map of pEGFP-Pem1-Ad2. Note the Pem1
intron, the Ad2 exon and the location of the HindIII cutting
sites (see Materials and Methods for details). B, dot plots
of nontransfected LIG4/ MEF (1), MEF transfected with
0.2 Ag pEGFP-Pem1 (2), MEFs transfected with 0.2 Ag
DsRed (3 ), or MEFs transfected with both plasmids
together (4). C, dot plots of LIG4/ MEFs transfected
either with 0.2 Ag supercoiled pEGFP-Pem1
(1 and 2), or 0.2 Ag HindIII linearized pEGFP-Pem1-Ad2
(3 and 4 ) together with 0.2 Ag DsRed. MEF pretreated for
24 hours with control siRNA (1 and 3 ) and MEF pretreated
for 24 hours with LIG3 siRNA (2 and 4 ; S2 sequence; see
Materials and Methods). D, Western blot for DNA ligase III
in cells treated for 24 hours with control or LIG3 siRNA.
Quantitative analysis considering signal intensity of the
GAPDH loading control gives for this experiment a knock
down effect of 78%. DNA rejoining of linearized
pEGFP-Pem1-Ad2 in cells treated for 24 hours with LIG3
siRNA normalized to that of cells treated with control
siRNA. In this experiment, 78% knock down of LIG3
caused a 70% reduction in the efficiency of rejoining. All
measurements of rejoining efficiency were carried out 24
hours after transfection of the corresponding plasmids.
Similar results were also obtained 48 hours later.
Cancer Research
Cancer Res 2005; 65: (10). May 15, 2005 4028 www.aacrjournals.org
 American Association for Cancer Research Copyright © 2005 
 on February 21, 2013cancerres.aacrjournals.orgDownloaded from 
DOI:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-3055
out under conditions favoring the function of DNA ligase III.
Finally, although V(D)J recombination shows a stricter dependence
than NHEJ on DNA-PK and DNA ligase IV/XRCC4, it can also use
alternative, DNA-PK–independent pathways that rely on micro-
homologies for the formation of nonstandard V(D)J recombination
products (12). To the extent that this form of end joining can occur
in the absence of DNA ligase IV, DNA ligase III is a potential
candidate.
In summary, the results presented here identify DNA ligase III,
which is unique to vertebrates, as the prevailing DNA end joining
activity in extracts of human cells and provide direct evidence for a
role in DNA end joining in vivo . Although this activity is inherent to
the enzyme, it has not been unequivocally identified before in
extracts of mammalian cells despite its significant contribution
under optimized conditions of end joining. These observations
raise the possibility that DNA ligase III functions in vivo in a
backup pathway of DNA end joining (B-NHEJ), removing DNA
DSBs when D-NHEJ is either inactive or unable to function. The
dominance of DNA ligase III in DNA end joining in vitro is
intriguing vis-a`-vis the dominance of DNA ligase IV under in vivo
conditions, and indicates that components of the D-NHEJ
apparatus may have been optimized for function in the context
of chromatin. Further genetic models will elucidate the potential
role of DNA ligase III in backup pathways of NHEJ and
will differentiate these backup pathways from of subpathways of
D-NHEJ using DNA ligase IV (23, 24).
Acknowledgments
Received 8/23/2004; revised 2/18/2005; accepted 3/24/2005.
Grant support: Volkswagenstiftung; and Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft;
European Commission Contract FIGH-CT-2002-00217; NIH, Department of Health
and Human Services grants RO1 CA42026 and RO1 CA56706; IFORES program of the
University of Duisburg-Essen; and NIH, National Cancer Institute, Department of
Health and Human Services grant T32 CA09137 (H. Wang).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Drs. E.P. Malaise (Inserm Unit 247, Institut Gustave-Roussy, Villejuif,
France) and C.F. Arlett (MRC Cell Mutation Unit, Sussex University, Brighton, United
Kingdom) for kindly providing the 180BR cells, Dr. F. Alt (Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, The Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA) for kindly providing the LIG4 -/-
MEFs, Dr. Harvey Ozer for the pRNS-1 plasmid, L. Li (University of Texas, M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX) for providing the pEGFP-Pem1, V. Gorbunova (University
of Rochester, Rochester, NY) for providing pEGFP-Pem1-Ad2, Dr. A. Tomkinson
(Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Biotechnology, the University of Texas
health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas) for the generous gift of DNA ligase III
expression vector and purified protein for initial experiments, and Dr. S.P. Jackson
(Department of Zoology, Cambridge University, Cambridge, United Kingdom) for anti-
Ligase IV and anti-XRCC4 antibodies.
References
1. Valerie K, Povirk LF. Regulation and mechanisms of
mammalian double-strand break repair. Oncogene 2003;
22:5792–812.
2. Thompson LH, Limoli CL. Origin, recognition, signaling,
and repair of DNA double-strand breaks in mammalian
cells. In: Caldecott K, editor. Eukaryotic DNA damage
surveillance and repair. Landes Press. Chapter 6, p. 107-
45. Available from: http://www.landesbioscience.com.
3. Jackson SP. Sensing and repairing DNA double-strand
breaks. Carcinogenesis 2002;23:687–96.
4. Dynan WS, Yoo S. Interaction of ku protein and DNA-
dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit with nucleic
acids. Nucleic Acids Res 1998;26:1551–9.
5. Wang H, Perrault AR, Takeda Y, Qin W, Wang H, Iliakis
G. Biochemical evidence for Ku-independent backup
pathways of NHEJ. Nucleic Acids Res 2003;31:5377–88.
6. Iliakis G, Wang H, Perrault AR, et al. Mechanisms of
DNA double strand break repair and chromosome
aberration formation. Cytogenet Genome Res 2004;104:
14–20.
7. Perrault R, Wang H, Wang M, Rosidi B, Iliakis G.
Backup pathways of NHEJ are suppressed by DNA-PK.
J Cell Biochem 2004;92:781–94.
8. Zhu C, Mills KD, Ferguson DO, et al. Unrepaired DNA
breaks in p53-deficient cells lead to oncogenic gene
amplification subsequent to translocations. Cell 2002;
109:811–21.
9. Gao Y, Ferguson DO, Xie W, et al. Interplay of p53
and DNA-repair protein XRCC4 in tumorigenesis,
genomic stability and development. Nature 2000;404:
897–900.
10. Difilippantonio MJ, Zhu J, Chen HT, et al. DNA repair
protein Ku80 suppresses chromosomal aberrations and
malignant transformation. Nature 2000;404:510–4.
11. Lee GS, Neiditch MB, Salus SS, Roth DB. RAG
proteins shepherd double-strand breaks to a specific
pathway, suppressing error-prone repair, but RAG
nicking initiates homologous recombination. Cell
2004;117:171–84.
12. Verkaik NS, Esveldt-van Lange REE, van Heemst D,
et al. Different types of V(D)J recombination and
end-joining defects in DNA double-strand break
repair mutant mammalian cells. Eur J Immunol 2002;
32:701–9.
13. Plowman PN, Bridges BA, Arlett CF, Hinney A,
Kingston JE. An instance of clinical radiation morbidity
and cellular radiosensitivity, not associated with ataxia-
telagiectasia. Br J Radiol 1990;63:624–8.
14. Riballo E, Critchlow SE, Teo S-H, et al. Identification
of a defect in DNA ligase IV in a radiosensitive
leukaemia patient. Curr Biol 1999;9:699–702.
15. Riballo E, Doherty AJ, Dai Y, et al. Cellular and
biochemical impact of a mutation in DNA ligase IV
conferring clinical radiosensitivity. J Biol Chem 2001;
276:31124–32.
16. Badie C, Iliakis G, Foray N, et al. Induction and
rejoining of DNA double-strand breaks and interphase
chromosome breaks after exposure to X rays in one
normal and two hypersensitive human fibroblast cell
lines. Radiat Res 1995;144:26–35.
17. Frank KM, Sharpless NE, Gao Y, et al. DNA ligase IV
deficiency in mice leads to defective neurogenesis and
embryonic lethality via the p53 pathway. Mol Cell 2000;
5:993–1002.
18. Labhart P. Ku-dependent nonhomologous DNA end
joining in Xenopus egg extracts. Mol Cell Biol 1999;19:
2585–93.
19. Tomkinson AE, Roberts E, Daly G, Totty NF, Lindahl
T. Three distinct DNA ligases in mammalian cells.
J Biol Chem 1991;266:21728–35.
20. Mackey ZB, Niedergang C, Menissier-de Murcia J,
et al. DNA ligase III is recruited to DNA strand breaks
by a zinc finger motif homologous to that of poly (ADP-
ribose) polymerase. J Biol Chem 1999;274:21679–87.
21. Seluanov A, Mittelman D, Pereira-Smith OM,
Wilson JH, Gorbunova V. DNA end joining becomes
less efficient and more error-prone during cellular
senescence. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004;101:7624–9.
22. Baumann P, West SC. DNA end-joining catalyzed by
human cell-free extracts. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;
95:14066–70.
23. Udayakumar D, Bladen CL, Hudson FZ, Dynan WS.
Distinct pathways of nonhomologous end joining that
are differentially regulated by DNA-dependent protein
kinase-mediated phosphorylation. J Biol Chem 2003;
278:41631–5.
24. Lee K-J, Jovanovic M, Udayakumar D, Bladen CL,
Dynan WS. Identification of DNA-PKcs phosphorylation
sites in XRCC4 and effects of mutations at these sites
on DNA end joining in a cell-free system. DNA Repair
2004;3:267–76.
25. Wang H, Zhao-Chong Z, Perrault AR, Cheng X, Qin W,
Iliakis G. Genetic evidence for the involvement of DNA
ligase IV in the DNA-PK-dependent pathway of non-
homologous end joining in mammalian cells. Nucleic
Acids Res 2001;29:1653–60.
26. Levin DS, Bai W, Yao N, O’Donnell M, Tomkinson AE.
An interaction between DNA ligase I and proliferating
cell nuclear antigen: implications for Okazaki fragment
synthesis and joining. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;
94:12863–8.
27. Taylor AM, Whitehouse CJ, Cappelli E, Frosina G,
Caldecott KW. Role of DNA ligase III zinc finger in
polynucleotide binding and ligation. Nucleic Acids Res
1998;26:4804–10.
28. Timson DJ, Singleton MR, Wigley DB. DNA ligases in
the repair and replication of DNA. Mutat Res 2000;460:
301–18.
29. Tomkinson AE, Mackey ZB. Structure and function of
mammalian DNA ligases. Mutat Res 1998;407:1–9.
30. Tomkinson A, Levin DS. Mammalian DNA ligases.
BioEssays 1997;19:893–901.
31. Caldecott KW, McKeown CK, Tucker JD, Ljungquist S,
Thompson LH. An interaction between the mammalian
DNA repair protein XRCC1 and DNA ligase III. Mol Cell
Biol 1994;14:68–76.
32. Caldecott K, Tucker JD, Stanker LH, Thompson LH.
Characterization of the XRCC1-DNA ligase III complex
in vitro and its absence from mutant hamster cells.
Nucleic Acids Res 1995;23:4836–43.
33. Caldecott KW, Aoufouchi S, Johnson P, Shall S.
XRCC1 polypeptide interacts with DNA polymerase h
and possibly poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase, and DNA
ligase III is a novel molecular ‘‘nick-sensor’’ in vitro .
Nucleic Acids Res 1996;24:4387–94.
34. Cappelli E, Taylor R, Cevasco M, Abbondandolo A,
Caldecott K, Frosina G. Involvement of XRCC1 and
DNA ligase III gene products in DNA base excision
repair. J Biol Chem 1997;272:23970–5.
35. Taylor AM, Whitehouse CJ, Caldecott KW. The DNA
ligase III zinc finger stimulates binding to DNA
secondary structure and promotes endjoining. Nucleic
Acids Res 2000;28:3558–63.
36. Chen L, Trujillo K, Sung P, Tomkinson AE.
Interactions of the DNA ligase IV-XRCC4 complex
with DNA ends and the DNA-dependent protein
kinase. J Biol Chem 2000;275:26196–205.
37. Lakshmipathy U, Campbell C. Double strand break
rejoining by mammalian mitochondrial extracts.
Nucleic Acids Res 1999;27:1198–204.
DNA Ligase III in Nonhomologous End Joining
www.aacrjournals.org 4029 Cancer Res 2005; 65: (10). May 15, 2005
 American Association for Cancer Research Copyright © 2005 
 on February 21, 2013cancerres.aacrjournals.orgDownloaded from 
DOI:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-3055
38. Audebert M, Salles B, Calsou P. Involvement of
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 and XRCC1/DNA ligase
III in an alternative route for DNA double-strand breaks
rejoining. J Biol Chem 2004;279:55117–26.
39. McVey M, LaRocque JR, Adams MD, Sekelsky JJ.
Formation of deletions during double-strand break
repair in Drosophila DmBlmmutants occurs after strand
invasion. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004;101:15694–9.
40. Cheong N, Perrault AR, Wang H, et al. DNA-PK-
independent rejoining of DNA double-strand breaks in
human cell extracts in vitro . Int J Radiat Biol 1999;75:
67–81.
41. DiBiase SJ, Zeng Z-C, Chen R, Hyslop T, Curran WJ Jr,
Iliakis G. DNA-dependent protein kinase stimulates an
independently active, nonhomologous, end-joining
apparatus. Cancer Res 2000;60:1245–53.
42. Wang H, Zeng Z-C, Bui T-A, et al. Efficient rejoining
of radiation-induced DNA double-strand breaks in
vertebrate cells deficient in genes of the RAD52
epistasis group. Oncogene 2001;20:2212–24.
43. Goettlich B, Reichenberger S, Feldmann E, Pfeiffer P.
Rejoining of DNA double-strand breaks in vitro by
single-strand annealing. Eur J Biochem 1998;258:387–95.
44. Lakshmipathy U, Campbell C. The human DNA ligase
III gene encodes nuclear and mitochondrial proteins.
Mol Cell Biol 1999;19:3869–76.
45. Perez-Jannotti RM, Klein SM, Bogenhagen DF. Two
forms of mitochondrial DNA ligase III are produced in
Xenopus laevis oocytes. J Biol Chem 2001;276:48978–87.
46. Lakshmipathy U, Campbell C. Mitochondrial DNA
ligase III function is independent of Xrcc1. Nucleic
Acids Res 2000;28:3880–6.
47. Lakshmipathy U, Campbell C. Antisense-mediated
decrease in DNA ligase III expression results in reduced
mitochondrial DNA integrity. Nucleic Acids Res 2001;29:
668–76.
48. Thompson LH, Brookman KW, Jones NJ, Allen SA,
Carrano AV. Molecular cloning of the human XRCC1
gene, which corrects defective DNA strand break repair
and sister chromatid exchange. Mol Cell Biol 1990;10:
6160–71.
49. van Ankeren SC, Murray D, Stafford PM, Meyn RE.
Cell survival and recovery processes in Chinese hamster
AA8 cell and in two radiosensitive clones. Radiat Res
1988;115:223–37.
50. Adachi N, Ishino T, Ishii Y, Takeda S, Koyama H.
DNA ligase IV-deficient cells are more resistant to
ionizing radiation in the absence of Ku70: implications
for DNA double-strand break repair. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 2001;98:12109–13.
51. Su¨sse S, Scholz C-J, Bu¨rkle A, Wiesmu¨ller L.
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP-1) and p53 inde-
pendently function in regulating double-strand break
repair in primate cells. Nucleic Acids Res 2004;32:669–80.
52. Rudat V, Bachmann N, Ku¨pper J-H, Weber K-J.
Overexpression of the DNA-binding domain of
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibits rejoining of
ionizing radiation-induced DNA double-strand breaks.
Int J Radiat Biol 2001;77:303–7.
53. Noel G, Giocanti N, Fernet M, Megnin-Chanet F,
Favaudon V. Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP-I) is
not involved in DNA double-strand break recovery.
BMC Cell Biol 2003;4:7–16.
54. D’Amours D, Desnoyers S, D’Silva I, Poirier GG.
Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation reactions in the regulation of
nuclear functions. Biochem J 1999;342:249–68.
55. Yang Y-G, Cortes U, Patnaik S, Jasin M, Wang Z-Q.
Ablation of PARP-1 does not interfere with the repair of
DNA double-strand breaks, but compromises the
reactivation of stalled replication forks. Oncogene
2004;23:3872–82.
56. Roth DB, Porter TM, Wilson JH. Mechanisms of
nonhomologous recombination in mammalian cells.
Mol Cell Biol 1985;5:2599–607.
57. Roth DB, Wilson JH. Nonhomologous recombina-
tion in mammalian cells: role for short sequence
homologies in the joining reaction. Mol Cell Biol 1986;
6:4295–304.
58. Chang C, Biedermann KA, Mezzina M, Brown JM.
Characterization of the DNA double strand break repair
defect in scid mice. Cancer Res 1993;53:1244–8.
59. Harrington J, Hsieh CL, Gerton J, Bosma G, Lieber MR.
Analysis of the defect in DNA end joining in the murine
scid mutation. Mol Cell Biol 1992;12:4758–68.
60. Kabotyanski EB, Gomelsky L, Han J-O, Stamato TD,
Roth DB. Double-strand break repair in Ku86- and
XRCC4-deficient cells. Nucleic Acids Res 1998;26:
5333–42.
61. Feldmann E, Schmiemann V, Goedecke W,
Reichenberger S, Pfeiffer P. DNA double-strand break
repair in cell-free extracts from Ku80-deficient cells:
implications for Ku serving as an alignment factor in
non-homologous DNA end joining. Nucleic Acids Res
2000;28:2585–96.
62. Chen S, Inamdar KV, Pfeiffer P, et al. Accurate in vitro
end joining of a DNA double strand break with partially
cohesive 3V-overhangs and 3V-phosphoglycolate termini.
Effect of Ku on repair fidelity. J Biol Chem 2001;276:
24323–30.
Cancer Research
Cancer Res 2005; 65: (10). May 15, 2005 4030 www.aacrjournals.org
 American Association for Cancer Research Copyright © 2005 
 on February 21, 2013cancerres.aacrjournals.orgDownloaded from 
DOI:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-3055
