GeneMark: web software for gene finding in
prokaryotes, eukaryotes and viruses
John Besemer1 and Mark Borodovsky1,2,*
1School ofBiology and 2DepartmentofBiomedical Engineering, Georgia InstituteofTechnology, Atlanta, GA 30332,USA
Received February 14, 2005; Revised and Accepted April 20, 2005
ABSTRACT
The task of gene identification frequently confronting
researchers working with both novel and well studied
genomes can be conveniently and reliably solved
with the help of the GeneMark web software (http://
opal.biology.gatech.edu/GeneMark/). The website
provides interfaces to the GeneMark family of pro-
grams designed and tuned for gene prediction in
prokaryotic, eukaryotic and viral genomic sequences.
Currently, the server allows the analysis of nearly
200 prokaryotic and .10 eukaryotic genomes using
species-specific versions of the software and pre-
computed gene models. In addition, genes in proka-
ryotic sequences from novel genomes can be identi-
fied using models derived on the spot upon sequence
submission, either by a relatively simple heuristic
approach or by the full-fledged self-training program
GeneMarkS. A database of reannotations of .1000
viral genomes by the GeneMarkS program is also
available from the web site. The GeneMark website
is frequently updated to provide the latest versions
of the software and gene models.
INTRODUCTION
Computational gene finders can be divided into two classes:
intrinsic and extrinsic. Intrinsic, or ab initio, gene finders make
no explicit use of information about DNAs or proteins outside
the sequence being studied. Extrinsic gene finders utilize
sequence similarity search methods to identify the locations
of protein-coding regions. It is common for gene finders of
both types to be used in concert in a gene finding project,
owing to their complementary nature.
The programs of the GeneMark family are ab initio gene
finders. Such programs are the only means to identify genes
with no homologues in current databases. As these genes make
up a sizeable percentage of the whole gene complement for
particular species, the importance of ab initio programs will
not diminish in the foreseeable future. The GeneMark web
software includes two major programs, called GeneMark (1)
and GeneMark.hmm (2). Both programs employ inhomogen-
eous (three-periodic) Markov chain models describing
protein-coding DNA and homogeneous Markov chain models
describing non-coding DNA. GeneMark uses a Bayesian
formalism to calculate the a posteriori probability of the pres-
ence of the genetic code (in at least one of six possible frames)
in a short DNA sequence fragment, thus being a local
approach. The GeneMark.hmm program uses a hidden
Markov model (HMM) framework and the generalized Viterbi
algorithm to determine the most likely sequence of hidden
states (which are actually labels designating the coding or
non-coding function) based on the whole observed DNA
sequence. Additional details about the GeneMark and
GeneMark.hmm algorithms can be found in Refs (1–3).
The architecture of the HMM itself can be altered to fit the
organization of a particular type of genome under study in a
better way. For example, the prokaryotic version of Gene-
Mark.hmm contains hidden states for the characteristic fea-
tures of genes in prokaryotes, including ribosomal binding
sites (RBS), uninterrupted genes and gene overlaps. The
eukaryotic version utilizes an extended HMM architecture,
including states for splice sites, translation initiation
(Kozak) sites and interrupted genes (exons and introns).
The web software programs have been extensively used—
currently >21 000 nucleotide sequence and 329 000 protein
sequence records in GenBank (4) contain references to the
GeneMark programs.
As many of the model parameters are species-specific, the
accuracy of an ab initio gene finder is highly dependent on the
selection of adequate training data as well as on the use of
sound methods to create the models. The models available at
the GeneMark website were constructed using our recently
developed self-training methods (3) and were tested locally
before being released.
WEB SERVER DESCRIPTION
Both GeneMark (1) and GeneMark.hmm (2) can be used via
the GeneMark website for the analysis of prokaryotic DNA,
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 404 894 8432; Fax: +1 404 894 0519; Email: mark.borodovsky@biology.gatech.edu
 The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W451–W454
doi:10.1093/nar/gki487
with 175 pre-computed species-specific statistical models
available. Analysis of DNA from any prokaryotic species is
supported by (i) a special version of GeneMark.hmm using a
heuristic model calculated from the nucleotide frequencies of
an input sequence at least 400 nt long (5) and (ii) a self-training
program, GeneMarkS (3), which can be used for longer
sequences on the order of 1 Mb in length. Thus, the DNA
of any prokaryote can be analysed, via either a pre-computed
species-specific model or a model created on the fly.
As many of the programs at the GeneMark website share sim-
ilar interfaces, we use here the prokaryotic GeneMark.hmm
program as an exemplar and discuss program-specific differ-
ences below, where appropriate.
The GeneMark.hmm web interface accepts as input a single
DNA sequence as an uploaded file or as text pasted into a
textbox. If a FASTA description line begins the sequence,
all text on the line following the ‘greater than’ symbol (>)
is used as the title. In the remainder of the submission, digits
and white space characters are ignored and letters other than T,
C, A and G (assumed to appear rarely) are converted to N.
The interface requires selection of the species name. Selection
of a model for the RBS (in the form of a position-specific
weight matrix and a spacer length distribution) is optional.
In certain cases, such as the crenarchaeote Pyrobaculum
aerophilum, the RBS model is replaced by a promoter model,
which is the dominant regulatory motif located upstream to
gene starts in this species (6). The interface also includes the
option of using other types of genetic codes such as the Myco-
plasma genetic code.
GeneMark.hmm reports all predicted genes in a format that
includes the strand the gene resides on, its boundaries, length
in nucleotides and gene class (Table 1). Class indicates which
of the two Markov chain models used in GeneMark.hmm,
Typical or Atypical gene model, provided the higher likeli-
hood for the gene sequence. Genes of the Typical class exhibit
codon usage patterns specific to the majority of genes in the
given species, while Atypical class genes may not follow such
patterns and frequently contain significant numbers of laterally
transferred genes (7,8). The nucleotide sequences of predicted
genes and translated protein sequences are available as an
output to facilitate further analysis, such as BLAST searching
(9). An option to generate GeneMark predictions in parallel
with the GeneMark.hmm analysis provides important addi-
tional information. In this case, GeneMark is set up to use
models derived from the same training data as models for the
current run of GeneMark.hmm.
It is worth noting that the GeneMark.hmm and GeneMark
algorithms are complementary to each other in the same way
as the Viterbi algorithm and the posterior decoding algorithm
are. Therefore, though the two algorithms are distinct, they
are supposed to generate predictions largely corroborating
and validating each other. Differences frequently indicate
sequence errors and deviations in gene organization, very
short genes, gene fragments, gene overlaps, etc.
Graphical output of the analysis is available in PDF or
PostScript format. A fragment of this output, illustrating
the predictions of both GeneMark and GeneMark.hmm, is
shown in Figure 1. The graphical output clearly depicts
the advantage of using multiple Markov chain models repres-
enting different classes of genes. Here, the coding potential
graph obtained using the Typical gene model, derived by
GeneMarkS, is denoted by a solid black line, and the coding
potential graph obtained using the Atypical gene model
(derived by a heuristic approach) is denoted by a dotted
line. Whereas the first and last genes in Figure 1 could be
detected using either of the two models, as both of them pro-
duced high enough coding potentials, the gene located in posi-
tions from 846 to 1112 was detected only by the Atypical
model. Further, Figure 1 demonstrates the ability of the Gene-
Mark programs to detect genes of both the Typical and Atyp-
ical gene classes (7). The GeneMark graph also includes
indications of frameshift positions (also listed in the text
report), which are often sequencing errors but in rare cases
are natural and biologically very interesting.
For the GeneMark program, there are several specific
options. The window size and step size parameters (96 nt
and 12 nt, respectively, by default) define the size of the
sliding window and how far this window is moved along
the sequence in one step. The threshold parameter determines
the minimal average coding potential for an open reading
frame (ORF) to be predicted as a gene. There are several
options which allow fine-tuning of the GeneMark graphical
output. In addition, there are options supporting the analysis
of eukaryotic DNA sequences by GeneMark including the
ability to provide lists of putative splice sites and protein
translations of predicted exons. As might be expected, Gene-
Mark (the posterior decoding algorithm) does not produce high
enough resolution for the precise prediction of exon–intron
borders. Thus, GeneMark.hmm (the generalized Viterbi
algorithm) in its eukaryotic version is the major tool for the
identification of exon–intron structures in eukaryotic DNA
sequences.
The output of the GeneMark program consists of a list of
ORFs predicted as genes, i.e. those with average coding poten-
tial above the selected threshold. Although each predicted
gene can have more than one potential start, additional data
is provided to help the researcher annotate one of the altern-
atives as the ‘true’ one. The start probability (abbreviated
‘Start Prob’) is derived from the sequences in the windows
immediately upstream and downstream of each potential start.
RBS information is provided in the form of a probability score
along with the position and sequence of the potential RBS
(abbreviated ‘RBS Prob’, ‘RBS Site’ and ‘RBS Seq’). In
addition to the list of predicted genes, GeneMark provides
a list of ‘regions of interest’, spans of significant length
between in-frame stop codons where spikes of coding potential
are wide enough and may warrant further analysis even if no
genes are predicted therein based on automatic comparison
with the threshold.
Table 1. Gene predictions made by the prokaryotic version of GeneMark.hmm
for a fragment of the Escherichia coli K12 genome
Gene Strand Left end Right end Gene length Class
1 + 61 825 765 1
2 + 846 1112 267 2
3 + 1145 2092 948 1
4 – 2254 4386 2133 1
5 – 4388 520 366 1
In the ‘Class’ column,1 and2 indicateTypical and Atypical, respectively. Direct
and reverse complement strands are indicated by ‘+’ and ‘–’, respectively. The
graphical output for the first three predictions is shown in Figure 1.
W452 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
Analysis of prokaryotic DNA sequences for which there is
no pre-computed species-specific model can be carried out
using a program version which heuristically derives a
model for any input sequence >400 nt (5). This approach
has also proven useful for the analysis of inhomogeneous
genomes, particularly regions too divergent from the bulk
of the genome, such as pathogenicity islands (10,11).
If models (including RBS models) have to be computed
de novo for an anonymous DNA sequence with length of the
order of 1 Mb or longer, the GeneMarkS program can be used
(3). This program needs significantly more computational
resources; thus, its output is provided via email. A modified
version of GeneMarkS tuned for the analysis of viruses of
eukaryotic hosts creates a model for the Kozak consensus
sequence instead of a two-component RBS model.
The eukaryotic version of GeneMark.hmm is currently
available for the analysis of 11 eukaryotic genomes: Homo
sapiens, Arabidopsis thaliana, Caenorhabditis elegans,
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Drosophila melanogaster, Gallus
gallus, Hordeum vulgare, Mus musculus, Oryza sativa,
Triticum aestivum and Zea mays. From the prediction accuracy
tables given at the website (http://opal.biology.gatech.edu/
GeneMark/plant_accuracy.html), it follows that the latest ver-
sions of GeneMark.hmm produce remarkably accurate gene
predictions for plant genomes such as rice and Arabidopsis.
This fact has not escaped the attention of plant genome sequen-
cing consortiums, which have used the program intensively
(12,13). The analysis of cDNA and EST sequences from
eukaryotes, which typically contain no introns, is facilitated
by a special version of GeneMark called GeneMark.SPL.
Interestingly, eukaryotic genomes with rare introns present
difficulty in terms of collecting enough statistics for the
intron and internal exon related models, the important
components of a full-fledged eukaryotic gene finder. For
this reason, a special interface is available for low eukaryotes
such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Currently, this interface
employs versions of prokaryotic GeneMark and Gene-
Mark.hmm augmented with Kozak start site models instead
of the prokaryotic RBS model.
The eukaryotic species-specific models are represented by
several variants built for distinct G + C% ranges covering the
whole scale of G + C inhomogeneity observed in a particular
genome. GeneMark.hmm automatically selects the model vari-
ant which fits the G+C% of the input sequence. Note that, in the
eukaryotic case, the RepeatMasker program (A. M. A. Smit,
R. Hubley, and P. Green, www.repeatmasker.org), which is
frequently used for pre-processing, can introduce a significant
number of ‘N’ characters. These characters do not influence the
selection of the Markov chain model used in prediction.
A sample text output produced by the eukaryotic version of
GeneMark.hmm is shown in Table 2. In the graphical output of
the eukaryotic version of GeneMark.hmm, the thick horizontal
bars (which represent whole genes in the prokaryotic case)
indicate predicted exons. Vertical ticks on these bars show
Figure 1. Graphical output from the combination of GeneMark and GeneMark.hmm for a fragment of the Escherichia coli K12 genome. The solid black and
dashed traces indicate the coding potential calculated by the GeneMark program using the Typical and Atypical Markov chain models of coding DNA, respectively.
Only the three reading frames in the direct strand are shown as there are no genes (either predicted or annotated) on the reverse strand in this section of the genome.
The thick black horizontal bars indicate the locations of the predictions made by GeneMark.hmm. The thick grey horizontal bars indicate ‘regions of interest’
provided by the GeneMark program. The thin black horizontal lines indicate (longest) ORFs observed in each reading frame; ticks extending above and below this line
indicate potential start and stop codons, respectively.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W453
the starts and ends of predicted initial and terminal exons,
respectively.
For the analysis of virus and phage DNA, the heuristic (for
short genomes) and GeneMarkS (for long genomes) options,
mentioned above, are recommended. In addition, a database
called VIOLIN containing pre-computed reannotations of
>1000 virus genomes is available (14).
Future directions for GeneMark web software development
include detection of several genomic elements currently not
predicted by either GeneMark or GeneMark.hmm, such as
rRNA and tRNA genes (which can be mis-predicted as
protein-coding genes in low G+C% species) and improving
the detection of gene 50 ends. Currently, the server supports the
analysis of sequences masked by tRNAscan (15) or similar
programs. The GeneMark programs will not find genes in
these masked areas (sequences of ‘N’ characters); thus, the
predictions will be compatible with this extrinsic information.
The detection of exact gene starts remains a challenging
problem in gene finding, as many genes have relatively
weak patterns indicating sites of translation and transcription
initiation. This problem is made especially difficult by the
lack of available data sets containing verified gene start loca-
tions to be used for training and evaluation. Refinements in the
RBS and Kozak models and the potential inclusion of hidden
states representing upstream promoter sequences are currently
being explored to address this issue.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors are grateful to Alexandre Lomsadze, Ryan Mills,
Vardges Ter-Hovhannisyan and Wenhan Zhu for help in updat-
ing and maintaining the GeneMark website. We also appreciate
the efforts of the European Bioinformatics Institute, who have
set up a server for the GeneMark program at www.ebi.ac.uk/
genemark/. Development of the programs available on the
GeneMark website has been supported in part by a research
grant from the US National Institutes of Health. Funding to
pay the Open Access publication charges for this article was
provided by NIH.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Borodovsky,M. and Mcininch,J. (1993) GenMark: parallel gene
recognition for both DNA strands. Comput. Chem., 17, 123–133.
2. Lukashin,A.V. and Borodovsky,M. (1998) GeneMark.hmm: new
solutions for gene finding. Nucleic Acids Res., 26, 1107–1115.
3. Besemer,J., Lomsadze,A. and Borodovsky,M. (2001) GeneMarkS: a
self-training method for prediction of gene starts in microbial genomes.
Implications for finding sequence motifs in regulatory regions. Nucleic
Acids Res., 29, 2607–2618.
4. Benson,D.A., Karsch-Mizrachi,I., Lipman,D.J., Ostell,J. and
Wheeler,D.L. (2004) GenBank: update. Nucleic Acids Res., 32,
D23–D26.
5. Besemer,J. and Borodovsky,M. (1999) Heuristic approach to deriving
models for gene finding. Nucleic Acids Res., 27, 3911–3920.
6. Slupska,M.M., King,A.G., Fitz-Gibbon,S., Besemer,J., Borodovsky,M.
and Miller,J.H. (2001) Leaderless transcripts of the crenarchaeal
hyperthermophile Pyrobaculum aerophilum. J. Mol. Biol., 309, 347–360.
7. Borodovsky,M., McIninch,J.D., Koonin,E.V., Rudd,K.E., Medigue,C.
and Danchin,A. (1995) Detection of new genes in a bacterial genome
using Markov models for three gene classes. Nucleic Acids Res., 23,
3554–3562.
8. Hayes,W.S. and Borodovsky,M. (1998) How to interpret an anonymous
bacterial genome: machine learning approach to gene identification.
Genome Res., 8, 1154–1171.
9. Altschul,S.F., Gish,W., Miller,W., Myers,E.W. and Lipman,D.J. (1990)
Basic local alignment search tool. J. Mol. Biol., 215, 403–410.
10. Huang,S.H., Chen,Y.H., Kong,G., Chen,S.H., Besemer,J.,
Borodovsky,M. and Jong,A. (2001) A novel genetic island of meningitic
Escherichia coli K1 containing the ibeA invasion gene (GimA):
functional annotation and carbon-source-regulated invasion of human
brain microvascular endothelial cells. Funct. Integr. Genomics, 1,
312–322.
11. Censini,S., Lange,C., Xiang,Z., Crabtree,J.E., Ghiara,P.,
Borodovsky,M., Rappuoli,R. and Covacci,A. (1996) cag,
a pathogenicity island of Helicobacter pylori, encodes type
I-specific and disease-associated virulence factors. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA, 93, 14648–14653.
12. Arabidopsis Genome Initiative. (2000). Analysis of the
genome sequence of the flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana.
Nature, 408, 796–815.
13. Yu,J., Hu,S., Wang,J., Wong,G.K., Li,S., Liu,B., Deng,Y., Dai,L.,
Zhou,Y., Zhang,X. et al. (2002) A draft sequence of the rice genome
(Oryza sativa L. ssp. indica). Science, 296, 79–92.
14. Mills,R., Rozanov,M., Lomsadze,A., Tatusova,T. and Borodovsky,M.
(2003) Improving gene annotation of complete viral genomes.
Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 7041–7055.
15. Lowe,T.M. and Eddy,S.R. (1997) tRNAscan-SE: a program for
improved detection of transfer RNA genes in genomic sequence.
Nucleic Acids Res., 25, 955–964.
Table 2. Prediction of a single gene (with seven exons) made by the eukaryotic version of GeneMark.hmm for a fragment of the Arabidopsis thaliana genome
Gene no. Exon no. Strand Exon type Exon range Exon length Start frame End frame
1 1 + Initial 23 525–24 451 927 1 3
1 2 + Internal 24 752–24 962 211 1 1
1 3 + Internal 25 041–25 435 395 2 3
1 4 + Internal 25 524–25 743 220 1 1
1 5 + Internal 25 939–25 997 59 2 3
1 6 + Internal 26 292–26 776 485 1 2
1 7 + Terminal 26 862–27 012 151 3 3
The gene that an exon belongs to and its strand are necessarily the same for all exons in a gene. Each exon is described by a type: ‘initial’ (begins with ATG),
‘internal’ or ‘terminal’ (ends with TAA, TAG or TGA) or ‘single’ for exons which are both initial and terminal (intronless gene). The start frame and end frame indicate
the position of the codon (first, second or third) that the exon begins and ends with, respectively. Notably, all complete gene structures begin in codon position 1 and end
in codon position 3.
W454 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
