WormBase: a comprehensive data resource for
Caenorhabditis biology and genomics
Nansheng Chen*, Todd W. Harris, Igor Antoshechkin1, Carol Bastiani1, Tamberlyn Bieri2,
Darin Blasiar2, Keith Bradnam3, Payan Canaran, Juancarlos Chan1, Chao-Kung Chen3,
Wen J. Chen1, Fiona Cunningham, Paul Davis3, Eimear Kenny1, Ranjana Kishore1,
Daniel Lawson3, Raymond Lee1, Hans-Michael Muller1, Cecilia Nakamura1, Shraddha Pai4,
Philip Ozersky2, Andrei Petcherski1, Anthony Rogers3, Aniko Sabo2, Erich M. Schwarz1,
Kimberly Van Auken1, Qinghua Wang1, Richard Durbin3, John Spieth2, Paul W. Sternberg1
and Lincoln D. Stein
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1 Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA, 1Howard Hughes Medical
Institute and California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA, 2Genome Sequencing Center, Washington
University, St Louis, MO, USA, 3The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK and 4The Watson School of
Biological Sciences, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA
Received August 21, 2004; Revised and Accepted October 5, 2004
ABSTRACT
WormBase (http://www.wormbase.org), the model
organism database for information about Caenorhab-
ditis elegans and related nematodes, continues to
expand in breadth and depth. Over the past year,
WormBase has added multiple large-scale datasets
including SAGE, interactome, 3D protein structure
datasets and NCBI KOGs. To accommodate this
growth, the International WormBase Consortium has
improved the user interface by adding new features
to aid in navigation, visualization of large-scale data-
sets, advanced searching and datamining. Internally,
we have restructured the databasemodels to rationa-
lize the representation of genes and to prepare the
systemtoaccept thegenomesequencesof threeaddi-
tional Caenorhabditis species over the coming year.
DESCRIPTION
WormBase is the model organism database for the biology
and genomics of Caenorhabditis elegans and Caenorhabditis
briggsae. It is a rapidly evolving resource, which is driven by
the fact that C.elegans is widely used as a model organism for
a variety of biomedical research topics, including devel-
opment, neuroscience, apoptosis and aging (1–4), and an
increasingly wide range of high-throughput data is available
for it. The genome sequence of C.elegans (5) has boosted
genome-wide research projects including ORFeome (6),
RNA interference (RNAi) (7), microarray (8), interactome
(genome-wide protein–protein interactions) (9), serial analysis
of gene expression (SAGE) (10,11) and other gene expression
profiling techniques (11). These large-scale datasets have
enormously enriched WormBase content (2,3). More recently,
the availability of the whole C.briggsae genome sequence
(12), in addition to that of C.elegans, has established
WormBase as a platform for comparative genomics among
the Caenorhabditides genus (13).
The International WormBase Consortium, consisting of
over 30 scientists from four institutions (http://wormbase.
org/about/people.html), collects and annotates both large-
and small-scale datasets from C.elegans, C.briggsae and
related nematodes, organizes them in a single public database,
and makes them available for browsing and downloading on
the WormBase website. In addition to acquiring directly
deposited data by liaison with the research community, the
consortium reviews and extracts data from the complete
Caenorhabditis published literature. New releases of the data-
base are made available every two weeks, ensuring that new
and updated datasets are available to the community on a
timely basis. This paper reviews recent progress in WormBase
content and improvements in the user interface, explains how
WormBase is evolving and discusses different methods of
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 516 367 8394; Fax: +1 516 367 8389; Email: chenn@cshl.org
The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use permissions, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org.
ª 2005, the authors
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 33, Database issue ª Oxford University Press 2005; all rights reserved
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D383–D389
doi:10.1093/nar/gki066
accessing the data. The paper closes with a discussion of new
features planned for the coming year.
RECENT ADDITIONS TO WormBase CONTENTS
Over the past year we have greatly increased the sizes of some
existing datasets. For example, there is a 5-fold increase
in microarray data points and a dramatic 13-fold increase in
microarray experiments, from 8 experiments (reported in
2 papers) to 113 experiments (reported in 15 papers). The
number of RNAi experiments producing a non-wild-type phe-
notype has also more than doubled over the past year.
We continue to refine C.elegans gene models on the basis of
new data appearing in the literature, from new sequence data in
the public nucleotide databases (GenBank/EMBL/DDBJ), and
from personal communications from the Worm community.
Most curation activity involves refining the structure of exist-
ing gene models. However, we also continue to remove gene
predictions that are no longer valid (e.g. very short open read-
ing frames) and we continually add new gene predictions
where appropriate (usually corresponding to new isoforms
of an existing gene). Despite large numbers of genes being
created and removed, the total gene count (for protein-coding
genes) has seen only a small net increase (+22 genes) over the
year. In contrast to this, the proportion of protein-coding genes
that are now confirmed by transcript data (i.e. where every
coding exon has transcript support) has increased by 20%
(from 4663 to 5569) over the same period. This is due to
the availability of more transcript data [particularly expressed
sequence tags (ESTs)] and the work of curators to refine gene
models to better fit the available transcript data. We have also
greatly improved the methods by which transcripts are mapped
onto the genome and connected to gene models.
Over the same period, WormBase has added several new
large-scale experimental and theoretical datasets. Notable
additions include large-scale SAGE datasets (10,11), the inter-
actome dataset (9), 3D structural data and the National Center
for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) KOGs (14) set of pre-
dicted orthologous groups. Recently, the newly developed
technique trans-spliced exon coupled RNA end determination
(TEC-RED) has been used to assay the 50 ends of expressed
genes in C.elegans (15) and the dataset is being curated and
entered into WormBase.
Genome-wide SAGE
SAGE (10,11) is a sensitive technique for assaying genome-
wide gene expression levels that provides a good complement to
microarray-based techniques. As of release WS123, WormBase
incorporates the results of 12 SAGE libraries, two of which have
been published previously (10). The 12 libraries cover various
developmental stages (11) from embryo to adult and touch
20 417 genes (coding sequences, WS129) corresponding to
91.9% of all genes annotated in theC.elegansgenome in Worm-
Base (22 213 including alternatively spliced coding sequences,
WS129). SAGE tags corresponding to a gene can be found
at the bottom of the WormBase gene page (e.g. http://www.
wormbase.org/db/gene/gene?name=ced-3#Reagents) and are
linked to information detailing the SAGE tag’s abundance at
various life stages in a new SAGE report page (Figure 1).
Interactome
Dissecting a protein’s interaction network is often a key to
understanding its biological role. WormBase includes the
results of the ‘Interactome Project’, a large-scale screen
based on the yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) technique (9). In the
current dataset, baits are biased towards genes either homo-
logous to human genes, of multicellular functions (genes with
homologues in multicellular organisms including Drosophila
melanogaster, Homo sapiens and Arabidopsis thaliana but not
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae), or having a known role in mito-
sis and meiosis. Currently, WormBase includes 5534 interac-
tions covering 15% of the C.elegans proteome. Users can view
these interactions from the gene summary page.
Protein three-dimensional structures
This small but important dataset is from the Northeast
Structural Genomics Consortium (http://www.nesg.org),
which aims to produce 340 C.elegans targets. The primary
targets of the Consortium focus on proteins of eukaryotic
model organisms including S.cerevisiae and D.melanogaster
in addition to C.elegans. Currently, structures for six proteins
have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) (http://
www.rcsb.org/pdb/) (16). Detailed information about the
status for these 340 C.elegans targets have been included in
the WormBase and will be regularly updated.
NCBI KOGs
KOGs are a eukaryote-specific version of the Conserved
Orthologous Groups originally devised at the NCBI for micro-
bial genomes (14). KOGs are defined by a triangle of recip-
rocal best BLASTP hits between domains of eukaryote
proteins from highly divergent species (14). Over the last
year, WormBase has incorporated these KOG annotations,
together with other homology groups (14). Currently, Worm-
Base carries 4852 KOGs, which includes the product of 9427
C.elegans protein-coding genes (i.e. 48% of all predicted pro-
tein-coding genes in WS129).
INTERNAL DATA MODEL CHANGES AND
NEW IDENTIFIERS
The backend database of WormBase is ACeDB (http://www.
acedb.org) (4). During the last year, we have changed the way
that a number of data types are represented in the database.
These changes to the database schema do not affect usual
users. However, advanced users who write scripts to access
WormBase need to be aware of them. Significant model
changes include the introduction of a unified Gene class (http://
wormbase.org/db/misc/model?class=Gene), which holds all
relevant information about a gene. Previously, such information
was scattered among several interrelated classes. At the same
time we have introduced CDS and Transcript classes to
manage better the relationships between spliced transcripts
and their products, and have significantly improved the deri-
vation of transcript structures from cDNA and EST
sequences.
Alongside these changes we have introduced stable anon-
ymous identifiers for genes, of the form WBGene00006741,
and for papers, of the form WBPaper0005637, in the same
D384 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
form as the person identifiers of the form WBPerson241.
These identifiers track the various names that have been
used for the corresponding entity and should be used where
possible for database cross-referencing. The website supports
URLs of the form http://www.wormbase.org/db/get?name=
WBGene00006741;class=Gene. Questions about data models
can be directed to wormbase-help@wormbase.org.
USER INTERFACE ENHANCEMENTS
Enhancements to WormBase genome browser
The genome browser is a central component of WormBase that
allows users to visualize gene model structures and their sup-
porting evidence, as well as other features such as single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), repetitive elements and
experimental reagents. Over the last year, the browser has
been enhanced in several ways: (i) scalable vector graphics
(SVG) support. WormBase genome browser images have been
widely used in presentations and publication illustrations
(2,3,17), but their bitmapped nature leads to image degradation
when printed at high resolution. We have recently added a
facility that allows WormBase users to download specified
genome browser images as SVG files (http://www.w3.org/
TR/SVG/), which can be displayed, edited and printed at
high resolution using SVG compatible software such as
Adobe Illustrator 10. (ii) Feature highlighting. To assist
location and visualization of features of interest, WormBase
now highlights with a yellow background the feature that users
have found in a search. This change is especially useful when
users browse in large window size with multiple tracks turned
on. (iii) Untranslated regions (UTRs). Both the internal data
model and the visual display have now been modified to show
the untranslated sections of transcripts, as well as internal
splices that occur within the 50- or 30-UTRs. (iv) More feature
tracks, including SNPs, SAGE tags, operon, poly(A) sites and
predicted signal sequences. (v) DAS support. The genome
browser may now be used as a viewer for Distributed Annota-
tion System (DAS) (18) tracks, allowing users to superimpose
their own annotations on WormBase tracks.
EST alignment page and protein alignment page
WormBase now maintains nucleotide-level alignments of
ESTs, cDNAs and other sequences both within and between
species. For example, the alignment between the C.elegans
and C.briggsae genomes can be viewed both in a low-
resolution view that emphasizes the relationship among a
group of colinear genes (http://www.wormbase.org/db/seq/
ebsyn?name=cb25.fpc0143:1..8000), or in a high-resolution
text alignment view that shows differences in individual
nucleotides. ESTs and cDNAs from C.elegans and other
nematodes can be viewed in a multiple alignment view that
highlights misalignments and gaps (http://www.wormbase.
org/db/seq/aligner?name=WBGene00000423;class=Gene).
Figure 1. SAGE report page.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D385
At the protein level, WormBase maintains a list of best
BLAST matches to longest protein products from other
important species including human (H.sapiens), mouse
(Mus musculus), rat (Rattus norvegicus), fly (D.melanogaster),
yeast (S.cerevisiae) and C.briggsae, which together can pro-
vide insights into the function of the related genes. All BLAST
results are hyperlinked to a relevant entry in the respective
model organism database or to Swiss-Prot/TrEMBL as appro-
priate. The multiple alignment display highlights conserved
amino acid residues using a color code based on the chemical
properties of the residues (Figure 2).
WormBase site map and WormBase glossary
Over the past year, we have added a WormBase site map
(http://wormbase.org/db/misc/site_map) to provide an over-
view of the increasing number of web pages. Users can access
this map directly from the navigation banner at the top of every
WormBase page. The site map page lists all WormBase pages
and provides users with different views. For example, users
can choose ‘Detailed View’ to get brief overviews for indi-
vidual pages before browsing the pages. And ‘Alphabetical
View’ lists search pages in alphabetical order. Recently,
WormBase has established a glossary page (http://dev.
wormbase.org/db/misc/glossary) that lists definitions of com-
mon terms used throughout the site.
WormBase AS A PLATFORM FOR DATA MINING
As biologists come to make more sophisticated use of large-
scale datasets, there is an increasing need for a resource that
is more than a point-and-click repository but provides data
analysis and mining tools as well. This section briefly
describes existing and recently introduced features that
make WormBase suitable for data mining.
WormBase accessing and retrieving
There are five different methods for accessing WormBase,
each one suitable for a different set of purposes. Users can
choose the most appropriate access methods according to their
experience and needs.
(i) Website browsing. This is an one-item-at-a-time approach.
WormBase users typically enter WormBase from the front
page, searching the gene (or other items) of interests in the
Figure 2. Protein alignment page.
D386 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
search box. Alternatively, users can open the WormBase site
map by clicking on a link in the top navigational banner and
enter a specific web page for searching, either by sequence
(BLAST or BLAT) or by text. Once the users find their item of
interest, they can browse related web pages by following links.
The advantage of working with WormBase this way is that the
users can get detailed views and information about the items of
interest.
(ii) Batch retrieval. WormBase users increasingly need
to obtain customized batch reports. To address this need,
WormBase provides two web search pages: ‘Batch Genes’
and ‘Batch Sequences’ (2). The Batch Genes page allows
users to retrieve all biologically interesting gene data fields,
ranging from external database IDs, to protein motifs, GO
terms, genomic positions, phenotypes and underlying DNA
and protein sequences. This page gives users the option to
download the results in plain text or the HTML format, and
provides a variety of ways to select the set of genes of interest.
The Batch Sequences page is ideal for retrieving sequence-
based data such as UTRs, introns, putative promoter elements
and so on. For example, this facility can be used to generate
sequence files consisting of a specific length of upstream
sequence from a selected set of protein-coding genes. Both
pages can be readily accessed from the top navigational ban-
ner. The benefit of this method of searching is that it returns
results for a large number of items (genes).
(iii) Query language searching. For users who are comfort-
able with the ACeDB database query languages and familiar
with WormBase database models, query language searches
represent a quick and versatile method of searching
WormBase. Two query language search pages are available:
one for the WormBase Query Language, the original ACeDB
query language, and another for AQL, the new-style ACeDB
Query Language that is more similar to SQL. These pages can
be accessed from the WormBase ‘Site Map’ page. For users
who are not familiar with the ACeDB query languages, the
search pages provide instructions and example queries.
The major benefit is that users can formulate sophisticated
ad hoc queries.
(iv) Bulk downloads. Users can download whole gene sets
or even the whole database itself. WormBase provides a num-
ber of database extracts on its FTP site, including coordinates
of genes and other features, protein sequences, gene splicing
data and genetic mapping information. The entire genome and
its annotations are available in a tabular format that can be
loaded into and queried with a variety of relational databases
including MySQL, PostgreSQL and Oracle. A table is pro-
vided for each release that links PCR products such as are used
for microarrays and RNAi experiments to currently annotated
genes. WormBase also provides the entire database in the
ACeDB format. The advantage of this method is that users
do not have to rely on the Internet for data retrieval, so
that their data processing is not limited by Internet access.
Problems associated with this method are that users need
to be very familiar with the nature of the datasets and the
database models.
(v) Scripting. For more advanced users who know script
programming, WormBase provides an open-access server
‘aceserver’ (at http://aceserver.cshl.org) for direct access to
the backend WormBase database (19). The WormBase data
mining instruction page provides researchers with details
about how to connect to these databases using Perl (http://
www.perl.org) application programming interface, AcePerl
(http://stein.cshl.org/AcePerl), together with a scripts reposi-
tory of reusable Perl scripts. Users can run these scripts on
their local machines and use them as templates to customize
scripts of their own. The biggest advantage of this is users can
query, format and process the search results to the extent they
desire. An obvious drawback is that users need to acquire some
programming skills. However, this is becoming increasingly
popular with advanced users.
Specialized data mining tools
As a sequence analysis platform, WormBase has made a large
number of sequence analysis tools available to users. These
tools include BLAST (20), BLAT (21), ePCR (22), coordinate
mapper, EST aligner and protein aligner. In the past year, two
new data mining tools, Textpresso (http://www.textpresso.
org) (23), a literature search tool, and CisOrtho (24), a com-
parative cis-elements search tool have also been added to
WormBase. Textpresso is a full text search engine, which
gives researchers the ability to search the body of all Worm-
Base literature holdings, which includes a substantial percen-
tage of the C.elegans and C.briggsae literature. Currently, the
Textpresso database holds 19 985 curated documents, 4420 of
which have full texts. These documents come from four
major sources: (i) CGC papers. These are scientific journal
articles maintained by the Caenorhabditis Genetics Center
(http://biosci.umn.edu/CGC/CGChomepage.htm); (ii) Worm
Meetings abstracts; (iii) Worm Breeders Gazette abstracts;
and (iv) Miscellaneous. These are various other abstracts con-
taining data about C.elegans and C.briggsae. Another useful
feature of Textpresso is that it returns the sentences that con-
tain the key words, with links to WormBase paper pages and
PubMed pages.
CisOrtho (24) works by starting from a consensus binding
site that is represented as a weight matrix. It identifies
potential sites in a pre-filtered genome and then further filters
by assessing conservation of the putative site in the genome
of a related species, a process called phylogenetic footprint-
ing. CisOrtho can be accessed at http://www.wormbase.org/
cisortho/.
DATABASE FREEZES
In the past, the WormBase fortnightly update policy presented
a problem to researchers who published results based on
mining WormBase because by the time their results were
published the version of WormBase they based their analysis
on had been superseded. To assist in making such research
citable and reproducible, we have adopted a new policy in
which every tenth WormBase release becomes a frozen
release. Frozen releases are available in perpetuity on specially
designated WormBase sites named http://ws100.wormbase.
org, http://ws110.wormbase.org and so on. The first freeze
was http://ws100.wormbase.org, released on May 10, 2003.
The most recent freeze is http://ws130.wormbase.org, released
on August 16, 2004. Researchers are encouraged to perform
large-scale analyses on a frozen release and to cite the release
number in their publications. Pointers to all freezes are dis-
played on the WormBase live site front page.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D387
COLLABORATIONS WITH OTHER MODEL
ORGANISM DATABASES
WormBase is a part of the GMOD project (25,26), a broad
collaboration among the model organism databases to develop
common vocabularies, data models, software tools and user
interfaces applicable across all model organism community
databases. As part of this project, WormBase provides
sequence-similarity-based links between its gene pages and
the gene pages of FlyBase (27), The Saccharomyces Genome
Database (28,29), Ensembl (29) and Reactome (http://
www.reactome.org). Links to RGD (30) and MGD (31) are
planned.
Recently, the GMOD project has developed a common
representation of genomic sequence features known as the
Sequence Ontology (http://song.sourceforge.net), which facil-
itates exchange of genomic annotations among the various
MODs and encourages the use of common analytic and visual-
ization tools. GMOD participants are already using common
software packages on their websites for visualizing genome
annotations, drawing genetic maps and searching the literat-
ure, and this convergence will be enhanced in the near future
as the MODs move towards a unified gene page.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
WormBase has evolved from ACeDB (http://www.acedb.org),
toadatabase whichencompass literaturecurationandbiologyof
C.elegans (4), and recently toadatabasehousing thebiologyand
genomic data of multiple nematode species (2,3). WormBase is
still a work in progress. On the user interface front, future
enhancements include WormMart, which is based on BioMart,
an advanced query and report generation system first developed
for use with Ensembl (32). On the data front, we are looking
forward to the genome sequencing and annotation of three more
nematode species (http://genome.gov/page.cfm?pageID=
10002154), bringing up to five the number of Caenorhabditis
genomes maintained by WormBase. During 2005, WormBase
plans to introduce a browser for nematode intermediate meta-
bolism and higher-order biological pathways. The pathway
browser and the underlying dataset will be developed in colla-
boration with the Reactome and MetaCyc (http://metacyc.org/)
(33) projects. Together these will provide an unparalleled res-
ource for dissecting functional elements in the Caenorhabditis
genomes and provide valuable insights into the evolution and
biological adaptations of these organisms.
The WormBase Consortium will continue to address issues
raised by WormBase users, maintaining both a simple and
friendly user interface while adding further search and research
tools to enable WormBase’s evolution from a data repository
into a resource for all biologists to use in order to maximize the
value of model organism research inC.elegans and its relatives.
As always, we welcome comments, questions, corrections
and data submissions (wormbase-help@wormbase.org).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
P.W.S. is an Investigator with the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute. We thank Sheldon McKay and Kris Gunsalus for
critical reading of the manuscript. WormBase is supported by
grant P41-HG02223 from the US National Human Genome
Research Institute and the British Medical Research Council.
REFERENCES
1. Riddle,D.L., Blumenthal,T., Meyer,B.J. and Priess,J.R. (1997)C.elegans
II. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY.
2. Harris,T.W., Chen,N., Cunningham,F., Tello-Ruiz,M., Antoshechkin,I.,
Bastiani,C., Bieri,T., Blasiar,D., Bradnam,K., Chan,J. et al. (2004)
WormBase: a multi-species resource for nematodebiologyandgenomics.
Nucleic Acids Res., 32 (Database issue), D411–D417.
3. Harris,T.W., Lee,R., Schwarz,E., Bradnam,K., Lawson,D., Chen,W.,
Blasier,D., Kenny,E., Cunningham,F., Kishore,R. et al. (2003)
WormBase: a cross-species database for comparative genomics.
Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 133–137.
4. Stein,L., Sternberg,P., Durbin,R., Thierry-Mieg,J. and Spieth,J. (2001)
WormBase: network access to the genome and biology of
Caenorhabditis elegans. Nucleic Acids Res., 29, 82–86.
5. The C.elegans Sequencing Consortium (1998) Genome sequence of the
nematode C.elegans: a platform for investigating biology. Science,
282, 2012–2018.
6. Chen,N., Lawson,D., Bradnam,K. and Harris,T.W. (2004) WormBase
as an integrated platform for the C. elegans ORFeome. Genome Res.
14, 2155–2161.
7. Kamath,R.S., Fraser,A.G., Dong,Y., Poulin,G., Durbin,R., Gotta,M.,
Kanapin,A.,Le Bot,N., Moreno,S., Sohrmann,M.et al. (2003)Systematic
functional analysis of the Caenorhabditis elegans genome using RNAi.
Nature, 421, 231–237.
8. Kim,S.K., Lund,J., Kiraly,M., Duke,K., Jiang,M., Stuart,J.M.,
Eizinger,A., Wylie,B.N. and Davidson,G.S. (2001) A gene expression
map for Caenorhabditis elegans. Science, 293, 2087–2092.
9. Li,S., Armstrong,C.M., Bertin,N., Ge,H., Milstein,S., Boxem,M.,
Vidalain,P.O., Han,J.D., Chesneau,A., Hao,T. et al. (2004) A map of the
interactome network of the metazoan C. elegans. Science, 303,
540–543.
10. Jones,S.J., Riddle,D.L., Pouzyrev,A.T., Velculescu,V.E., Hillier,L.,
Eddy,S.R., Stricklin,S.L., Baillie,D.L., Waterston,R. and Marra,M.A.
(2001) Changes in gene expression associated with developmental arrest
and longevity in Caenorhabditis elegans. Genome Res., 11, 1346–1352.
11. McKay,S.J., Johnsen,R., Khattra,J., Asano,J., Baillie,D.L., Chan,S.,
Dube,N., Fang,L., Goszczynski,B., Ha,E. et al. (2004) Cold Spring
Harbor Symposia onQuantitativeBiology. Cold Spring Harbor, NY, Vol.
68, pp. 159–170.
12. Stein,L.D., Bao,Z., Blasiar,D., Blumenthal,T., Brent,M.R., Chen,N.,
Chinwalla,A., Clarke,L., Clee,C., Coghlan,A. et al. (2003) The genome
sequence of Caenorhabditis briggsae: a platform for comparative
genomics. PLoS Biol., 1, E45.
13. Gupta,B.P. and Sternberg,P.W. (2003) The draft genome sequence of
the nematode Caenorhabditis briggsae, a companion to C. elegans.
Genome Biol., 4, 238.
14. Tatusov,R.L., Fedorova,N.D., Jackson,J.D., Jacobs,A.R., Kiryutin,B.,
Koonin,E.V., Krylov,D.M., Mazumder,R., Mekhedov,S.L.,
Nikolskaya,A.N. et al. (2003) The COG database: an updated version
includes eukaryotes. BMC Bioinformatics, 4, 41.
15. Hwang,B.J.,Muller,H.M. andSternberg,P.W.(2004) Genomeannotation
by high-throughput 50 RNA end determination. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA, 101, 1650–1655.
16. Berman,H.M., Battistuz,T., Bhat,T.N., Bluhm,W.F., Bourne,P.E.,
Burkhardt,K., Feng,Z., Gilliland,G.L., Iype,L., Jain,S. et al. (2002) The
Protein Data Bank. Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr., 58, 899–907.
17. Stajich,J.E., Block,D., Boulez,K., Brenner,S.E., Chervitz,S.A.,
Dagdigian,C., Fuellen,G., Gilbert,J.G., Korf,I., Lapp,H. et al. (2002) The
Bioperl toolkit: Perl modules for the life sciences. Genome Res., 12,
1611–1618.
18. Dowell,R.D., Jokerst,R.M., Day,A., Eddy,S.R. and Stein,L. (2001)
The distributed annotation system. BMC Bioinformatics, 2, 7.
19. Stein,L.D. and Thierry-Mieg,J. (1998) Scriptable access to the
Caenorhabditis elegans genome sequence and other ACEDB databases.
Genome Res., 8, 1308–1315.
20. Lopez,R., Silventoinen,V., Robinson,S., Kibria,A. and Gish,W. (2003)
WU-Blast2 server at the European Bioinformatics Institute. Nucleic
Acids Res., 31, 3795–3798.
D388 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
21. Kent,W.J. (2002) BLAT—the BLAST-like alignment tool.GenomeRes.,
12, 656–664.
22. Schuler,G.D. (1997)Sequence mappingby electronic PCR.GenomeRes.,
7, 541–550.
23. Muller,H.M., Kenny,E. and Sternberg,P. (2004) Testpresso: an ontology-
based information retrieval and extraction system for C. elegans
literature. PLoS Biol., 2, e309.
24. Bigelow,H.R., Wenick,A.S., Wong,A. and Hobert,O. (2004) CisOrtho:
a program pipeline for genome-wide identification of transcription
factor target genes using phylogenetic footprinting. BMC
Bioinformatics, 5, 27.
25. Lewis,S.E., Searle,S.M., Harris,N., Gibson,M., Lyer,V., Richter,J.,
Wiel,C., Bayraktaroglir,L., Birney,E., Crosby,M.A. et al. (2002) Apollo:
a sequence annotation editor. Genome Biol., 3, RESEARCH0082.
26. Stein,L.D., Mungall,C., Shu,S., Caudy,M., Mangone,M., Day,A.,
Nickerson,E., Stajich,J.E., Harris,T.W., Arva,A. et al. (2002) The generic
genome browser: a building block for a model organism system
database. Genome Res., 12, 1599–1610.
27. FlyBase (2003) The FlyBase database of theDrosophila genome projects
and community literature. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 172–175.
28. Christie,K.R., Weng,S., Balakrishnan,R., Costanzo,M.C., Dolinski,K.,
Dwight,S.S., Engel,S.R., Feierbach,B., Fisk,D.G., Hirschman,J.E. et al.
(2004) Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD) provides tools to
identify and analyze sequences from Saccharomyces cerevisiae and
related sequences from other organisms.NucleicAcidsRes.,32 (Database
issue), D311–D314.
29. Birney,E., Andrews,D., Bevan,P., Caccamo,M., Cameron,G., Chen,Y.,
Clarke,L., Coates,G., Cox,T., Cuff,J. et al. (2004) Ensembl 2004.Nucleic
Acids Res., 32 (Database issue), D468–D470.
30. Twigger,S., Lu,J., Shimoyama,M., Chen,D., Pasko,D., Long,H.,
Ginster,J., Chen,C.F., Nigam,R., Kwitek,A. et al. (2002) Rat Genome
Database (RGD): mapping disease onto the genome. Nucleic Acids Res.,
30, 125–128.
31. Bult,C.J., Blake,J.A., Richardson,J.E., Kadin,J.A., Eppig,J.T.,
Baldarelli,R.M., Barsanti,K., Baya,M., Beal,J.S., Boddy,W.J. et al.
(2004) The Mouse Genome Database (MGD): integrating biology with
the genome. Nucleic Acids Res., 32 (Database issue),
D476–D481.
32. Kasprzyk,A., Keefe,D., Smedley,D., London,D., Spooner,W.,
Melsopp,C., Hammond,M., Rocca-Serra,P., Cox,T. and Birney,E. (2004)
EnsMart: a generic system for fast and flexible access to biological data.
Genome Res., 14, 160–169.
33. Krieger,C.J., Zhang,P., Mueller,L.A., Wang,A., Paley,S., Arnaud,M.,
Pick,J., Rhee,S.Y. and Karp,P.D. (2004) MetaCyc: a multiorganism
database of metabolic pathways and enzymes. Nucleic Acids Res., 32
(Database issue), D438–D442.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D389
