JOURNAL OF VIROLOGY, May 1995, p. 3074–3083 Vol. 69, No. 5
0022-538X/95/$04.0010
Copyright q 1995, American Society for Microbiology
Analysis of Genomic Sequences of 95 Papillomavirus Types:
Uniting Typing, Phylogeny, and Taxonomy
SHIH-YEN CHAN,1 HAJO DELIUS,2 AARON L. HALPERN,3 AND HANS-ULRICH BERNARD1*
Laboratory for Papillomavirus Biology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, National University of Singapore,
Singapore 0511, Republic of Singapore1; German Cancer Research Center, 69120 Heidelberg,
Germany2; and Theoretical Biology and Biophysics, Theoretical Division, Los Alamos
National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 875453
Received 26 September 1994/Accepted 16 February 1995
Our aim was to study the phylogenetic relationships of all known papillomaviruses (PVs) and the possibility
of establishing a supratype taxonomic classification based on this information. Of the many detectably
homologous segments present in PV genomes, a 291-bp segment of the L1 gene is notable because it is flanked
by the MY09 and MY11 consensus primers and contains highly conserved amino acid residues which simplify
sequence alignment. We determined the MY09-MY11 sequences of human PV type 20 (HPV-20), HPV-21,
HPV-22, HPV-23, HPV-24, HPV-36, HPV-37, HPV-38, HPV-48, HPV-50, HPV-60, HPV-70, HPV-72, HPV-73,
ovine (sheep) PV, bovine PV type 3 (BPV-3), BPV-5, and BPV-6 and created a database which now encompasses
HPV-1 to HPV-70, HPV-72, HPV-73, seven yet untyped HPV genomes, and 15 animal PV types. Three
additional animal PVs were analyzed on the basis of other sequence data. We constructed phylogenies based
on partial L1 and E6 gene sequences and distinguished five major clades that we call supergroups. One of them
unites 54 genital PV types, which can be further divided into eleven groups. The second supergroup has 24 types
and unites most PVs that are typically found in epidermodysplasia verruciformis patients but also includes
several types typical of other cutaneous lesions, like HPV-4. The third supergroup unites the six known
ungulate fibropapillomaviruses, the fourth includes the cutaneous ungulate PVs BPV-3, BPV-4, and BPV-6,
and the fifth includes HPV-1, HPV-41, HPV-63, the canine oral PV, and the cottontail rabbit PV. The chaffinch
PV and two rodent PVs, Micromys minutus PV and Mastomys natalensis PV, are left ungrouped because of the
relative isolation of each of their lineages. Within most supergroups, groups formed on the basis of cladistic
principles unite phenotypically similar PV types. We discuss the basis of our classification, the concept of the
PV type, speciation, PV-host evolution, and estimates of their rates of evolution.
During the last decade, papillomaviruses (PVs) have at-
tracted increasing scientific attention, as they are quantitatively
the most important group of viruses associated with benign and
malignant neoplasia in humans (40, 73). Currently, more than
70 different human PV (HPV) types are known (15), and
additional evidence from partial sequences indicates the exis-
tence of a further 13 which would qualify as novel HPV types
(2, 5). Other PV types have also been identified in mammals
and birds (61). The large number of PV types and poorly
defined lower- (e.g., subtypes) and higher-order classifications
(e.g., mucosal HPVs) have become a potential source of con-
fusion, and it seems desirable to investigate the possibility of
giving them some internal taxonomic organization. Before this
is done, it is necessary to have a clear definition of the objects
one is classifying and reliable hypotheses about their phylog-
eny.
PV types are the objects to be classified, and they are defined
by genomic properties rather than serology; thus, the term
serotype is not used. The original definition was by DNA hy-
bridization criteria (9), but this method had a serious limitation
in that the values determined for genomic similarities were
frequently very different from and inconsistently related to
nucleotide sequence similarities. In fact, PVs which show little
or no relatedness by hybridization could still have a greater
than 50% nucleotide similarity. This is due to the scattered
distribution of short sequence homologies. To overcome this
inconsistency, an HPV genome is now defined as a new HPV
type when it shows a more than 10% dissimilarity in the com-
bined nucleotide sequences of the E6, E7, and L1 genes when
compared with those of any previously known type (15). This
requires the sequencing of about 2.4 kb, or roughly one-third,
of the genome of all new isolates and then sequence alignment
and the calculation of dissimilarity according to certain oper-
ational criteria.
Phylogenetic research uses homologous features such as nu-
cleotide sequences to reconstruct evolutionary relationships
which are graphically represented as trees. As a result of large
systematic sequencing efforts (for a review, see reference 13),
the PVs have become the best-known DNA virus family and an
important resource for the study of virus evolution (4, 7, 31, 50,
65). Since the first extensive phylogenetic studies of PVs were
done (7, 65), there has been a doubling of the number of PV
types for which complete or partial sequence information is
known. There are indications that the rate at which new genital
HPV types are detected is slowing down (5, 66), while only
small efforts to detect novel PVs in animals are presently made.
However, many new HPV genomes related to the epider-
modysplasia verruciformis (EV) HPVs have recently been
found in skin cancers from renal transplant patients (2, 57).
Because of this increase in the number of known sequences,
the advent of fresh analytical approaches, and the need for
taxonomic investigation, we felt it would be helpful to under-
take a revision of PV phylogeny.
Given the objects to be classified and their phylogeny, there
are broadly three main taxonomic approaches one can take.
* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Laboratory for Papillo-
mavirus Biology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, National
University of Singapore, Singapore 0511, Republic of Singapore. Fax:
(65) 7791117.
3074
 at Penn State Univ on April 15, 2008 
jvi.asm.org
D
ow
nloaded from
 
The differences arise mainly from the different philosophical
perceptions of what a taxonomic scheme should represent and
what qualities it should possess. The cladistic approach uses
evolutionary relationships deduced from shared derived char-
acters, and it establishes taxonomic groups that must be mono-
phyletic groups (clades) (60, 70). Pheneticists use an overall
similarity measure (or its complement, the dissimilarity) of
reliably measured phenotypic characters (59). Finally, evolu-
tionary systematists use a combination of both criteria (43),
differing from that of cladists in that they also accept non-
monophyletic groups as taxonomic groups. Genetic sequence
data may be used by all the schools because the DNA sequence
is both inherited material suitable for phylogenetic evaluation
and also a phenotypic feature that can be determined reliably.
There exist other phenotypic features such as virion morphol-
ogy, protein structure, disease pathology, and immune re-
sponses that could conceivably enter into a taxonomic scheme.
However, many of these either are poorly understood, are not
distinctive enough to provide a foundation for a taxonomy, or
may also have resulted from sharing an ancestral trait or from
independent evolution of the trait. They, however, may play an
adjunct role, and as knowledge of these features increases, it
will be interesting to see how well they correlate to the existing
groups. We adopted the cladistic methodology, as it is a par-
ticularly consistent and useful approach for classifying PVs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Origin of PV clones and sequences. Original references to the isolation of all
the HPV types numbered 1 to 69 are contained in three reviews (13, 14, 66).
These reviews and reference 48 also cite all publications of the complete genomic
nucleotide sequences of 43 HPV types. We cite only those concerning specific
statements made in this study. The sequences of all HPV types and all animal
PVs not mentioned separately below were obtained from GenBank (Release
83.0) and have been recently published as part of a compendium (48). This
compendium also contains partial sequences of seven HPV genomes which will
probably attain type status after complete isolation and DNA sequencing. These
seven clones were identified during several major epidemiological studies sum-
marized in reference 5, and their codes (CP, IS, LV, and MM) refer to the
respective epidemiological studies. Three additional genomes found during this
latter study were assumed to be novel HPV types but have since then become
identified as variants of HPV-70 (CP141), HPV-72 (CP4173-LVX100), and
HPV-73 (MM9) (68). Since the genomic sequences of the reference clones of
these three types were not yet available, we used the sequences of these three
variants to represent these types.
The L1 sequences of HPV-20, HPV-21, HPV-22, HPV-23, HPV-24, HPV-36,
HPV-37, HPV-38, HPV-48, HPV-50, HPV-60, and ovine PV were determined by
one of us (H.D.) during an ongoing project to establish the complete genomic
sequences of most PVs. The sequences of bovine PV type 3 (BPV-3) and BPV-6
were obtained with sequencing primers modeled after the nucleotide sequence of
their presumed nearest relative, BPV-4 (34), and that of BPV-5 was obtained by
amplifying it with PCR primers modeled after BPV-1. These sequences are
available by anonymous file transfer protocol from the HPV database
(atlas@lanl.gov). The clones of HPV-20, HPV-21, HPV-22, HPV-23, HPV-24,
HPV-36, HPV-37, HPV-38, HPV-48, HPV-50, and HPV-60 were obtained from
E.-M. de Villiers at the Reference Center for Human Pathogenic Papillomavi-
ruses, Heidelberg, Germany. The clone of ovine PV was supplied by Phillip
Baird, Sydney, Australia, and the clones of BPV-3, BPV-5, and BPV-6 DNA
were furnished by Saveria M. Campo, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
Data analysis. Sequence alignments, distances, and manipulations were done
with the Genetics Computer Group Sequence Analysis Software Package version
7.3.1-UNIX (23) and the Multiple Aligned Sequence Editor (20). The pairwise
simple distance (dissimilarity) was determined on aligned sequences, excluding
gaps, and is the proportion of nucleotides that differed for a pair of sequences.
Linear correlation analysis, with the best-fit line additionally constrained to pass
through the origin, was performed with the FIT and REGRESS programs in
Mathematica version 2.2 (Wolfram Inc., Champaign, Ill.). The difference be-
tween constrained and unconstrained fits was negligible. Distance matrix and
maximum-likelihood phylogenies and distance matrix bootstrap analyses were
done with the Phylogeny Inference Package version 3.5 (21, 22) and the fastDNAml
version 1.0 program (49). Maximum and weighted parsimony analyses were
conducted with the Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony package version 3.1.1
(62). The weighted parsimony analyses (29) used an inverse frequency substitu-
tion matrix generated with the help of MacClade version 3.1.1 (41). Multiple
Aligned Sequence Editor, Genetics Computer Group Software, and Phylogeny
Inference Package runs were performed on a Silicon Graphics server running
IRIX V.4 and a Tatung Sparc 5 model 85 running Solaris 2.3. Phylogenetic
Analysis Using Parsimony and MacClade were run on a Macintosh Quadra 800
running System Software 7.1. Mathematica was run on an IBM PC-compatible
486 running OS/2 2.2.
RESULTS
Alignment of homologous partial L1 sequences of 92 PV
types. Strict amino acid conservation allows the alignment of
several genomic segments among all presently known PV ge-
nomes. Specifically, good alignment is possible for the central
portion of the E6 gene (10, 67), the DNA binding and the
transcription activation domains of the E2 gene (24), and sev-
eral gene segments of the E1, L2, and L1 genes (7, 48, 64).
Alignment is not possible for several segments that have accu-
mulated extensive substitutions, deletions, and insertions, and
such segments include the overlap of the E2 hinge region and
the E4 gene (16) and the E5 gene (1). The conserved segments
are useful for phylogenetic analysis, provided that they are
large enough to be sufficiently informative. In previous studies
of two 152-bp and 132-bp segments of the E1 and L1 genes, we
found similar relationships among 48 PV types irrespective of
the nature of the evaluated genomic segment (7). Most of
these affinities were in agreement with those found during
another study of a 384-bp segment of the E6 gene (65).
Figure 1 shows the alignment of the amino acid sequences
that correspond to part of the L1 gene of 92 PV types and
presently represents the most extensive database for any PV
segment. It resulted from the extension of research on the
detectability of unknown genital HPV genomes (5) with the
PCR primer pair MY09-MY11 (42). These primers amplify a
segment of approximately 460 bp of the L1 gene of most
genital HPV types. A 291-bp subsegment of this amplimer can
be confidently aligned because of highly conserved amino
acid residues which are indicated in Fig. 1. This particular
subsegment excludes sequences corresponding to those of the
MY09-MY11 primers and the 59 portion of the segment which
is of low conservation, with numerous small insertions and
deletions (5). In the following, we refer to these sequences as
the 291-bp L1 segments. The database did not include se-
quences for the colobus monkey PV (CgPV) (53), the only
avian (chaffinch) PV (FPV) (46) analyzed so far, and the Mi-
cromys minutus (mouse) PV (MmPV) (67), because the rele-
vant L1 sequences and the cloned genomes were not available.
However, in addition to all the types whose full sequences are
published, we did evaluate about 30 partially sequenced HPVs;
BPV-3, BPV-4, and BPV-6, which do not have E6 genes (34);
and animal PVs that have not attracted much sequencing ef-
fort.
The 291-bp L1 segment and E6 gene contain sufficient se-
quence information for typing.Given the large amount of data,
the ready accessibility of the 291-bp L1 segment by PCR, and
its utility for phylogenetic studies, we studied how it compared
with the combined E6-E7-L1 segment for typing purposes. To
the extent that the 291-bp L1 segment could be used to reliably
replicate the definition of types determined with the full E6,
E7, and L1 sequences, this would give us confidence that the
typing of novel sequences with the 291-bp segment would yield
the same result as would typing based on the current standard.
A potential concern in this regard, and in using the 291-bp
segment for phylogenetic purposes, was that such a small well-
conserved segment might lack the resolving power required for
these analyses.
Using the alignments from the HPV database compendium
(48), we constructed a combined alignment of E6, E7, and L1
for all types for which the sequences of all three genes were
VOL. 69, 1995 PV PHYLOGENY AND TAXONOMIC CLASSIFICATION 3075
 at Penn State Univ on April 15, 2008 
jvi.asm.org
D
ow
nloaded from
 
available. After removing all columns from the combined
alignment which contained gaps in one or more sequences, we
calculated dissimilarities for each pair of sequences as the
number of mismatches divided by the number of aligned po-
sitions compared (e.g., 25 mismatches out of 200 positions 5
12.5%). After doing the same for the 291-bp L1 segment and
for a 399-bp E6 segment (see below), we attempted a linear
correlation analysis. The results plotted in Fig. 2 indicate that
both the 291-bp L1 and the 399-bp E6 segment distances are
highly linearly correlated with those of the E6-E7-L1 se-
quences used for typing (r5 0.99 in both cases), with gradients
of 0.92 and 1.28, respectively. The gradients suggest that the
291-bp L1 segment sequence is on the average more conserved
and that the 399-bp E6 segment sequence is less conserved
than the E6-E7-L1 sequences. Thus, the current 10% criterion
for typing is roughly equivalent to 9.2% and 12.8% criteria,
respectively, if these other segments are used.
We further checked the distances between several of the
most closely related pairs of HPV types to see if using the
smaller 291-bp L1 distances would frequently lead to a dis-
agreement with the current standard on the type status. Table
1 shows that even the most closely related types have distances
that significantly exceed 0.092 for the 291-bp L1 segment, and
therefore we conclude that the shorter 291-bp L1 distances do
not normally lead to errors about type status. However, there
are two pairs with clearly lower 291-bp distances, HPV-34 and
HPV-64 (0.050) and HPV-44 and HPV-55 (0.057). The pre-
liminary genomic sequence data for HPV-64 (15) in fact sug-
gest that the HPV-34–HPV-64 pair may not be separate types.
The verdict on the HPV-44–HPV-55 pair awaits more se-
quence information.
FIG. 1. Alignment of the amino acid sequences corresponding to the highly
conserved 291-bp L1 segments of 92 PV types. The upper part of the figure
indicates the genomic position of this sequence in the L1 gene as well as those
of the MY09-MY11 PCR primer pair. The solid arrows indicate amino acid
residues that are strictly conserved in all PVs. These and many other highly
conserved amino acid residues are useful for aligning the sequences and indi-
cating the PV origin of partial genomic segments (5). Striped arrows indicate
amino acid residues that strictly covary between genital and EV HPVs, i.e., the
sequence MXYXH of genital PVs becomes LXQXN in EV HPVs. HPV-68,
HPV-70, HPV-72, and HPV-73 sequences may have slight nucleotide sequence
differences from the reference isolates. Abbreviations: LCR, long control region;
BPV, bovine PV; CgPV, colobus monkey PV; COPV, canine oral PV; CRPV,
cottontail rabbit PV; DPV, deer PV; EPV, European elk PV; FPV, chaffinch
(avian) PV; HPV, human PV; MmPV, Micromys minutus (mouse) PV; MnPV,
Mastomys natalensis (South African mouse) PV; OvPV, ovine (sheep) PV;
PCPV, pigmy chimpanzee PV; RhPV, rhesus monkey PV. Note the absence of
HPV-46, which is now considered to be a subtype of HPV-20 (15).
FIG. 2. Linear correlation analyses of all available 291-bp L1 (A) and 399-bp
E6 distances against the combined E6, E7, and L1 combined gene distances, the
latter being derived from published alignments (48). Over 2,000 datum points
were plotted for each anlaysis. The best-fit line was constrained to pass through
the origin by adjusting the model parameters within Mathematica.
3076 CHAN ET AL. J. VIROL.
 at Penn State Univ on April 15, 2008 
jvi.asm.org
D
ow
nloaded from
 
The phylogeny of 92 PV types as determined on the basis of
partial L1 sequences. Figure 3 shows a maximum-likelihood
phylogeny of 92 PV types as determined on the basis of nucle-
otide sequences of the 291-bp L1 segments (Fig. 1). Neighbor-
joining analysis gave results very similar to those given by
maximum likelihood, regardless of distance corrections (re-
sults not shown). A maximum-parsimony analysis led to a large
number of equally parsimonious trees. This finding, in con-
junction with the highly divergent character of the sequences,
suggests that there is a lot of noise due to back mutation and
homoplasy and prompted the use of the weighted parsimony
approach, which led to the tree shown in Fig. 4.
In both trees, the same two large branches that have been
observed before (5, 7, 8, 65) are clearly present. One unites
HPV types associated with genital lesions (genital HPVs, re-
ferred to in the following as supergroup A), and the other
unites HPV types associated with EV (supergroup B). On
branches positioned between them are most animal PVs and
three HPVs associated with cutaneous lesions, namely, HPV-1,
HPV-41, and HPV-63. One of these branches unites all fibro-
papillomaviruses from ungulates, and we call this supergroup
C. A fourth branch unites BPV-3, BPV-4, and BPV-6 (super-
group D), and the fifth unites HPV-1, HPV-41, HPV-63, ca-
nine oral PV, and cottontail rabbit PV (supergroup E). Table
2 summarizes the PV types within these supergroups and fur-
ther proposes groups within these supergroups formed of types
with relatively close relationships. Details of the rationale be-
hind this classification will be discussed below.
Both phylogenies are very similar, but we note the following
differences (see Table 2 for the group identities). (i) There are
internal topology differences for supergroup A, e.g., the vari-
ous positions of groups A1, A3, A5, and A6. (ii) There are
internal differences for group B1. (iii) Supergroups C and D
(all BPVs) together form a monophyletic group in Fig. 3 but
not in Fig. 4 or in a bootstrapped consensus neighbor-joining
tree (data not shown). (iv) Supergroup E, although apparently
a clade, has members that are very distantly related.
Other causes of uncertainty arise from the large number of
types, making the search for the optimal tree necessarily far
FIG. 3. A phylogenetic tree of 92 PV types based on a maximum-likelihood
evaluation of the 291-bp L1 segment. In addition, FPV, CgPV, and MmPV are
included in this tree, but their relationships are indicated by dashed branches,
because they were derived from different sequence data. For abbreviations, see
the legend to Fig. 1.
FIG. 4. A phylogenetic tree of 92 PV types based on a weighted parsimony
evaluation of the 291-bp L1 segment. Branch lengths are proportional to the
numbers of weighted steps between reconstructed bifurcations of lineages. An
initial unweighted analysis involving 10 random sequence addition replicates and
nearest neighbor interchange searching yielded 217 equally parsimonious trees
of 4,021 steps. An inverse-frequency substitution weight matrix was generated
with MacClade 3.1.1 as follows. The average number over all 217 trees of each
of the 12 possible nucleotide substitutions was calculated, counting only unam-
biguously reconstructed changes. Weights for each type of substitution were then
calculated as the total number of changes of all types over the number of changes
of that particular type. Weighted parsimony analyses were performed with these
weights. Nearest neighbor interchange replicates (n 5 75) yielded a single best
tree with a weighted length of 35,564. Additional ad hoc searches involving
subtree pruning-regrafting on user-defined starting trees yielded a better tree
with a weighted length of 35,536, presented here. The abbreviations are as
defined in the legend to Fig. 1.
TABLE 1. Comparison of pairwise distances for 10 very
closely related HPV types
HPV pair E6-E7-L1 distance 291-bp L1 distance
HPV-2–HPV-27 0.091 0.100
HPV-2–HPV-57 0.153 0.154
HPV-3–HPV-10 0.176 0.143
HPV-4–HPV-65 0.151 0.158
HPV-5–HPV-12 0.207 0.186
HPV-6–HPV-11 0.152 0.115
HPV-7–HPV-40 0.137 0.129
HPV-11–HPV-13 0.231 0.190
HPV-18–HPV-45 0.157 0.136
HPV-19–HPV-25 0.137 0.143
VOL. 69, 1995 PV PHYLOGENY AND TAXONOMIC CLASSIFICATION 3077
 at Penn State Univ on April 15, 2008 
jvi.asm.org
D
ow
nloaded from
 
from exhaustive, and from the further possibility of alternative
weighting schemes. Nevertheless, an informal comparison of
the many near-optimal trees and trees based on different
weighting schemes (data not shown) does confirm that many of
the groups of interest are stable. Such a comparison also re-
veals the more uncertain aspects of the phylogeny. Instability is
particularly noteworthy for CP8061, LVX82, HPV-54, and rhe-
sus monkey PV, although all still definitely belong to super-
group A. Neighbor-joining and bootstrapping analyses re-
vealed a low value of confidence for group A9, which was
occasionally dismembered in trees with different weighting
schemes. Within supergroup B, instability was high for HPV-
49. Finally, the inclusion of Mastomys natalensis PV within
either supergroup C, D, or E was an alternative to a placement
on a separate lineage.
We included in Fig. 3 the relative positions of FPV, CgPV,
and MmPV. The 291-bp L1 sequences of these viruses were
not known, and their relationships with the 92 PV types listed
in Fig. 1 were derived from an E1 database in the case of CgPV
(7), from E6 sequences in the case of MmPV (Fig. 4) (67), and
from partial E1 and L1 sequences in the case of FPV (46).
The phylogeny of 57 PV types as determined on the basis of
a 399-bp E6 segment. To compare our findings with those of a
previous study of E6 gene sequences (65), we used the same
segment of the expanded HPV database (13) to construct
phylogenies. We refer to these data as the 399-bp E6 segment,
because addition of some PV types required the assumption of
insertions in the original 384-bp alignment. Figure 5 shows a
neighbor-joining phylogeny done with these E6 sequences. It
shows all previously sequenced HPV types in positions similar
to those that have been previously published (65) and displays
both the stable features and instabilities mentioned before,
such as those for supergroup A, the distinction between group
B1 and B2, and supergroup C. Supergroup D is missing, as
these BPV types do not have E6 genes. On the basis of E6
sequences, supergroup E is very diverse. Cottontail rabbit PV
was excluded from supergroup E because its E6 gene could not
be confidently aligned. The overall similarities between the E6-
and L1-based phylogenies support previous findings that PV
gene trees are a good reflection of trees of PV types because of
the apparent absence of intertype recombinations.
Distances are inadequate as an operational tool for higher
classification. The proliferation of PV types over the past years
has led to the need for more general taxonomic categories.
Given the success of the distance criteria in operationally de-
fining types, it is tempting to assume that additional levels of
TABLE 2. Classification of PVs on the basis of cladistic relationships
PV supergroupa
Supergroup A (genital HPVs)
Group A1: HPV-32 and HPV-42 (100%)
Group A2: HPV-3, HPV-10, HPV-28, and HPV-29 (100%)
Group A3: HPV-61, HPV-62, HPV-72, CP6108, CP8304, and MM8 (94%)
Group A4: HPV-2, HPV-27, and HPV-57 (100%)
Group A5: HPV-26, HPV-51, HPV-69, ISO39, and MM4 (97%)
Group A6: HPV-30, HPV-53, HPV-56, and HPV-66 (100%)
Group A7: HPV-18, HPV-39, HPV-45, HPV-59, HPV-68, and HPV-70 (78%)
Group A8: HPV-7, HPV-40, and HPV-43 (100%)
Group A9: HPV-16, HPV-31, HPV-33, HPV-35, HPV-52, HPV-58, HPV-67, and RhPV (34%)
Group A10: HPV-6, HPV-11, HPV-13, HPV-44, HPV-55, and PCPV (100%)
Group A11: HPV-34, HPV-64, and HPV-73 (100%)
Poorly resolved lineages within supergroup A: CgPV (291-bp L1 sequences unavailable), CP8061, LVX82, and HPV-54
Supergroup B (EV HPVs)
Group B1: HPV-5, HPV-8, HPV-9, HPV-12, HPV-14, HPV-15, HPV-17, HPV-19, HPV-20, HPV-21, HPV-22, HPV-23, HPV-24, HPV-25,
HPV-36, HPV-37, HPV-38, HPV-47, and HPV-49 (100%)
Group B2: HPV-4, HPV-48, HPV-50, HPV-60, and HPV-65 (73%)
Supergroup C (ungulate fibropapillomaviruses)
Group C1: BPV-1 and BPV-2 (94%)
Group C2: DPV, EPV, and OvPV
Isolated lineage within supergroup C with likely group rank: BPV-5
Supergroup D (BPVs causing true papillomas)
Group D1: BPV-3, BPV-4, and BPV-6 (86%)
Supergroup E (animal and human cutaneous PVs)
Group E1: HPV-1 and HPV-63
Isolated lineages within supergroup E with likely group rank: COPV, CRPV, and HPV-41
Poorly resolved lineages which likely represent taxa of supergroup rank
FPV (291-bp L1 sequences unavailable)
MmPV (291-bp L1 sequences unavailable)
MnPV
a The cladistic relationships were determined on the basis of the phylogenies depicted in Fig. 3 and 4. Supergroups A, B, C, D, and E are clades with well-recognized
differences in biology. Simple distances based on the 291-bp L1 segment generally exceeded 0.37 for types from different supergroups. Within a supergroup, types from
different groups generally had distances ranging from 0.30 to 0.37. Types within groups generally had distances ranging from 0.10 to 0.35. The large value for the upper
boundary of this range is due to the large distances within group B1, which should be split into two or more smaller groups when the internal phylogeny is better known.
Where applicable, the bootstrap values (100 replicates, neighbor-joining method) for the groups are indicated in parentheses as percentages. The abbreviations are the
same as those defined in the legend to Fig. 1.
3078 CHAN ET AL. J. VIROL.
 at Penn State Univ on April 15, 2008 
jvi.asm.org
D
ow
nloaded from
 
classification may also be defined on the basis of larger dis-
tance thresholds. However, we found that it is impossible to
establish criteria for supratype classification of PVs that are
based purely on distance (or its equivalent, similarity) and that
give results which are compatible with reconstructions derived
by phylogenetic methods or which are operationally consistent.
The problem can be illustrated by the use of simple dis-
tances. As most nucleotide sequence distances between types
of the same supergroup are less than 37% and those between
types belonging to different supergroups are larger, one might
consider defining a taxonomic category using this distance
score as a cutoff point. When one examines the 291-bp L1
segments, one finds that HPV-33 and HPV-16 (both genital
HPVs in supergroup A) are 24% dissimilar but that HPV-33
and HPV-38 (a cutaneous HPV in supergroup B) are 30%
dissimilar and that HPV-16 and HPV-38 are 38% dissimilar.
Given the 37% cutoff point, the distances from HPV-33 indi-
cate that all three HPV types should be in the same super-
group, and yet given the pairwise distances of HPV-16 and
HPV-38, these two types would have to be assigned to different
supergroups. Similar conflicts can be found for many different
types and at many different thresholds. Furthermore, this prob-
lem is not resolved under various distance corrections (data
not shown).
Figure 6 shows a distribution of the simple distances for
intragroup, between-group, and between-supergroup (includ-
ing the isolated types) comparisons for the specific taxonomic
groupings presented in Table 2. It shows that while the modal
distances are clearly different, there is a considerable overlap
of the distributions such that no consistent set of classificatory
thresholds can be nominated as an operational criterion. While
this set of groupings does not give the minimal overlap of
distances, the problems mentioned above preclude the defini-
tion of virtually any useful grouping on the basis of distances
alone.
Phylogenetic classification. Cladistic phylogenetic classifica-
tions reflect hypotheses about the evolutionary history of or-
ganisms (69, 70), and given the best hypothesis, all acceptable
classifications must reflect monophyletic relationships (28).
The same phylogeny may be used to establish alternative clas-
sifications which differ in the number of taxons and ranks, the
decision being a matter of simplicity of use and consensus
among taxonomic researchers. Table 2 reflects our proposal
for a phylogenetic classification of the PVs which is aimed at
minimizing category names while introducing supratype group-
ings at levels we believe will be biologically interesting. The
choice of cladistic groups was guided by phenetic similarities in
biology, disease pathology, and high bootstrap values; the re-
sults to a large part reflect traditional groupings that PV biol-
ogists have found useful. Occasionally, the distance criterion
was used to determine the taxonomic organization, such as that
between and within supergroups C to E.
We have adopted informal taxon names such as group and
supergroup, which are useful for taxa within families or genera
(70), but have avoided the use of formal taxon names, includ-
ing the names of specific viruses. The use of alphanumeric
names maintains the stability of the nomenclature in the face
of possible changes to the phylogeny and group membership
because it keeps the group nomenclature independent of its
constituent taxon names.
By definition, a clade is formed by all species with shared
derived ancestral characters and their most recent common
ancestor. Because of the lack of a fossil record, viral phylog-
enies cannot be firmly rooted, and so we cannot be sure of the
temporal direction of homologous character changes, which is
required to recognize monophyly. We used the rooting of the
weighted parsimony analysis (62) and possible outgroups such
as the BPVs to root the HPVs, as suggested by the evidence of
virus-host coadaptation with strict host specificity (6, 7, 56), to
partially overcome this uncertainty. Remarks about many of
the groupings have been addressed in the HPV database com-
pendium (48), and additional points will be raised in the Dis-
cussion.
FIG. 5. A phylogenetic tree of 57 PV types based on a neighbor-joining
(Kimura two-parameter distances) evaluation of a 399-bp E6 gene alignment.
The abbreviations are as defined in the legend to Fig. 1.
FIG. 6. A histogram of simple distances (dissimilarities) between pairs of
taxa for the 291-bp L1 segment, separated into within-group, across-group but
within-supergroup, and across-supergroup comparisons. Note the overlap in the
distributions of the distances, indicating the impossibility of using distance
thresholds to unambiguously define the groupings of interest (see text for de-
tails).
VOL. 69, 1995 PV PHYLOGENY AND TAXONOMIC CLASSIFICATION 3079
 at Penn State Univ on April 15, 2008 
jvi.asm.org
D
ow
nloaded from
 
DISCUSSION
This paper investigates how nucleotide sequence informa-
tion may be used to reconstruct the genealogies of PVs as a
prerequisite for a phylogenetic taxonomy. The genomic seg-
ment that we chose meets the strict criteria for establishing
phylogenies, is sufficiently discriminating for typing purposes,
and has the advantage over other conserved genomic segments
in being easily amplified by PCR. In the following, we describe
our view of the taxonomy of PVs at the levels of variants,
subtypes, types, groups, and supergroups, which correspond to
increasing phenetic levels of diversity. For completeness, we
have included in this discussion variants and subtypes, al-
though the analysis below the type level was not a part of this
study.
Variants of PV types. Variants of a PV type differ from the
reference type (the clone sequenced to describe that type) by
distances of up to 0.020 within genes and slightly more outside
genes, a statement which reflects empirical observations rather
than a definition. Sequence variants from HPV-5 and HPV-8
(11, 11a), HPV-6 and HPV-11 (27, 37), HPV-16 (19, 31, 32,
52), HPV-18, and HPV-45 (50) have been systematically stud-
ied. While the finding of sequence diversity among indepen-
dent isolates is somewhat trivial, it is remarkable that no larger
diversities were observed, i.e., the continuous process of sub-
stitutional alterations that has linked PV types in their evolu-
tionary history has no complete record in today’s HPV isolates.
Old and new concepts about subtypes. The term subtype was
originally used for certain HPV isolates of a type that had
restriction patterns different in Southern blots from those of
the reference type. Point mutations in restriction sites can alter
such patterns dramatically, and it was thought that these iso-
lates might differ significantly elsewhere in their genomes. Sub-
sequent sequence analysis of subtypes of HPV-5 (71) and
HPV-6 (27, 37) revealed a sequence diversity of only about
1%, i.e., as little as that between variants. The long control
regions of independent isolates of HPV-6 and HPV-11 can
differ by small insertions and deletions (27, 37) which are
probably derived from sequences with a propensity for gener-
ating slippage (27), but these isolates do not differ significantly
elsewhere in the genome. Against this background, we recom-
mend that the term subtype be abandoned for these isolates.
However, it can be useful for describing isolates with distances
of 0.020 to 0.100 from their reference PV types, i.e., a diversity
that is lower than that among types and higher than that among
variants. Surprisingly, subtypes in this new sense of the word
have been very rarely encountered, and we are aware of only
three examples at the nucleotide level, the pairs HPV-34–
HPV-64 and HPV-44–HPV-55 and the HPV genome in the
ME180 cell line in comparison with that for HPV-68 (15, 54).
PV types as species. The well-known ‘‘biological species’’
concept of Mayr (43, 44) applies exclusively to sexually repro-
ducing species. Less well-known is the fact that it is a special
case of a broader concept, the ‘‘evolutionary species’’ (45),
which explicitly includes asexual organisms. We take the defi-
nition of an evolutionary species to be a single lineage of
individuals separated from other extant lineages and from their
common ancestors by substantial genetic differences (58, 69).
Why is it important to identify the evolutionary species, and
to which level of the organization of PVs does it correspond?
The species is the highest taxonomic level (i.e., the largest
group of individuals) subject to evolutionary selectional pres-
sures through direct competition and as such the highest group
that will tend to evolve as a unit. Higher taxa are mere group-
ings of species that exist solely by virtue of being named (43).
We have previously implied that the PV type is the evolution-
ary species (3, 4). As such, the type identifies a population of
viruses which may show minor internal variation and a large
genetic discontinuity between types.
PV speciation and the basis of classification from molecular
sequences. Sexually replicating species achieve cohesiveness
through a vertical bond between parents and offspring and a
horizontal bond between mates. In the face of evolutionary
novelties, cohesiveness of the species can be maintained, pro-
vided that mating bonds are not disrupted and gene flow oc-
curs among mating populations. Asexual species lack the mat-
ing bond, and species cohesiveness depends on a mixture of
stabilizing selection, stable environments, and genetic cohe-
siveness, whose molecular basis is the high fidelity of DNA
replication and the low frequency of mutations (55). While
evolutionary processes in sexual and asexual lineages undoubt-
edly differ, both reproductive modes result in lineages of or-
ganisms and hence are amenable to classification by the same
principles (58).
It is a characteristic of today’s PVs, as with many other
organisms, that one observes related genetic entities (the spe-
cies or types) separated from each other by genetic disconti-
nuities. This may in principle result from either separation of
lineages into distinct populations via geographic segregation or
adoption of different ecological niches or, if mutation rates are
high enough and levels of competition between lineages are
low enough, random mutation and drift of lineages which
eventually accumulate high levels of diversity. As an ancestral
type diverged into distinct lineages, intermediate variants
would tend to become extinct, either because they were not as
fit or simply as the result of chance, leaving behind relatively
isolated lineages. The many host-specific PVs and the adapta-
tion to cutaneous or mucosal epithelial environments support
the role of selection for lineages specifically adapted to differ-
ent ecological niches, but the number of types occupying sim-
ilar ecological niches with similar geographic distributions sug-
gests that mutation and random extinction of lineages must
have played a part in the development of the current range of
PV types as well.
The operational definition of a PV type was arbitrary but
apparently felicitous, insofar as few borderline cases and no
genome less than 10% from both of two previously identified
types have been confirmed. To some part, this observation can
be explained on a statistical basis, because the evolution of
sequences is, to a first approximation, governed by a molecular
clock, so that mutations accumulate at roughly equal rates in
different lineages. The consequence is that, in a system evolv-
ing in this fashion, distances back to a common ancestor will all
be approximately equal, and if two sequences are more than a
certain distance apart, the chance of a third sequence being
less than that distance from both of the two previous sequences
is vanishingly small. As this assumption seems to apply to PVs,
it is likely that PV classifications at the type level will remain
stable after future additions of novel genomes. As to the ap-
parent scarcity of subtypes (defined as sequences between 2
and 10% different from a prototype sequence), it would be of
interest to investigate whether the number of subtypes is less
than would be expected under various models of evolution and
population genetics.
PV groups and supergroups. Below the taxonomic level of
the subfamily, we have avoided the term genus, which might
eventually become introduced after further study of PV
genomic diversity. Instead, we use the neutral term super-
group, and in the following, specific characteristics of these
supergroups and some isolated lineages will be addressed. Phe-
notypically, the recognition of supergroups A and B is sup-
ported by well-known differences in natural disease biology
3080 CHAN ET AL. J. VIROL.
 at Penn State Univ on April 15, 2008 
jvi.asm.org
D
ow
nloaded from
 
and by gene regulation differences, like similar cis-responsive
elements that are shared by types of the same supergroup (18,
63). However, both supergroups do contain some anomalies,
which are discussed below.
Supergroup A.All HPV types traditionally called genital and
mucosal HPVs belong to supergroup A. Neither term is strictly
correct, because typical genital HPVs (e.g., HPV-6) are also
found in oral and laryngeal mucosas, and at genital sites, they
also infect the cutaneous epithelia, e.g., the penile foreskin.
Presently, it is not known whether any gene functions are
unique to the genital HPV types. However, they do exhibit a
common architecture in the long control region which is absent
from unrelated PVs and which probably correlates with similar
regulatory properties. Most conspicuously, there are an SP1
and two E2 binding sites immediately upstream of the TATA
box that is involved in E6 transcription (63).
Within supergroup A, we distinguish 11 groups on the basis
of monophyly, high bootstrap scores (generally over 90%), and
biological similarity. This classification highlights several inter-
esting features of the supergroup’s evolution; in particular,
there are three groups associated with cutaneous lesions.
Members of group A2 are normally found in skin warts, and
group A4 viruses exhibit a dual predilection for both cutaneous
and mucosal surfaces (4, 15). Group A8 is an unusual mixture
of the cutaneous butcher’s wart virus HPV-7 and two other
mucosal types. These peculiar associations are also supported
by nucleotide alignments of the E6, E1, and different parts of
the L1 genes and therefore do seem to reflect natural evolu-
tionary groupings (6, 7). The members of these groups may
hold the secrets of how the mucosal-cutaneous distinction
arose.
The groups A6, A7, and A9 include the most commonly
found high-risk types (4, 39), and these are the groups that
have attracted the attention of most researchers. However, it is
unfortunate that A7 and A9 have rather low bootstrap scores.
As members of these groups are among the most widely stud-
ied, there is hope that a future synthesis of molecular func-
tional data coupled with a comparative approach will help to
make the relationships more clear. Most members of the re-
maining groups have been isolated from benign genital or oral
lesions or from latent infections, but on occasion, they can also
be found in malignant disease (15).
Previously, hierarchical associations of genital HPVs reflect-
ing similar biologies have been proposed (65). The cutaneous-
genital HPVs (groups A2 and A4) were claimed to associate
with the HPV-6 lineage to form the low-risk types, while most
other HPVs formed the high-risk types. Our reexamination of
the same E6 data set does not support this model. E6 phylog-
enies constructed by distance matrix, parsimony, and maxi-
mum-likelihood methods and evaluated by bootstrapping re-
veal that the cutaneous-genital HPVs, the low-risk genital
HPVs (e.g., group A10), and the high-risk genital HPVs form
independent groups within supergroup A. There is no reliable
nested hierarchy of clades for these groups and consequently
no evidence of a nested hierarchy of virulence.
Supergroup B. EV is a rare skin disorder characterized by
disseminated wartlike lesions and skin cancers (for reviews, see
references 25 and 33). The 17 HPV types originally isolated
from EV patients form the majority in supergroup B. Two
groups, B1 and B2, are well-defined, and they both also contain
types that have not been found in EV-associated lesions.
Group B2 is more atypical, as only HPV-50 is considered to be
an EV virus, while the rest have been isolated from non-EV
patients and from such lesions as common warts, flat warts, and
squamous cell carcinomas (for a review, see reference 15).
Nevertheless, the grouping also has the support of amino acid
sequence similarities throughout the entire genome (13).
Group B1 is a large group of mainly EV HPVs, except for
HPV-37, HPV-38, and HPV-49. The phylogenies are conflict-
ing as to the internal group structure but do give a hint of
subdivisions partially consistent with previous hybridization
studies (38). In particular, there is agreement that HPV-9,
HPV-15, HPV-17, HPV-22, HPV-23, HPV-37, and HPV-38
form a clade which also has a high bootstrap value of 93%, and
the remaining types, excluding HPV-49, form another clade
(bootstrap value, 91%). Because of the large distances between
types in this group, it will be a prime candidate for splitting into
smaller groups when the phylogenetic relationships are better
understood. Recently, six new HPV genomes (2) have been
detected by PCR in cutaneous cancers of renal transplant
patients. A neighbor-joining analysis of a segment overlapping
our 291-bp L1 region shows that they belong in group B1.
Finally, it should be pointed out that EV patients frequently
have flat warts associated with HPV-3 and HPV-10, two types
that phylogeny assigns to the genital HPVs, although patho-
logically they are sometimes included among the EV HPVs.
Supergroups C and D. Each of these two supergroups reli-
ably unites ungulate PVs, which have always been considered
as distinct because of their unique genomic organization and
distinctive pathologies, i.e., fibropapillomas (BPV-1, BPV-2,
BPV-5, European elk PV, deer PV, and ovine PV) versus true
papillomas (BPV-3, BPV-4, and BPV-6) (for references, see
reference 34).
Supergroup E. In this supergroup are united the two fairly
closely related viruses HPV-1 and HPV-63 (17), together with
the very distantly related type HPV-41. On the level of very
large distances, these three HPV types form a clade together
with canine oral PV and cottontail rabbit PV. We have ex-
cluded the most distantly relatedMastomys natalensis PV from
this supergroup. Future animal PV sequences may better de-
fine these relationships.
FPV. PVs appear to be widespread among vertebrate hosts
other than mammals, but only one PV sequence from a bird,
the chaffinch, has been reported (46). To estimate the relation-
ship of FPV to other PVs, we aligned the published sequence
against homologous segments of typical representatives of the
five supergroups, i.e., HPV-1, HPV-5, HPV-16, BPV-1, BPV-4,
and Mastomys natalensis PV (data not shown). Nearly all dis-
similarities between the FPV sequence and those of the other
six PVs exceeded those among the six PVs. We take this to
indicate that in spite of the limited interpretability of simple
distances, FPV is less related to any of the mammalian PVs
than they are related to one another.
Taxonomic flexibility. This taxonomic scheme is an outline
and does not involve the full spectrum of activities traditionally
associated with erecting a taxonomy, e.g., provision of identi-
fication keys. However, it does show how one may organize
PVs by cladistic principles while giving recognition to levels of
biomedical interest. It is an expression of our best phylogenetic
hypotheses and should not be seen as an unchangeable con-
vention but rather as a tool to inspire research to change it for
the better. The proposed names do not mean that other col-
lective names (e.g., high-risk group) are discouraged; the tax-
onomic convention permits these so long as they are useful and
it is understood that they have no formal taxonomic status
within a cladistic classification. Additional classificatory levels
such as genus and subgroup may be erected when needed. We
hope that an increasingly comparative approach aided by the
HPV database (48) will speed us toward the goal of an increas-
ingly informative taxonomy.
Host-PV evolution. All known PVs have been detected in a
single mammalian or bird host species (61), and no interspe-
VOL. 69, 1995 PV PHYLOGENY AND TAXONOMIC CLASSIFICATION 3081
 at Penn State Univ on April 15, 2008 
jvi.asm.org
D
ow
nloaded from
 
cies transfer has yet been reported. This host specificity and the
inapparent or benign nature of most PV infections suggest that
these viruses are extremely well-adapted parasites. We had
previously suggested that this could indicate host-PV coevolu-
tion (7). A reexamination of the phylogeny and arguments
derived from plant-insect studies (36) now indicates that it
does not accord with coevolution in the strictest sense of the
word (26, 35) for the following reasons. (i) The virus phylogeny
does not mirror the host phylogeny accurately (Fahrenholz’s
rule), e.g., in supergroups A and C and in the dissimilarity
between supergroups A and B compared with the other super-
groups. (ii) In hosts harboring many different types of well-
adapted parasites, e.g., humans and cattle and their PVs, the
selection pressure exerted by any one kind of parasite on the
host is negligible by comparison with what the host can exert
on the parasites. Thus, PV evolution is more likely to be dom-
inated by unilateral host selection (sequential evolution [55])
rather than by mutual coevolution, as it has to adjust to the
molecular mechanism of the host cell (56).
The presence of three monkey PVs closely related to HPVs
of supergroup A is an interesting observation that may be
explained as a consequence of infection of monkey-human
ancestors by the PV ancestors of supergroup A. Given that
HPV-16 and HPV-18 variants indicate a very slow rate of
evolution (as little as one mutation in 300 bp over several
thousands of years) and assuming a molecular clock (72), su-
pergroup A radiation could have overlapped that of its primate
hosts. Alternatively, interpretation of nonsynonymous- to syn-
onymous-change plots, especially with reference to the HPV-
13–pigmy chimpanzee PV comparison, suggests that the close-
ness could also be the result of cross-species transmission (48).
PV evolution would then have parallels to the evolutionary
history of the human immunodeficiency virus-simian immuno-
deficiency virus group (47). Although reports are lacking, it
may be possible to test for PV viability and gene function
following experimental infection of heterologous hosts. Should
there be no cross-species viability, one might then attribute an
even greater age to the affinities between animal PVs and
HPVs in supergroup E and all other PVs, an age possibly
similar to that of land vertebrates, i.e., about 200 million years.
But whatever the opinions, there is certainly a need for the
sampling and study of many more animal PVs.
Future directions. The establishment of the HPV sequence
database at the National Laboratory in Los Alamos by the
National Institutes of Health (48) should give a boost to com-
parative studies. Research done there will be published annu-
ally in the form of a compendium that will be sent to interested
scientists and that will provide updates on the relationships of
newly typed PVs. One interesting project will be a search for
correlations between amino acid and nucleotide sequence el-
ements common to subgroups of PVs which may shed light on
the molecular basis of PV biology and pathology.
In the search for novel HPVs, one probably should not
expect many more genital PVs, as most of the members of this
group may have been found (5). However, the present phylo-
genetic isolation of HPV-1, HPV-41, and HPV-63 may indicate
that many cutaneous HPV types (17, 30) are still to be found,
and the recent identification of new EV-related viruses (2, 57)
seems to prove this. Aside from this, it is apparent that future
progress in the understanding of PV evolution will require the
discovery of large numbers of novel animal PV genomes, e.g.,
genital PVs from primates or nonprimate mammals.
On a potentially even deeper level of phylogenetic branch-
ing, it would be of interest to examine the relationship between
PVs and polyomaviruses, which form subfamilies within the
family Papovaviridae. They had been grouped together because
they are the only viruses with double-stranded, covalently
closed, circular DNA and with similar capsid morphologies. A
monophyletic origin is rather doubtful because of the vast
differences in genome organization and lack of sequence sim-
ilarities. Only two short amino acid sequence similarities,
which may be homologous, are known: (i) the binding site for
the retinoblastoma protein of the simian virus 40 T antigen and
of some HPV E7 proteins and (ii) a segment of the simian virus
40 T antigen that can be aligned with PV E1 proteins (8).
These similarities possibly emerged through convergence, but
even if they did reflect a common ancestry of protein domains,
they may be taxonomically irrelevant, as they may be ancestral
characters shared with eukaryotic or adenovirus proteins (12,
51). Evidence for shared derived characters could come from
studies of three-dimensional structures. For example, one
could speculate that the PV capsid proteins may have domains
that interact with one another and with DNA in a manner
similar to that of the domains of polyomavirus capsid proteins
or that the E1 and E2 proteins might have DNA binding
domains homologous to those of the polyoma T antigen. But
on the strength of the present evidence, polyomaviruses and
PVs should be considered separate families.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Shih-Ping Chan, Department of Mathematics, National
University of Singapore, for computer assistance; Chiew-Hoon Tan for
technical support; Gerald Myers, Theoretical Division, Los Alamos
National Laboratory, for enlightening discussions; and the two review-
ers for their invaluable suggestions.
A.L.H. is a postdoctoral fellow sponsored by the Division of Micro-
biology and Infectious Diseases of the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases through an interagency agreement with the Los
Alamos National Laboratory.
REFERENCES
1. Banks, L., and G. Matlashewski. 1993. Cell transformation and the HPV E5
gene. Papillomavirus Rep. 4:1–4.
2. Berkhout, R. J. M., L. M. Tieben, H. L. Smits, J. N. Bouwes Bavinck, B. J.
Vermeer, and J. ter Schegget. 1995. Nested PCR approach for detection and
typing of epidermodysplasia verruciformis-associated human papillomavirus
types in cutaneous cancers from renal transplant recipients. J. Clin. Micro-
biol. 33:690–695.
3. Bernard, H. U. 1994. Coevolution of papillomaviruses with human popula-
tions. Trends Microbiol. 2:140–143.
4. Bernard, H. U., S. Y. Chan, and H. Delius. 1994. Evolution of papillomavi-
ruses. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 186:33–54.
5. Bernard, H. U., S. Y. Chan, M. M. Manos, C. K. Ong, L. L. Villa, H. Delius,
C. L. Peyton, H. M. Bauer, and C. M. Wheeler. 1994. Identification and
assessment of known and novel human papillomaviruses by PCR amplifica-
tion, restriction fragment length polymorphism, nucleotide sequence, and
phylogenetic algorithms. J. Infect. Dis. 170:1077–1085.
6. Chan, S.-Y. 1992. Ph.D. thesis. National University of Singapore, Singapore.
7. Chan, S.-Y., H.-U. Bernard, C.-K. Ong, S.-P. Chan, B. Hofmann, and H.
Delius. 1992. Phylogenetic analysis of 48 papillomavirus types and 28 sub-
types and variants: a showcase for the molecular evolution of DNA viruses.
J. Virol. 66:5714–5725.
8. Clertant, P., and I. Seif. 1984. A common function of polyoma virus large-T
and papillomavirus E1 proteins. Nature (London) 311:276–279.
9. Coggin, J. R., and H. zur Hausen. 1979. Workshop on papillomaviruses and
cancer. Cancer Res. 39:545–546.
10. Danos, O., and M. Yaniv. 1987. E6 and E7 gene products evolved by am-
plification of a 33-amino-acid peptide with a potential nucleic-acid-binding
structure, p. 145–150. In B. M. Steinberg, J. L. Brandsma, and L. B. Taich-
man (ed.), Papillomaviruses (cancer cells 5). Cold Spring Harbor Labora-
tory, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.
11. Deau, M.-C., M. Favre, S. Jablonska, L.-A. Rueda, and G. Orth. 1993.
Genetic heterogeneity of oncogenic human papillomavirus type 5 (HPV5)
and phylogeny of HPV5 variants associated with epidermodysplasia verru-
ciformis. J. Clin. Microbiol. 31:2918–2926.
11a.Deau, M. C., M. Favre, and G. Orth. 1991. Genetic heterogeneity among
human papillomaviruses (HPV) associated with epidermodysplasia verruci-
formis: evidence for multiple allelic forms of HPV-5 and HPV-8 E6 genes.
Virology 184:492–503.
12. Defeo-Jones, D., P. S. Huang, R. E. Jones, K. M. Haskell, G. A. Vuocolo,
3082 CHAN ET AL. J. VIROL.
 at Penn State Univ on April 15, 2008 
jvi.asm.org
D
ow
nloaded from
 
M. G. Hanobik, H. E. Huber, and A. Oliff. 1991. Cloning of cDNAs for
cellular proteins that bind to the retinoblastoma gene product. Nature (Lon-
don) 352:251–254.
13. Delius, H., and B. Hofmann. 1994. Primer-directed sequencing of human
papillomavirus types. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 186:13–31.
14. de Villiers, E.-M. 1989. Heterogeneity of the human papillomavirus group. J.
Virol. 63:4898–4903.
15. de Villiers, E.-M. 1994. Human pathogenic papillomavirus types: an update.
Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 186:1–12.
16. Doorbar, J. 1991. An emerging function for E4. Papillomavirus Rep.2:145–147.
17. Egawa, K., H. Delius, T. Matsukura, M. Kawashima, and E. M. de Villiers.
1993. Two novel types of human papillomavirus, HPV 63 and HPV 65:
comparisons of their clinical and histological features and DNA sequences to
other HPV types. Virology 194:789–799.
18. Ensser, A., and H. Pfister. 1990. Epidermodysplasia verruciformis associated
human papillomaviruses present a subgenus-specific organisation of the reg-
ulatory genome region. Nucleic Acids Res. 18:3919–3922.
19. Eschle, D., M. Du¨rst, J. ter Meulen, J. Luande, H. C. Eberhardt, M. Pawlita,
and L. Gissmann. 1992. Geographical dependence of sequence variation in
the E7 gene of human papillomavirus type 16. J. Gen. Virol. 73:1829–1832.
20. Faulkner, D. V., and J. Jurka. 1988. Multiple Aligned Sequence Editor
(MASE). Trends Biochem. Sci. 13:321–322.
21. Felsenstein, J. 1982. Numerical methods for inferring evolutionary trees. Q.
Rev. Biol. 57:379–404.
22. Felsenstein, J. 1985. Confidence limits on phylogenies: an approach using
the bootstrap. Evolution 39:783–791.
23. Genetics Computer Group Wisconsin USA. 1991. Program manual of the
GCG package, version 7.
24. Giri, I., and M. Yaniv. 1988. Structural and mutational analysis of E2 trans-
activating proteins of papillomaviruses reveals three distinct functional do-
mains. EMBO J. 7:2823–2829.
25. Grußendorf-Conen, E. I. 1987. Papillomavirus-induced tumors of the skin:
cutaneous warts and epidermodysplasia verruciformis, p. 158–181. In K.
Syrjaenen, L. Gissmann, and L. G. Koss (ed.), Papillomaviruses and human
disease. Springer Verlag, Berlin.
26. Hafner, M. S., and S. A. Nadler. 1988. Phylogenetic trees support the co-
evolution of parasites and hosts. Nature (London) 332:258–259.
27. Heinzel, P., S.-Y. Chan, L. Ho, M. O’Connor, P. Balaram, M. Saveria-
Campo, K. Fujinaga, N. Kiviat, J. Kuypers, H. Pfister, B. M. Steinberg, S.-K.
Tay, L. L. Villa, and H. U. Bernard. Variation of human papillomavirus type
6 (HPV-6) and HPV-11 genomes sampled throughout the world. Submitted
for publication.
28. Hennig, W. 1966. Phylogenetic systematics. University of Illinois Press, Ur-
bana.
29. Hillis, D. M., J. P. Huelsenbeck, and C. W. Cunningham. 1994. Application
and accuracy of molecular phylogenies. Science 264:671–677.
30. Hirt, L., A. Hirsch-Behnam, and E. M. de Villiers. 1990. Nucleotide se-
quence of human papillomavirus (HPV) type 41: an unusual HPV type
without a typical binding site consensus sequence. Virus Res. 18:179–190.
31. Ho, L., S.-Y. Chan, R. D. Burk, B. C. Das, K. Fujinaga, J. P. Icenogle, T.
Kahn, N. Kiviat, W. Lancaster, P. Mavromara-Nazos, V. Labropoulou, S.
Mitrani-Rosenbaum, B. Norrild, M. R. Pillai, J. Stoerker, K. Syrjaenen, S.
Syrjaenen, S.-K. Tay, L. L. Villa, C. M. Wheeler, A.-L. Williamson, and H.-U.
Bernard. 1993. The genetic drift of human papillomavirus type 16 is a means
of reconstructing prehistoric viral spread and the movement of ancient
human populations. J. Virol. 67:6413–6423.
32. Icenogle, J. P., P. Sathya, D. L. Miller, R. A. Tucker, and W. E. Rawls. 1991.
Nucleotide and amino acid sequence variation in the L1 and E7 open reading
frames of human papillomavirus type 6 and type 16. Virology 184:101–107.
33. Jablonska, S., and S. Majewski. 1994. Epidermodysplasia verruciformis:
immunological and clinical aspects. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 186:
157–175.
34. Jackson, M. E., W. D. Pennie, R. E. McCaffery, K. T. Smith, J. Grindlay, and
M. S. Campo. 1991. The B group bovine papillomaviruses lack an identifiable
E6 open reading frame. Mol. Carcinog. 4:382–387.
35. Janzen, D. H. 1980. When is it coevolution? Evolution 34:611–612.
36. Jermy, T. 1984. Evolution of insect/host relationships. Am. Nat. 124:609–630.
37. Kitasato, H., H. Delius, H. zur Hausen, K. Sorger, F. Ro¨sl, and E.-M. de
Villiers. 1994. Sequence rearrangements in the upstream regulatory region
of human papillomavirus type 6: are these involved in malignant transition?
J. Gen. Virol. 75:1157–1162.
38. Kremsdorf, D., S. Jablonska, M. Favre, and G. Orth. 1982. Biochemical
characterization of two types of human papillomaviruses associated with
epidermodysplasia verruciformis. J. Virol. 43:436–447.
39. Lorincz, A. T., R. Reid, A. B. Jenson, M. D. Greenberg, W. D. Lancaster, and
R. J. Kurman. 1992. Human papillomavirus infection of the cervix: relative
risk associations of 15 common anogenital types. Obstet. Gynecol. 79:328–337.
40. Lowy, D. R., R. Kirnbauer, and J. T. Schiller. 1994. Genital human papil-
lomavirus infection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91:2436–2440.
41. Maddison, W. P., and D. R. Maddison. 1992. MacClade: analysis of phylog-
eny and character evolution. Sinauer, Sunderland, Mass.
42. Manos, M. M., Y. Ting, D. K. Wright, A. J. Lewis, T. R. Broker, and S. M.
Wolinsky. 1989. The use of polymerase chain reaction amplification for the
detection of genital human papillomaviruses. Cancer Cells 7:209–214.
43. Mayr, E. 1942. Systematics and and the origin of species. Columbia Univer-
sity Press, New York.
44. Mayr, E. 1963. Animal species and evolution. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, Mass.
45. Meglitsch, P. A. 1954. On the nature of the species. Syst. Zool. 3:49–65.
46. Moreno-Lopez, J., H. Ahola, A. Stenlund, A. Osterhaus, and U. Pettersson.
1984. Genome of an avian papillomavirus. J. Virol. 51:872–875.
47. Moriyama, E. N., and T. Gojobori. 1991. Molecular evolution of human and
simian immunodeficiency viruses, p. 291–301. InM. Kimura and N. Takahata
(ed.), New aspects of the genetics of molecular evolution. Japan Scientific
Societies Press, Tokyo.
48. Myers, G., H. U. Bernard, H. Delius, M. Favre, J. Icenogle, M. van Ranst,
and C. Wheeler (ed.). 1994. Human papillomaviruses 1994. A compilation
and analysis of nucleic and amino acid sequences. Los Alamos National
Laboratory, Los Alamos, N.Mex.
49. Olsen, G. J., H. Matsuda, R. Hagstrom, and R. Overbeek. Personal commu-
nication.
50. Ong, C.-K., S.-Y. Chan, M. S. Campo, K. Fujinaga, P. Mavromara-Nazos, V.
Labropoulou, H. Pfister, S.-K. Tay, J. ter Meulen, L. L. Villa, and H.-U.
Bernard. 1993. Evolution of human papillomavirus type 18: an ancient phy-
logenetic root in Africa and intratype diversity reflect coevolution with hu-
man ethnic groups. J. Virol. 67:6424–6431.
51. Phelps, W. C., C. L. Lee, K. Mu¨nger, and P. M. Howley. 1988. The human
papillomavirus type 16 E7 gene encodes transactivation and transformation
functions similar to those of adenovirus E1A. Cell 53:539–547.
52. Pushko, P., S. Toshiyuki, J. Cuzick, and L. Crawford. 1994. Sequence vari-
ation in the capsid protein genes of human papillomavirus type 16. J. Gen.
Virol. 75:911–916.
53. Reszka, A. A., J. P. Sundberg, and M. E. Reichmann. 1991. In vitro trans-
formation and molecular characterization of colobus monkey venereal pap-
illomavirus DNA. Virology 181:787–792.
54. Reuter, S., H. Delius, T. Kahn, B. Hofmann, H. zur Hausen, and E. Schwarz.
1991. Characterization of a novel papillomavirus DNA in the cervical carci-
noma cell line ME180. J. Virol. 65:5564–5568.
55. Ridley, M. 1993. Evolution. Blackwell Scientific, Cambridge, Mass.
56. Shadan, F. F., and L. P. Villareal. 1993. Coevolution of persistently infecting
small DNA viruses and their hosts linked to host-interactive regulatory
domains. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90:4117–4121.
57. Shamanin, V., M. Glover, C. Rausch, C. Proby, I. M. Leigh, H. zur Hausen,
and E.-M. de Villiers. 1994. Specific types of human papillomavirus found in
benign proliferations and carcinomas of the skin in immunosuppressed pa-
tients. Cancer Res. 54:4610–4613.
58. Simpson, G. G. 1961. Principles of animal taxonomy. Columbia University
Press, New York.
59. Sneath, P. H. A., and R. R. Sokal. 1973. Numerical taxonomy. Freeman, San
Francisco.
60. Stewart, C.-B. 1993. The powers and pitfalls of parsimony. Nature (London)
361:603–607.
61. Sundberg, J. P. 1987. Papillomavirus infections in animals, p. 40–103. In K.
Syrjaenen, L. Gissmann, and L. G. Koss (ed.), Papillomaviruses and human
disease. Springer Verlag, Berlin.
62. Swofford, D. L. 1993. Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony: PAUP, ver-
sion 3.1. Illinois Natural History Survey, Champaign, Ill.
63. Tan, S.-H., L. E.-C. Leong, P. A. Walker, and H.-U. Bernard. 1994. The
human papillomavirus type 16 E2 transcription factor binds with low coop-
erativity to two flanking sites and represses the E6 promoter through dis-
placement of Sp1 and TFIID. J. Virol. 68:6411–6420.
64. van den Brule, A. J. C., P. J. F. Snijders, C. J. L. M. Meijer, and J. M. M.
Walboomers. 1993. PCR-based detection of genital HPV genotypes: an
update and future perspectives. Papillomavirus Rep. 4:95–99.
65. van Ranst, M., J. B. Kaplan, and R. D. Burk. 1992. Phylogenetic classifica-
tion of human papillomaviruses: correlation with clinical manifestations. J.
Gen. Virol. 73:2653–2660.
66. van Ranst, M. A., R. Tachezy, and R. D. Burk. 1994. Human papillomavirus
sequences: what is in stock? Papillomavirus Rep. 5:65–75.
67. van Ranst, M. A., R. Tachezy, J. Pruss, and R. D. Burk. 1992. Primary
structure of the E6 protein of Micromys minutus papillomavirus and Mas-
tomys natalensis papillomavirus. Nucleic Acids Res. 20:2889.
68. Wheeler, C. M. Personal communication.
69. Wiley, E. O. 1978. The evolutionary species concept reconsidered. Syst. Zool.
27:17–26.
70. Wiley, E. O. 1981. Phylogenetics. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
71. Yabe, Y., A. Sakai, T. Hitsumoto, H. Kato, and H. Ogura. 1991. A subtype of
human papillomavirus 5 (HPV-5b) and its subgenomic segment amplified in
carcinoma: nucleotide sequences and genomic organizations. Virology 183:
793–798.
72. Zuckerkandl, E., and L. Pauling. 1962. Molecular disease, evolution, and
genetic heredity, p. 189–225. InM. Kasha and B. Pullman (ed.), Horizons in
biochemistry. Academic Press, New York.
73. zur Hausen, H. 1991. Viruses in human cancers. Science 254:1167–1173.
VOL. 69, 1995 PV PHYLOGENY AND TAXONOMIC CLASSIFICATION 3083
 at Penn State Univ on April 15, 2008 
jvi.asm.org
D
ow
nloaded from
 
