The Stanford Microarray Database accommodates
additional microarray platforms and data formats
Catherine A. Ball1,*, Ihab A. B. Awad2, Janos Demeter1, Jeremy Gollub1, Joan M. Hebert3,
Tina Hernandez-Boussard1, Heng Jin1, John C. Matese4, Michael Nitzberg1,
Farrell Wymore1, Zachariah K. Zachariah1, Patrick O. Brown1,5 and Gavin Sherlock2
1Department of Biochemistry and 2Department of Genetics, 3Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA,
USA, 4Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA and 5Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Stanford, CA, USA
Received September 3, 2004; Accepted September 13, 2004
ABSTRACT
The Stanford Microarray Database (SMD) (http://
smd.stanford.edu) is a research tool for hundreds
of Stanford researchers and their collaborators.
In addition, SMD functions as a resource for the entire
biological research community by providing unrest-
ricted access to microarray data published by SMD
users and by disseminating its source code. In addi-
tion to storing GenePix (Axon Instruments) and
ScanAlyze output from spotted microarrays, SMD
has recently added the ability to store, retrieve, dis-
play and analyze the complete raw data produced by
several additional microarray platforms and image
analysis software packages, so that we can also
now accept data from Affymetrix GeneChips (MAS5/
GCOS or dChip), Agilent Catalog or Custom arrays
(using Agilent’s Feature Extraction software) or
data created by SpotReader (Niles Scientific). We
have implemented software that allows us to accept
MAGE-ML documents from array manufacturers and
to submit MIAME-compliant data in MAGE-ML format
directly to ArrayExpress and GEO, greatly increasing
the ease with which data from SMD can be published
adhering to accepted standards and also increasing
the accessibility of published microarray data to
the general public. We have introduced a new tool
to facilitate data sharing among our users, so that
datasets can be shared during, before or after the
completion of data analysis. The latest version of
the source code for the complete database package
was released in November 2004 (http://smd.stanford.
edu/download/), allowing researchers around the
world to deploy their own installations of SMD.
INTRODUCTION
The Stanford Microarray Database (SMD) (1) (http://
smd.stanford.edu) was initially developed in 1999 to serve
a small team of researchers using spotted DNA microarrays
for human and yeast research at Stanford University. Since
then, it has become a research tool for a much larger scientific
community using multiple microarray platforms to study a
myriad of biomedical research problems. SMD now supports
the research of more than 1000 users in over 260 laboratories
at Stanford and around the world. These users have entered
data generated from more than 50 000 microarrays used to
study the biology of 34 organisms, published more than
190 papers referring to data in SMD and have made the com-
plete raw data from more than 7000 microarrays freely avail-
able via the SMD website. The public data can be selected,
viewed, downloaded and analyzed by the public using most
of the tools that are available to registered SMD users. The
source code for SMD has been downloaded and installed at
several academic and private locations.
Here, we discuss some of the recent developments at
SMD that have enabled us to accept microarray data from
additional platforms and image analysis software, export
data in MAGE-ML format and permit greater data sharing
between researchers. In addition, we present information
about the latest release of the SMD source code.
RESULTS
Microarray platforms and software
Until 2003, all data in SMD were obtained from two-channel
cDNA microarrays extracted from scanned images using
either GenePix (www.axon.com) or ScanAlyze (http://
rana.lbl.gov/EisenSoftware.htm).The increased interest among
SMD users in other microarray platforms and other data
acquisition software provided impetus to accommodate new
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 650 724 3028; Fax: +1 650 724 3701; Email: ball@genome.stanford.edu
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press are attributed as the original
place of publicationwith the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but only in part or as a derivative
work this must be clearly indicated.
ª 2005, the authors
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 33, Database issue ª Oxford University Press 2005; all rights reserved
D580–D582 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gki006
data formats in SMD. Specifically, we have added the ability
to accept data from Agilent arrays acquired by Agilent’s
Feature Extraction software, gene expression data from
Affymetrix arrays acquired by the Affymetrix Microarray
Analysis Suite v5.0 (MAS5, Affymetrix), Gene Chip Operating
System (GCOS, Affymetrix) or DNA-Chip Analyzer (dChip) (2)
and two-color data acquired using SpotReader (http://www.
nilesscientific.com/) software.
In order to accept data from additional microarray platforms
and software packages, we were faced with several hurdles.
First, the data models used to describe both the microarray
designs and the associated results had to be re-designed and
re-implemented. We decided to store all fields available from
every software package that we supported, which can be up to
several dozen, rather than store only the data fields common to
many different software packages. Second, we modified the
software for entry and retrieval of array designs and for micro-
array data entry, retrieval, display and analysis. The design and
implementation are object-oriented and relatively easy to
extend, so that additional platforms and data formats can be
accommodated in the future. These features are available in
the 11/04 software release.
Data export to public repositories
In close collaboration with the staff of ArrayExpress, a public
repository for microarray data (3) (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/
arrayexpress/), we have constructed and implemented a pipe-
line that converts sets of microarray data within SMD into
MAGE-ML files that support the MIAME standards for
information content (4,5) that can be directly deposited
to ArrayExpress, and more recently GEO (6; http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo). We took advantage of software
developed by members of the microarray informatics commu-
nity (MAGE-stk; http://mged.sourceforge.net/), to create
this pipeline, which translates data from SMD into the
MAGE-OM structure, export it as MAGE-ML, and
then test its formatting with the ArrayExpress MAGE-ML
validator (ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/arrayexpress/
MAGEvalidator-DISTRIB/). The MAGE-ML files are then
transferred via ftp to ArrayExpress and GEO where they
can be immediately entered.
Several new tables and user interfaces were designed and
added to allow SMD users to provide the annotation of their
experiments and biological samples that are required for
MIAMEcompliance. These include tools to annotate protocols,
experimental factors and experimental designs. Using MGED
Ontology terms (http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/
MGEDontology.php), SMD users can describe the overall
experimental design and how each member of a set of micro-
arrays fits into that design, such as time points in a time series
experiment or tumor samples from many individuals in a
molecular survey of a type of cancer. Users can also describe
the biological properties and parameters, including HIPAA-
compliant clinical data, of each sample and the procedures
and protocols used to treat the sample, extract the RNA or
DNA, amplify and label the nucleic acids, hybridize the arrays,
and scan and acquire data from the resulting microarray
image. In this way, each set of microarrays associated with a
publication in SMD can be adequately annotated and easily
submitted to a public data repository.
Tools for collaboration
The large community of researchers using SMD participates in
widespread and active collaborations. SMD’s tools for sharing
data facilitate collaboration and accurate communication of
experimental details. To complement existing tools for organ-
izing and annotating shared data, we have implemented a ‘data
repository’ that allows users to save and share the results of
data analysis (Figure 1). Users are able to save the results of
data selection, filtering, transformation and analysis at each of
these different steps and then specify other users or groups
who should be able to view the datasets. In addition to provid-
ing a means to help users save their work and facilitate
collaboration, the data repository provides a jumping-off
Figure 1. Screenshot of SMD’sMicroarray Data Repository. The repository allows the users to store their data sets created within SMD, upload datasets from other
sources, share themwith colleagues and collaborators and jumpoff to a variety of data retrieval, selection, transformation and analysis options. The interface provides
the option to view any other repository for which a user has permission to view data. SMD users can store datasets before and after filtering and centering in pre-
clustering (.pcl) files.Using repository options, a user can view, download, cluster and filter data, delete data from the repository, edit descriptions andpermissions for
a data set, perform singular value decomposition and collapse the data based on human genes into UniGene clusters, sections of chromosome or other ‘synthetic
genes’ constructed by the researcher. Clustered data can also be stored, and users have additional options to view a heat-map cluster using GeneXplorer (8) to view
spot-image clusters displaying or to view both heat-map and spot-image clusters side by side.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D581
point for various analysis tools, such as hierarchical clustering
and singular value decomposition.
Availability
An updated version of the source code for SMD, including all
the functions described in this paper, was made publicly avail-
able in November 2004 (http://smd.stanford.edu/download/).
The source code is freely available under the liberal, open-
source MIT license (http://www.opensource.org/licenses/
mit-license.php).
Future directions
In the future, we will update and release our software with
greater frequency and with better support for users who are
upgrading their SMD installations and must therefore migrate
data from one database schema to another. In this way, other
installations of SMD will be able to benefit from improve-
ments and new tools in a timely manner that will require less
work to deploy. We also plan to provide web services through
BioMOBY (7) to allow for more creative and flexible use of
SMD by researchers or data miners who wish to be able to
automate complex queries of the available data. Finally, tech-
niques for determining data quality in an automated fashion
remain an active area of research at SMD. Automatically
recognizing problematic data will allow researchers to reject
it from analysis, correct errors and, ideally, identify and
prevent potential sources of poor-quality data. The large
body of data in SMD will provide excellent training and
test sets for quality assurance studies.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by grants from the US National
Institutes of Health to P.O.B. (5R01 CA77097) and to G.S.
(1R01 HG002732).
REFERENCES
1. Gollub,J., Ball,C.A., Binkley,G., Demeter,J., Finkelstein,D.B.,
Hebert,J.M., Hernandez-Boussard,T., Jin,H., Kaloper,M., Matese,J.C.
et al. (2003) The Stanford Microarray Database: data access and
quality assessment tools. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 94–96.
2. Li,C. and Hung Wong,W. (2001) Model-based analysis of
oligonucleotide arrays: model validation, design issues and standard
error application. Genome Biol., 2, RESEARCH0032.
3. Brazma,A., Parkinson,H., Sarkans,U., Shojatalab,M., Vilo,J.,
Abeygunawardena,N., Holloway,E., Kapushesky,M., Kemmeren,P.,
Lara,G.G. et al. (2003)ArrayExpress—apublic repository formicroarray
gene expression data at the EBI. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 68–71.
4. Spellman,P.T., Miller,M., Stewart,J., Troup,C., Sarkans,U., Chervitz,S.,
Bernhart,D., Sherlock,G., Ball,C., Lepage,M. et al. (2002) Design and
implementation of microarray gene expression markup language
(MAGE-ML). Genome Biol., 3, RESEARCH0046.
5. Brazma,A., Hingamp,P., Quackenbush,J., Sherlock,G., Spellman,P.,
Stoeckert,C., Aach,J., Ansorge,W., Ball,C.A., Causton,H.C. et al. (2001)
Minimum information about a microarray experiment (MIAME)-toward
standards for microarray data. Nature Genet., 29, 365–371.
6. Edgar,R. Domrachev,M. and Lash,A.E. (2002) Gene Expression
Omnibus:NCBI gene expression and hybridization array data repository.
Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 207–210.
7. Wilkinson,M.D. and Links,M. (2002) BioMOBY: an open source
biological web services proposal. Brief. Bioinform, 3, 331–341.
8. Rees,C.A., Demeter,J., Matese,J.M., Botstein,D. and Sherlock,G. (2004)
GeneXplorer: an interactive web application for microarray data
visualization and analysis. BMC Bioinformatics, 5, 141.
D582 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
