miRU: an automated plant miRNA target
prediction server
Yuanji Zhang*
Plant Biology Division, The Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation, Ardmore, OK 73402, USA
Received February 3, 2005; Revised and Accepted March 9, 2005
ABSTRACT
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play important roles in gene
expression regulation in animals and plants. Since
plant miRNAs recognize their target mRNAs by
near-perfect base pairing, computational sequence
similarity search can be used to identify potential
targets. A web-based integrated computing system,
miRU, has been developed for plant miRNA target
gene prediction in any plant, if a large number
of sequences are available. Given a mature miRNA
sequence fromaplant species, thesystemthoroughly
searches for potential complementary target sites
with mismatches tolerable in miRNA–target recog-
nition. True or false positives are estimated based on
the number and type of mismatches in the target site,
and on the evolutionary conservation of target com-
plementarity in another genome which can be selec-
ted according to miRNA conservation. The output
for predicted targets, ordered by mismatch scores,
includes complementary sequences withmismatches
highlighted in colors, original gene sequences and
associated functional annotations. ThemiRUweb ser-
ver is available at http://bioinfo3.noble.org/miRU.htm.
INTRODUCTION
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenously encoded small
RNAs that can regulate gene expressions by base-pairing to
protein-coding mRNAs for degradation or translation repres-
sion. Numerous miRNAs have been identified from genomes
of many animals and plants, such as fruit fly, nematode, zebra-
fish, chicken, mouse, human, Arabidopsis, rice and maize.
miRNA genes are abundant in humans, estimated to account
for 1% of the total predicted genes. In Arabidopsis, at least
43 distinct miRNA families consisting of 111 members have
been reported and archived in ‘The miRNA Registry’ thus far
(http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Software/Rfam/mirna/index.shtml)
(1). Although the function of most miRNAs remains unknown,
a number of miRNAs have been shown to play important
roles in developmental timing, cell death, cell proliferation,
hematopoiesis and patterning of the nervous system in anim-
als, and stress responses, and leaf and flower development in
plants (2–6).
Finding regulatory mRNA targets is essential to understand-
ing the biological functions of miRNAs. Different methods
are needed to predict animal and plant miRNA targets. While
miRNA–target duplex free energy may be important for
animal miRNA target prediction (7,8), plant miRNA targets
can be predicted by sequence similarity since plant miRNA
seems to bind almost perfectly to its cognate mRNA (7,9).
Computational tools have been developed to predict plant
miRNA targets (9–11), but none is in the web server format.
Rhoades et al. (9) used PatScan (12) to predict plant miRNA
targets with <3 mismatches. Jones-Rhoades and Bartel (11)
used their own unpublished programs, together with PatScan,
and the prediction seems to be more comprehensive. Wang
et al. (10) deployed Smith–Waterman algorithm in miRNA
target prediction, but failed to detect all previously identified
targets (10). Since most biology laboratories involved in
plant miRNA research may not have necessary bioinformatic
resources for target prediction, a publicly accessible web
application for plant miRNA target prediction has been
developed. The tool allows systematic search for miRNA
complementary targets in any plant whose genome sequence
or a large number of expressed sequence tags (ESTs) are
available. Backed by an exhaustive search algorithm, the
tool is able to find all potential targets with the given mis-
matches. False positives are reduced by limiting the number of
mismatches and by ensuring the target complementarity con-
servation in another plant species (11).
INPUT TO THE SERVER
The server has a user-friendly and intuitive input interface,
as shown in Figure 1. The user is required to enter a mature
miRNA sequence in 50!30direction. Although miRNAs are
usually 21–24 nt (4), the input sequence can be in the range of
19–28 nt in length to accommodate an siRNA input, as the tool
can also be used to search for siRNA targets and off-targets.
*Tel: +1 580 224 6726; Fax: +1 580 224 6692; Email: yjzhang@noble.org
ª The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W701–W704
doi:10.1093/nar/gki383
To predict target genes, the user has to specify an mRNA
dataset for the intended organism. Currently, the system
includes genome mRNAs or ESTs and other transcripts-
assembled Gene Indices (13) for 28 plant species downloaded
from The Institute for Genome Research (TIGR) at http://
www.tigr.org/. With the above input information, a Perl script
at the backend will then do an exhaustive sequence similarity
search, using an algorithm modified from BLAST (14) (see
Additional File 1).
To reduce false positives in predicted targets, the user can
limit the number of mismatches, which are classified into three
types and are assigned different scores; the higher scores
are for more detrimental mismatches for miRNA function:
G:U wobble pairings (each assigned 0.5 scores), insertions/
deletions (indels) (2.0) and all other non-canonical Watson–
Crick pairings (1.0). The total score for an alignment is
calculated based on 20 nt. When the query is longer than
20 nt, scores for all possible consecutive 20 nt subsequences
are computed and the minimum score is output as the total
score for the query-subject alignment. Since target comple-
mentarity to the miRNA 50 end seems to be critical to the target
site function (15–18), any mismatch other than G:U wobble
in positions 2–7 at the 50 end is further penalized 0.5 points in
the score.
Based on the observation that both miRNAs and their
target sites are evolutionarily conserved across genomes
(18–20), the conservation of target complementarity in another
genome can be used to further reduce false positives in plant
miRNA target prediction (11). Furthermore, such analysis will
also provide useful information about conserved regulatory
roles of homologous miRNAs in different species. To use
this strategy in the server, the information of the homologous
miRNA and the mRNA dataset of the second genome should
be provided for the system to do another search. Then the
system compares potential targets to find whether homologous
genes are predicted to be targeted by the homologous miRNAs
in both genomes. Genes are considered to be homologous if
they share >1 Pfam domains (21). All mRNA datasets are
preprocessed by aligning to Pfam-A seed domain sequences
(Pfam 16.0, which contains 7677 families, available at
http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Software/Pfam/). For Arabidopsis
and rice genome mRNA datasets, the corresponding protein
datasets are used for functional domain identification using
HMMER (22) with E-value <0.1 as the significance level.
Since HMMER does not allow DNA–protein comparisons,
all gene index datasets are searched against Pfam-A seed
domain sequences using blastx program (14) with E-value
cut-off of 105. TIGR’s ‘Eukaryotic Gene Orthologs’ dataset
(23) is also used for determining homology relationships in the
Gene Index datasets. The search results are parsed and stored
in a MySQL database to facilitate the comparisons of target
conservation in any two genomes.
OUTPUT TO THE USER
The output report consists of three parts (Figure 2). The first
part is a summary of search input parameters, including
the query sequence, mismatches allowed and target dataset.
The next section is a list of predicted complementary targets
displayed in the order of mismatch scores. Information shown
for each predicted target includes gene identifier, target site
position, mismatch score, number of mismatches and target
Figure 1. Data input web interface for plant miRNA target prediction.
W702 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
complementary sequence with mismatches highlighted in
colors (green for GU mismatches, purple for indels and red
for all other mismatches). The target is indicated if its com-
plementarity is conserved in another genome. Therefore, the
target list includes conserved targets that are highly likely to
be true targets. It also includes targets whose counterparts in
the second genome are not found. Some of these targets may
still be true targets since the dataset to be compared for most
plants are ESTs sampled from the genomes and may miss
the conserved targets. The last part of the output is the target
gene sequences in FASTA format, which includes the defini-
tion line for the original functional annotation. The target site
in the gene can easily be located as it is highlighted in colors
(Figure 2).
To verify the tool, its prediction was compared with two
published prediction results (6,11). The prediction of Arabi-
dopsis miRNA targets by Jones-Rhoades and Bartel (11)
seems to be highly reliable since more than half of the pre-
dicted targets were experimentally verified as true targets.
In this work, Arabidopsis miRNAs conserved in rice, as listed
in Supplementary Table S1 in Jones-Rhoades and Bartel (11),
were used as queries for the tool to predict target genes and the
result can be found in Additional File 2. All the reported
potential target genes were successfully detected by this tool.
Recently, Sunkar and Zhu (6) identified stress-regulated
miRNAs from Arabidopsis. They also predicted the potential
target genes for these miRNAs using the criteria modified
from Rhoades et al. (9). The new algorithm detected all
their predicted targets. Moreover, the result indicates that
Sunkar and Zhu’s prediction seems to be incomplete. For
example, a total of 23 targets were predicted by Sunkar and
Zhu for ten miRNAs identified in their experiment, while this
server predicts 203 potential targets in total (see Additional
File 3).
SUMMARY
The server aims at predicting plant miRNA targets with the
highest sensitivity and selectivity by using a search algorithm
which guarantees finding all homologous sequences within
given mismatches, and by applying current knowledge about
miRNA targets to minimize false positives. As a practical tool,
it should aid biologists in plant miRNA research.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Material is available at NAR Online.
Figure 2. Result page of plant miRNA target prediction.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W703
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author would like to acknowledge Drs Richard A. Dixon
and Patrick Zhao for critical reading of the manuscript.
Financial support for this project was provided by the Samuel
Roberts Noble Foundation. Funding to pay the Open Access
publication charges for this article was also provided by the
Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Griffiths-Jones,S. (2004) The microRNA Registry. Nucleic Acids Res.,
32, D109–D111.
2. Bartel,D.P. (2004) MicroRNAs: genomics, biogenesis, mechanism,
and function. Cell, 116, 281–297.
3. Carrington,J.C. and Ambros,V. (2003) Role of microRNAs in plant and
animal development. Science, 301, 336–338.
4. Dugas,D.V. and Bartel,B. (2004) MicroRNA regulation of gene
expression in plants. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol., 7, 512–520.
5. Ambros,V. (2004) The functions of animal microRNAs. Nature,
431, 350–355.
6. Sunkar,R. and Zhu,J.-K. (2004) Novel and stress-regulated microRNAs
and other small RNAs from Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 16, 2001–2019.
7. Lai,E.C. (2004) Predicting and validating microRNA targets.
Genome Biol., 5, 115.
8. Rehmsmeier,M., Steffen,P., Hochsmann,M. and Giegerich,R. (2004)
Fast and effective prediction of microRNA/target duplexes. RNA,
10, 1507–1517.
9. Rhoades,M.W., Reinhart,B.J., Lim,L.P., Burge,C.B., Bartel,B. and
Bartel,D.P. (2002) Prediction of plant microRNA targets. Cell, 110,
513–520.
10. Wang,X.J., Reyes,J.L., Chua,N.H. and Gaasterland,T. (2004) Prediction
and identification of Arabidopsis thaliana microRNAs and their
mRNA targets. Genome Biol., 5, R65.
11. Jones-Rhoades,M.W. and Bartel,D.P. (2004) Computational
identification of plant microRNAs and their targets, including a
stress-induced miRNA. Mol. Cell, 14, 787–799.
12. Dsouza,M., Larsen,N. and Overbeek,R. (1997) Searching for patterns in
genomic data. Trends Genet., 13, 497–498.
13. Quackenbush,J., Liang,F., Holt,I., Pertea,G. and Upton,J. (2000)
The TIGR Gene Indices: reconstruction and representation of expressed
gene sequences. Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 141–145.
14. Altschul,S., Thomas,L.,Alejandro,A., Zhang,J., Zhang,Z.,Miller,W. and
Lipman,D. (1997) Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation
of protein database search programs.Nucleic Acids Res., 25, 3389–3402.
15. Mallory,A.C., Reinhart,B.J., Jones-Rhoades,M.W., Tang,G.,
Zamore,P.D., Barton,M.K. and Bartel,D.P. (2004)MicroRNA control of
PHABULOSA in leaf development: importance of pairing to the
microRNA 50 region. EMBO J., 23, 3356–3364.
16. Brennecke,J., Stark,A., Russell,R.B. and Cohen,S.M. (2005) Principles
of microRNA–target recognition. PLoS Biol., 3, e85.
17. Lim,L.P., Lau,N.C., Garrett-Engele,P., Grimson,A., Schelter,J.M.,
Castle,J., Bartel,D.P., Linsley,P.S. and Johnson,J.M. (2005) Microarray
analysis shows that some microRNAs downregulate large numbers of
target mRNAs. Nature, 433, 769–773.
18. Stark,A., Brennecke,J., Russell,R.B. and Cohen,S.M. (2003)
Identification of Drosophila microRNA targets. PLoS Biol., 1, E60.
19. Juarez,M.T., Kui,J.S., Thomas,J., Heller,B.A. and Timmermans,M.C.P.
(2004) microRNA-mediated repression of rolled leaf1 specifies
maize leaf polarity. Nature, 428, 84–88.
20. Bonnet,E.,Wuyts,J., Rouze,P. andVan de Peer,Y. (2004)Detection of 91
potential conserved plant microRNAs in Arabidopsis thaliana and
Oryza sativa identifies important target genes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA, 101, 11511–11516.
21. Bateman,A., Coin,L., Durbin,R., Finn,R.D., Hollich,V.,
Griffiths-Jones,S., Khanna,A., Marshall,M., Moxon,S.,
Sonnhammer,E.L. et al. (2004) The Pfam protein families database.
Nucleic Acids Res., D138–D141.
22. Durbin,R., Eddy,S., Krogh,A. and Mitchison,G. (1998) Biological
Sequence Analysis: Probabilistic Models of Proteins and Nucleic Acids.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
23. Lee,Y., Sultana,R., Pertea,G., Cho,J., Karamycheva,S., Tsai,J.,
Parvizi,B., Cheung,F., Antonescu,V. and White,J. (2002)
Cross-referencing eukaryotic genomes. Genome Res., 12, 493–502.
W704 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
