The HHpred interactive server for protein homology
detection and structure prediction
Johannes So¨ding*, Andreas Biegert and Andrei N. Lupas
Department of Protein Evolution, Max-Planck-Institute for Developmental Biology,
Spemannstrasse 35, 72076 Tu¨bingen, Germany
Received February 14, 2005; Revised and Accepted March 21, 2005
ABSTRACT
HHpred is a fast server for remote protein homology
detection and structure prediction and is the first
to implement pairwise comparison of profile hidden
Markov models (HMMs). It allows to search a wide
choice of databases, such as the PDB, SCOP, Pfam,
SMART, COGs and CDD. It accepts a single query
sequence or a multiple alignment as input. Within
only a few minutes it returns the search results in a
user-friendly format similar to that of PSI-BLAST.
Search options include local or global alignment and
scoring secondary structure similarity. HHpred can
produce pairwise query-template alignments, mul-
tiple alignments of the query with a set of templates
selected from the search results, as well as 3D struc-
tural models that are calculated by the MODELLER
software from these alignments. A detailed help facil-
ity is available. As a demonstration, we analyze the
sequence of SpoVT, a transcriptional regulator from
Bacillus subtilis. HHpred can be accessed at http://
protevo.eb.tuebingen.mpg.de/hhpred.
INTRODUCTION
It is well known that sequence search methods such as BLAST,
FASTA or PSI-BLAST (1–3) are of prime importance for
biological research because functional information of a protein
or gene can be inferred from homologous proteins or genes
identified in a sequence search. But quite often no significant
relationship to a protein of known function can be established.
This is certainly the case for the most interesting group of
proteins, those for which no ortholog has yet been studied.
It is less well known that in cases where conventional
sequence search methods fail, the recently developed, highly
sensitive methods for homology detection or structure
prediction (confer, e.g. (4–11) and descriptions and links at
http://bioinfo.pl/Meta/servers.html) quite often allow to make
inferences from more remotely homologous relationships
(12–17). If the relationship is so remote that no common
function can be assumed, one can generally still derive
hypotheses about possible mechanisms, active site positions
and residues, or the class of substrate bound (18,19). When
a homologous protein with known structure can be identified,
its stucture can be used as a template to model the 3D structure
for the protein of interest (5), since even remotely homologous
proteins generally have quite similar 3D structure (20). The
3D model may then help to generate hypotheses to guide
experiments.
The primary aim in developing HHpred was to provide
biologists with a method for sequence database searching
that is as easy to use as BLAST or PSI-BLAST and yet com-
petitive in sensitivity with the most powerful servers for struc-
ture prediction that are currently available. We believe that
HHpred is unique in the advantages it offers:
Speed: A search with a 300 residue sequence through the
Protein Data Bank (PDB) (9000 HMMs) takes 1 min.
Databases: A wide range of regularly updated structure
and protein family databases can be searched: the PDB (21),
SCOP (22), Pfam (23), SMART (24), COG (25) and CDD (26).
User-friendliness: Search results are presented in an easy-
to-read format that is similar to PSI-BLAST. The summary hit
list includes E-values and true probabilities. Alignments
contain annotation about secondary structure, consensus
sequences and position-specific reliability and they can be
augmented by representative sequences from the underlying
multiple alignments.
Flexibility: We try to offer the user maximum control and
flexibility. He can paste his own input query alignment, search
in local or global alignment mode, realign alignments
with other parameters and edit the query-template (multiple)
alignment with which to launch the comparative modelling.
Multi-domain proteins: HHpred has been designed to work
equally well for single-domain and multi-domain query sequ-
ences. It can therefore be used to predict domain boundaries.
Documentation: A comprehensive help facility is available.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +49 7071 601 451; Fax: +49 7071 601 349; Email: johannes.soeding@tuebingen.mpg.de
ª The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
W244–W248 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gki408
Selectivity: High-scoring false positives have systematically
been reduced by developing a protocol for building query and
database alignments that supresses non-homologous sequences
(J. So¨ding, to be published).
Sensitivity: HHpred is among the most sensitive servers
for remote homology detection. A comparison of the new
version HHpred2.1 with the servers that took part in the recent
structure prediction benchmark CAFASP4 (27) can be viewed
at http://protevo.eb.tuebingen.mpg.de/hhpred/hhpred_in_
CAFASP4.html. In a recent study (28), in which we bench-
marked HHsearch, the method for HMM–HMM compar-
ison employed by our server, together with PSI-BLAST,
HMMER, PROF_SIM and COMPASS (3,6,7,29), HHsearch
was found to possesses the highest sensitivity and alignment
accuracy.
METHODS AND INPUT PARAMETERS
In the first step, an alignment of homologs is built for the query
sequence by multiple iterations of PSI-BLAST searches
against the non-redundant database from NCBI. The max-
imum number of PSI-BLAST iterations and the E-value
threshold can be specified on the start page (Figure 1). Instead
of a single sequence, the user may also enter a multiple align-
ment to jumpstart PSI-BLAST, or he can choose to skip the
PSI-BLAST iterations altogether by choosing zero for the
maximum number of PSI-BLAST iterations.
The user can further specify a minimum coverage of the
query by the PSI-BLAST matches. With a value of 50%, at
least half of the query residues must be aligned (‘covered’)
with residues from the matched sequence in order for it to enter
into the profile. Similarly, a minimum sequence identity of the
PSI-BLAST match to the query sequence can be demanded.
Our benchmarks (data not published) have shown that a value
between 20 and 25% improves selectivity without comprom-
ising sensitivity. The final alignment from PSI-BLAST is
annotated with the predicted secondary structure and confid-
ence values from PSIPRED (30).
In the next step, a profile HMM is generated from the
multiple alignment that includes the information about
predicted secondary structure. A profile HMM is a concise
statistical description of the underlying alignment. For each
column in the multiple alignment that has a residue in the
query sequence, an HMM column is created that contains
the probabilities of each of the 20 amino acids, plus 4 prob-
abilities that describe how often amino acids are inserted
and deleted at this position (insert open/extend, delete open/
extend). These insert/delete probabilites are translated into
position-specific gap penalties when an HMM is aligned to
a sequence or to another HMM.
Figure 1. Start page for the HHpred server at http://protevo.eb.tuebingen.mpg.de/hhpred with part of a help window overlaid.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W245
The query HMM is then compared with each HMM in the
selected database. The database HMMs have been precalcu-
lated and also contain secondary structure information, either
predicted by PSIPRED, or assigned from 3D structure by
DSSP (31). The database search is performed with the
HHsearch software for HMM–HMM comparison (28). Com-
pared to methods that rely on pairwise comparison of simple
sequence profiles, HHsearch gains sensitivity by using
position-specific gap penalties. If the default setting ‘Score
secondary structure’ is active, a score for the secondary struc-
ture similarity is added to the total score. This increases the
sensitivity for homologous proteins considerably (28). As a
possible drawback, it may lead to marginally significant scores
for structurally analogous, but non-homologous proteins.
The user can choose between local and global alignment
mode. In global mode alignments extend in both directions up
to the end of either the query or the database HMM. No
penalties are charged for end gaps. In local mode, the
highest-scoring local alignment is determined, which can
start and end anywhere with respect to the compared
HMMs. It is recommended to use the local alignment mode
as a default setting since it has been shown in our benchmarks
to be on average more sensitive in detecting remote relation-
ships as well as being more robust in the estimation of
statistical significance values. A global search might be appro-
priate when one expects the database entries to be (at least
marginally) similar over their full length with the query
sequence. In most cases it will be advisable to run a search
in both modes to gain confidence in one’s results.
EXAMPLE ANALYSIS
As an example we analyze the sequence of Stage V sporulation
protein T (SpoVT) from Bacillus subtilis that is known to
regulate forespore-specific sG-dependent transcription (32)
(annotated as ‘transcriptional regulator’ in GenBank). Input
parameters are set as shown in Figure 1. The results consist of
two parts (Figure 2): a summary list with matching database
sequences (‘templates’) and a list of query–template align-
ments below.
The first column of the summary hit list has indices that link
to the corresponding alignment further down. Next are the first
30 characters from the description of the HMM. The ‘Prob’
column lists the probability in percent that the database match
is a true positive, i.e. that it is homologous to the query
sequence at least in some core part. This is the most relevant
statistical measure of significance and can be interpreted quite
literally. The true-positive probability is a conservative meas-
ure in the sense that it corrects for occasional high-scoring false
positives. (The major cause for high-scoring false positives are
corrupted alignments that contain non-homologous sequences
which slipped in during the automized alignment-building with
PSI-BLAST.) [See (28) for details.] The E-values in HHpred
are defined in the same way as in BLAST or PSI-BLAST. (The
E-value for a sequence match is the expected number of false
positives per database search with a score at least as good
as the score of this sequence match.) But it is important to
note that, in contrast to the true-positive probability, HHpred
E-values do not take into account the secondary structure sim-
ilarity. Hits can therefore be significant by the true-positive
probability criterion even when the E-value is1. The P-value
is equal to the E-value divided by the number of HMMs in the
searched database. The ‘Score’ column gives the total score
that includes the score from the secondary structure compar-
ison which is listed in the next column (‘SS’). ‘Cols’ contains
the total number of matched columns in the query–template
alignment and the remaining columns describe the range of
aligned residues in the query and template.
From the summary list in Figure 2 it is evident that the
SpoVT protein consists of two domains, one from residue 1
to 51 and the other from residue 52 to 178. The N-terminal
domain has two significant hits in SCOP at rank 1 and 3. The
first hit is the DNA-binding domain of transition-state regu-
lator AbrB (33), a known close homolog of SpoVT. AbrB is a
protein that is broadly represented in bacterial species and is
involved in switching from exponential growth to stationary
phase by integrating a great number of environmental factors.
The second hit is to MazE, the antidote of the antidote-toxin
addiction module MazEF (34). How can both AbrB and MazE
be homologous to the query if they are not even classified into
the same class, let alone fold or superfamily, by the SCOP
database? Can the match with MazE be a false positive despite
the rather significant 84% probability?
To elucidate this, we can look at the SpoVT–MazE align-
ment below. Five representative (i.e. maximally diverse)
sequences from each of the two underlying alignments are
shown for each HMM. (Their amino acids can be colored
by biochemical properties by pressing one of the radio buttons
entitled ‘color alignments’ above the summary hit list.) First
we note that the predicted secondary structure of SpoVT
(sequence ‘Q ss_pred’) agrees very well with the actual sec-
ondary structure of MazE determined by the program DSSP
(sequence ‘T ss_dssp’). Second, the hydrophobicity pattern in
the aligned HMMs looks quite similar, which is especially
evident with the coloring. Third, the HMM–HMM alignment
contains a single gap in MazE at a position where also some
sequences in SpoVT exhibit a gap. All in all, the alignment
looks very much like what one would expect for a distant
homologous relationship.
The conflict posed by the manifest homology between
MazE and AbrB and their grossly different structural topology
prompted us to undertake a thorough bioinformatic investiga-
tion of the AbrB-like superfamily and to redetermine the AbrB
structure by NMR (M. Coles and S. Djuranovic et al., manu-
script submitted, PDB ID: 1YFB). Indeed, we found that the
published structure of AbrB (PDB ID: 1EKT) is incorrect and
that the correct structure for AbrB places it in the same super-
family as MazE.
Hits 2 and 4–9 in the summary list are all proteins from the
same SCOP fold d.110. Clicking on the SCOP family IDs
opens a window with the corresponding entry in SCOP. Irre-
spective of the specific significance values, the fact that so
many quite divergent members from the same two superfam-
ilies d.110.2 (GAF-domain) and d.110.3 (PAS-domain) appear
among the best hits strongly indicates that these are not high-
scoring chance hits but true homologs. Whether the C-terminal
domain looks more like a GAF or a PAS domain, we can now
generate an approximate structural model that could help us to
guide experiments to investigate what regulatory substrate this
domain may actually bind (32).
By clicking ‘Create CM Model’ one can select the templates
to be used for comparative modelling. HHpred then returns a
W246 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
multiple alignment in PIR format with the query sequence and
the selected templates. This aligment may be edited by the user
and then fed to the MODELLER software (35), accessible via
the MPI toolkit for users of HHpred.
A very useful feature is the possibility to view and manually
improve the query alignment that was used to generate the
query HMM; via the tab ‘Edit Query Alignment’ the user can
modify the query alignment that appears in a text field and start
a new search with the modified alignment.
By pressing ‘Realign’ at the top, the user may also realign
the identified templates in the summary hit list with different
parameters without the need to rerun the database search. One
can change the alignment mode from global to local, set the
number of representative sequences or use filters to narrow
down the set of sequences allowed into the query and template
alignments. If the user wants to search another database
with the same query HMM, she can select ‘Restart with
Query HMM’.
CONCLUSION
Whenever biologists cannot get satisfactory results from
BLAST, PSI-BLAST or other database searches due to insig-
nificant matches with proteins of known structure or function,
Figure 2. Search results for SpoVT from Bacillus subtilis. The summary hit list at the top shows that SpoVT consists of two domains: the N-terminal domain is very
similar to AbrB (rank 1) and clearly homologous to MazE (rank 3) and the C-terminal domain is similar to GAF and PAS domains (rank 2, 4–9). In the summary
hit list, column ‘Prob’ gives the probability that the hit is homologous to the query. This is the principle measure of statistical significance. In the alignments below,
the sequences marked ‘Q’ (‘T’) refer to the query (template) alignment. Sequences ‘ss_pred’ and ‘ss_conf’ denote the PSI-PRED secondary structure prediction
and confidence values, ‘ss_dssp’ is the secondary strcuture assigned by DSSP. Upper an lower case amino acids in the consensus sequences indicate high (&60%)
and moderate (&40%) conservation, respectively. Symbols indicating the quality of the column–column match: ‘ j ’ very good, ‘+’ good, ‘’ neutral, ‘’ bad and
‘=’ very bad.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W247
they should consider using one of the recently developed
sensitive structure prediction and homology detection servers
(4–11) that are listed, for instance, on the LiveBench/
CAFASP site at http://bioinfo.pl/Meta/servers.html. Among
these servers, HHpred offers a high degree of flexibility and
user-friendliness combined with excellent sensitivity. In con-
trast to methods based on profile–profile comparison, HHpred
exploits the information that is contained in insert and delete
probabilities by including them in a statistical framework. But
the speed of HHpred is perhaps the most important advantage,
considering that the best-ranked servers in CAFASP4 gener-
ally take hours or even days to return a prediction. The speed
enables the user to tweak the performance and gain confidence
in the results by modifying input alignments, search para-
meters or selected databases on a trial and error basis.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Michael Remmert for his valuable help
in setting up the web interface. We thank Sergej Djuranovic
for first pointing out the HHpred prediction for the SpoVT
C-terminal domain. J.S. is indebted to Alex Diemand for
assistance in preparing the screenshots. Many thanks to all
users who helped to improve our software with their questions
and feedback. Funding to pay the Open Access publication
charges for this article was provided by the Max-Planck
Society.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Altschul,S.F., Gish,W., Miller,W., Myers,E.W. and Lipman,D.J. (1990)
Basic local alignment search tool. J. Mol. Biol., 215, 403–410.
2. Pearson,W.R. (1991) Searching protein sequence libraries: comparison
of the sensitivity and selectivity of the Smith-Waterman and FASTA
algorithms. Genomics, 11, 635–650.
3. Altschul,S.F., Madden,T.L., Scha¨ffer,A.A., Zhang,J., Zhang,Z.,
Miller,W. and Lipman,D. (1997) Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST:
a new generation of protein database search programs.Nucleic Acid Res.,
25, 3389–3402.
4. Pietrokovski,S. (1996) Searching databases of conserved sequence
regions by aligning protein multiple-alignments. Nucleic Acids Res., 24,
3836–3845.
5. Rychlewski,L., Zhang,B. and Godzik,A. (1998) Fold and function
predictions for Mycoplasma genitalium proteins. Fold Des., 3, 229–238.
6. Yona,G. and Levitt,M. (2002) Within the twilight zone: a sensitive
profile–profile comparison tool based on information theory.
J. Mol. Biol., 315, 1257–1275.
7. Sadreyev,R.I. and Grishin,N.V. (2003) COMPASS: a tool for comparison
of multiple protein alignments with assessment of statistical significance.
J. Mol. Biol., 326, 317–336.
8. vonO¨hsen,N., Sommer,I. and Zimmer,R. (2003) Profile–profile
alignment: a powerful tool for protein structure prediction.
Pac. Symp. Biocomput., 252–263.
9. Panchenko,A.R. (2003) Finding weak similarities between proteins by
sequence profile comparison. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 683–689.
10. Fischer,D. (2003) 3D-SHOTGUN: a novel, cooperative, fold-recognition
meta-predictor. Proteins, 51, 434–441.
11. Ginalski,K., Elofsson,A., Fischer,D. and Rychlewski,L. (2003) 3D-Jury:
a simple approach to improve protein structure predictions.
Bioinformatics, 19, 1015–1018.
12. Venclovas,C. and Thelen,M.P. (2000) Structure-based predictions of
Rad1, Rad9, Hus1 and Rad17 participation in sliding clamp and
clamp-loading complexes. Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 2481–2493.
13. Zheng,M., Ginalski,K., Rychlewski,L. and Grishin,N. (2005) Protein
domain of unknown function DUF1023 is an alpha/beta hydrolase.
Proteins, 59, 1–6.
14. Ginalski,K., Rychlewski,L., Baker,D. and Grishin,N.V. (2004)
Protein structure prediction for the male-specific region of the
human Y chromosome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 101,
2305–2310.
15. Rand,T.A., Ginalski,K., Grishin,N.V. and Wang,X. (2004)
Biochemical identification of Argonaute 2 as the sole protein required
for RNA-induced silencing complex activity. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA,
101, 14385–14389.
16. Pawlak,S.D., Radlinska,M., Chmiel,A.A., Bujnicki,J.M. and
Skowronek,K.J. (2005) Inference of relationships in the ‘twilight zone’ of
homology using a combination of bioinformatics and site-directed
mutagenesis: a case study of restriction endonucleases Bsp6I and PvuII.
Nucleic Acids Res., 33, 661–671.
17. Kihara,D. and Skolnick,J. (2004) Microbial genomes have over 72%
structure assignment by the threading algorithm PROSPECTOR_Q.
Proteins, 55, 464–473.
18. Todd,A.E., Orengo,C.A. and Thornton,J.M. (2001) Evolution of function
in protein superfamilies, from a structural perspective. J. Mol. Biol.,
307, 1113–1143.
19. Pawlowski,K., Jaroszewski,L., Rychlewski,L. and Godzik,A. (2000)
Sensitive sequence comparison as protein function predictor.
Pac. Symp. Biocomput., 42–53.
20. Kinch,L. and Grishin,N. (2002) Evolution of protein structures and
functions. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., 12, 400–408.
21. Bourne,P.E., Addess,K.J., Bluhm,W.F., Chen,L., Deshpande,N.,
Feng,Z., Fleri,W., Green,R., Merino-Ott,J.C., Townsend-Merino,W.
et al. (2004) The distribution and query systems of the RCSB protein data
bank. Nucleic Acid Res., 32, D223–D225.
22. Murzin,A.G., Brenner,S.E., Hubbard,T. and Chothia,C. (1995)
SCOP: a structural classification of proteins database for the investigation
of sequences and structures. J. Mol. Biol., 247, 536–540.
23. Sonnhammer,E.L., Eddy,S.R., Birney,E., Bateman,A. and Durbin,R.
(1998) Pfam: multiple sequence alignments and HMM-profiles of protein
domains. Nucleic Acids Res., 26, 320–322.
24. Ponting,C.P., Schultz,J., Milpetz,F. and Bork,P. (1999) SMART:
identification and annotation of domains from signalling and
extracellular protein sequences. Nucleic Acids Res.,
24, 229–232.
25. Tatusov,R.L., Fedorova,N.D., Jackson,J.D., Jacobs,A.R., Kiryutin,B.,
Koonin,E.V., Krylov,D.M., Mazumder,R., Mekhedov,S.L.,
Nikolskaya,A.N. et al. (2003) The COG database: an updated version
includes eukaryotes. BMC Bioinformatics, 4, 41–41.
26. Marchler-Bauer,A., Panchenko,A., Shoemaker,B., Thiessen,P., Geer,L.
and Bryant,S. (2002) CDD: a database of conserved domain alignments
with links to domain three-dimensional structure. Nucleic Acids Res.,
30, 281–283.
27. Fischer,D., Rychlewski,L., Dunbrack,R.L.J., Ortiz,A.R. and Elofsson,A.
(2003) CAFASP3: the third critical assessment of fully automated
structure prediction methods. Proteins, 53, 503–516.
28. So¨ding,J. (2005) Protein homology detection by HMM–HMM
comparison. Bioinformatics, 21, 951–960.
29. Eddy,S.R. (1998) Profile hidden Markov models. Bioinformatics,
14, 755–763.
30. Jones,D.T. (1999) Protein secondary structure prediction based on
position-specific scoring matrices. J. Mol. Biol., 292, 195–202.
31. Kabsch,W. and Sander,C. (1983) Dictionary of protein secondary
structure: pattern recognition of hydrogen-bonded and geometrical
features. Biopolymers, 22, 2577–2637.
32. Dong,T.C., Cutting,S.M. and Lewis,R.J. (2004) DNA-binding studies on
the Bacillus subtilis transcriptional regulator and AbrB homologue,
SpoVT. FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 233, 247–256.
33. O’Reilly,M. and Devine,K.M. (1997) Expression of AbrB, a transition
state regulator from Bacillus subtilis, is growth phase dependent in a
manner resembling that of Fis, the nucleoid binding protein from
Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol., 179, 522–529.
34. Kamada,K., Hanaoka,F. and Burley,S.K. (2003) Crystal structure of the
MazE/MazF complex: molecular bases of antidote-toxin recognition.
Mol. Cell, 11, 875–884.
35. Sali,A. and Blundell,T.L. (1993) Comparative protein modelling by
satisfaction of spatial restraints. J. Mol. Biol., 234, 779–815.
W248 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
