  
1998, 62(4):1435. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 
Radhey S. Gupta
 
Eubacteria, and Eukaryotes
Relationships among Archaebacteria,
Sequences: A Reappraisal of Evolutionary 
Protein Phylogenies and Signature
http://mmbr.asm.org/content/62/4/1435
Updated information and services can be found at: 
These include:
REFERENCES
http://mmbr.asm.org/content/62/4/1435#ref-list-1free at: 
This article cites 223 articles, 110 of which can be accessed
CONTENT ALERTS
 more»articles cite this article), 
Receive: RSS Feeds, eTOCs, free email alerts (when new
http://journals.asm.org/site/misc/reprints.xhtmlInformation about commercial reprint orders: 
http://journals.asm.org/site/subscriptions/To subscribe to to another ASM Journal go to: 
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
MICROBIOLOGY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY REVIEWS,
1092-2172/98/$04.0010
Dec. 1998, p. 1435–1491 Vol. 62, No. 4
Copyright © 1998, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.
Protein Phylogenies and Signature Sequences: A Reappraisal
of Evolutionary Relationships among Archaebacteria,
Eubacteria, and Eukaryotes
RADHEY S. GUPTA*
Department of Biochemistry, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario L8N 3Z5, Canada
PREFACE ..................................................................................................................................................................1435
CURRENT EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE ...................................................................................................1436
MOLECULAR PHYLOGENIES: ASSUMPTIONS, LIMITATIONS, AND PITFALLS .................................1438
SEQUENCE SIGNATURES AND THEIR IMPORTANCE IN EVOLUTIONARY STUDIES......................1442
ROOT OF THE PROKARYOTIC TREE: ANCESTRAL NATURE OF ARCHAEBACTERIA AND
GRAM-POSITIVE BACTERIA .......................................................................................................................1444
EVOLUTIONARY RELATIONSHIPS AMONG PROKARYOTES...................................................................1446
Signature Sequences Showing the Distinctness of Archaebacteria ...............................................................1447
Signature Sequences Distinguishing Archaebacteria and Gram-Positive Bacteria from Gram-Negative
Bacteria ..............................................................................................................................................................1449
A Specific Relationship between Archaebacteria and Gram-Positive Bacteria and the Distinctness of
Gram-Negative Bacteria Is Consistent with Prokaryotic Cell Structures and Other Gene
Phylogenies ........................................................................................................................................................1450
Signature Sequence Distinguishing between Low-G1C and High-G1C Gram-Positive Bacteria and
Pointing to a Specific Relationship of the Latter Group to the Gram-Negative Bacteria .....................1455
Signature Sequences Indicating that Deinococcus and Thermus Are Intermediates in the Transition
from Gram-Positive to Gram-Negative Bacteria ..........................................................................................1456
Phylogenetic Placement of Cyanobacteria and Their Close Evolutionary Relationship to the
Deinococcus-Thermus Group ............................................................................................................................1458
Signature Sequences Defining Proteobacteria and Some of Their Subdivisions.........................................1461
Nature of the Archaebacterial Group and Its Relationship to Gram-Positive Bacteria ............................1461
Possible Selective Forces Leading to Horizontal Gene Transfers .................................................................1465
Evolutionary Relationships within Prokaryotes: an Integrated View Based on Molecular and
Phenotypic Characteristics ..............................................................................................................................1470
EVOLUTIONARY RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EUKARYOTES AND PROKARYOTES...........................1473
Some Critical Assumptions in Studying Prokaryote-Eukaryote Relationships ...........................................1473
Most Genes for the Information Transfer Processes Are Derived from Archaebacteria ...........................1473
Hsp70 Provides the Clearest Example of the Contribution of Eubacteria to the Nuclear-Cytosolic
Genome...............................................................................................................................................................1474
The Eukaryotic Nuclear Genome Is a Chimera of Genes Derived from Archaebacteria and
Gram-Negative Bacteria...................................................................................................................................1475
Origin of the Nucleus and Endoplasmic Reticulum ........................................................................................1477
Did Mitochondria and the First Eukaryotic Cell Originate from the Same Fusion Event? .....................1481
CONCLUDING REMARKS....................................................................................................................................1485
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS .........................................................................................................................................1487
REFERENCES ..........................................................................................................................................................1487
“The credible is, by definition, what is believed already,
and there is no adventure of the mind there.”
Northrop Frye (74)
PREFACE
The recognition of archaebacteria as distinct life forms by
Woese and coworkers in 1977 (256) has been hailed as one of
the most significant developments in the history of microbiol-
ogy and has profoundly influenced thoughts on the evolution-
ary relationships among living organisms. The discovery of this
“third form of life” has led to the notion that prokaryotic cells
are of two fundamentally different kinds, archaebacteria and
eubacteria, and that of these, the archaebacteria are the closest
relatives and direct ancestors of eukaryotic cells (Fig. 1a). The
discovery of archaebacteria was initially based mainly on the
16S rRNA (oligonucleotide) sequences and phylogeny. How-
ever, during the past 10 years, much new information on dif-
ferent gene sequences, including the entire genomes of several
prokaryotic and eukaryotic species, has accumulated (15, 26,
45, 66, 72, 73, 80, 119, 128, 138, 147, 215, 242). Based on these
data, it is now possible to critically evaluate whether the three-
domain proposal provides an accurate picture of the evolution-
ary relationship among living organisms or if a different type of
relationship is warranted. The results of studies reviewed here
indeed point to a very different evolutionary picture from the
currently widely accepted one. In this review I present evidence
based on molecular sequences that archaebacteria exhibit a
* Mailing address: Department of Biochemistry, McMaster Univer-
sity, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada L8N 3Z5. Phone: (905) 525-9140 ext.
22639. Fax: (905) 522-9033. E-mail: gupta@fhs.csu.McMaster.CA.
1435
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
close and specific relationship to gram-positive bacteria and
that the primary division within prokaryotes is not between
archaebacteria and eubacteria but, rather, between organisms
that have either a monoderm cell structure (i.e., prokaryotic
cells surrounded by a single membrane, which includes all
archaebacteria and gram-positive bacteria) or a diderm cell
structure (i.e., prokaryotic cells surrounded by an inner cyto-
plasmic membrane and an outer membrane, which includes all
true gram-negative bacteria) (Fig. 1b) (100). The sequence
data also strongly indicate that the ancestral eukaryotic cell is
not a direct descendant of the archaebacterial lineage but is a
chimera that resulted from a unique fusion event involving two
very different groups of prokaryotes—a thermoacidophillic ar-
chaebacterium (monoderm) and a gram-negative eubacterium
(diderm), followed by integration of their genomes. Thus, all
eukaryotic organisms, including the amitochondriate and
aplastidic cells, received and retained gene contributions from
both lineages.
CURRENT EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE
The quest for an understanding of the evolutionary relation-
ships between extant organisms has posed a major challenge to
biologists for centuries (23, 43, 159, 167). Since all living or-
ganisms are specifically related to each other by the presence
of numerous common (or related) biomolecules and follow a
similar complex strategy for growth and propagation, there is
now little doubt that they all evolved from a common (univer-
sal) ancestor (3, 228). However, discerning how different major
groups of organisms are related to each other and tracing their
evolution from the common ancestor remains controversial
and unresolved. After the invention of the microscope in the
17th century, studies on the morphological characteristics of
cells from extant organisms led to the identification of two
distinct types of cells (3), later termed prokaryotes and eu-
karyotes (34, 173), which could be readily distinguished. The
eukaryotic cells are distinguished from prokaryotes by a num-
ber of different characteristics including the presence of a
cytoskeleton, endomembrane system, etc. (3, 159). However,
the hallmark feature of all eukaryotic cells is the presence of a
membrane-bounded nucleus, and any organism lacking a nu-
clear membrane is considered a prokaryote (4, 34, 173). Eu-
karyotic organisms were classified into a number of different
groups or kingdoms, namely, Animalia, Plantae, Fungi, and
Protoctista, based on their detailed and complex morphologies
and with the aid of fossil records (164, 248). However, a similar
Linnaean approach to classification based on cell shape, phys-
iology, and other characteristics was unsuccessful in detecting
the phylogeny of prokaryotic organisms (23, 24, 121, 140, 194,
195, 227, 228, 230, 245, 250, 252, 254). The problem was partly
due to their very simple morphologies but was also due in large
part to the difficulty in determining which of the cellular fea-
tures and characteristics of prokaryotes is most meaningful for
taxonomic purposes.
Despite the ill-defined state of bacterial taxonomy, one em-
pirical criterion that has proven of much practical value in the
classification/identification of prokaryotes is their response to
the Gram stain (121), discovered by Christian Gram in 1884
(88). As has been noted by Murray, “Gram-positiveness and
Gram-negativeness are still unassailable characters except in
Archaebacteria, the radiation-resistant cocci and . . . the wall-
less mollicutes” (175). Gram staining involves successive treat-
ment of cells with the basic dye crystal violet followed by
treatment with iodine solution and then extraction with a polar
organic solvent such as alcohol or acetone. The cells which
resist decolorization and retain the blue-black dye complex are
referred to as gram positive, whereas those which do not retain
the stain are classified as Gram negative (12, 13, 88, 121). The
FIG. 1. Evolutionary relationships among living organisms in the three-domain model of Woese et al. (258) (a) and as suggested here based on protein sequence
data and structural characteristics of organisms (b). In panel b, the solid arrows identify taxa that evolved from each other in the directions shown by accumulation of
mutations and the dotted lines denote symbiotic events that led to the acquisition of mitochondria and plastids. These latter events, which are common in both models,
are not shown in panel a. In panel b, the double-headed arrow between archaebacteria and gram-positive bacteria indicates the polyphyletic relationship between these
groups for several genes. The terms “monoderm” and “diderm” refer to prokaryotic cells that are bounded by only one membrane or two different (cytoplasmic and
outer) membranes, respectively. The dashed lines indicate the first fusion between an archaebacterium and a gram-negative bacterium that is postulated to have given
rise to the ancestral eukaryotic cell (102, 105). Abbreviations: CM, cytoplasmic membrane; CW, cell wall; OM, outer membrane, PE, periplasm.
1436 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Gram-staining response, although not always reliable due to its
dependence on cell physiology and cell integrity (11, 228), thus
divides prokaryotes into two main groups, the gram-positive
and the gram-negative (121, 228). Although the Gram reaction
is an empirical criterion, its basis lies in the marked differences
in the ultrastructure and chemical composition of the cell wall
(14, 192, 228, 229, 235). The Gram-positive bacteria in general
contain a thick cell wall (20 to 80 nm) that is very rich in
cross-linked peptidoglycan (accounting for between 40 and
90% of the dry weight) and also containing teichoic acids,
teichuronic acid, and polysaccharides (6, 14, 192, 229). Because
of their rigid cell walls, these bacteria have been named Fir-
micutes in Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology (174); a
number of other bacteria which possess the above structural
characteristics but may show gram-variable (or gram-negative)
staining are also placed in the same group. In contrast, all
“true” gram-negative bacteria, named Gracilicutes in Bergey’s
Manual (174), have only a thin layer of peptidoglycan (2 to 3
nm) and have, in addition to the cytoplasmic membrane, an
outer membrane containing lipopolysaccharides, which lies
outside of the peptidoglycan layer. As noted by Tru¨per and
Schleifer (244) “A clear separation of the Gram-positive and
Gram-negative bacteria can be obtained by the differences in
the ultrastructure and chemical composition of the cell wall”.
In the present work, I have used the term “gram negative
bacteria” to describe prokaryotes whose envelopes contain a
cytoplasmic membrane, a murine cell wall, and an outer mem-
brane rather than by their Gram-staining response.
Based on the nature of the bounding layer of the cells, which
is reflected in the Gram-staining reaction, a major microbiol-
ogy textbook (228) suggested the division of prokaryotes into
three main groups: “The Mycoplasma which do not synthesize
a cell wall, the membrane serving as the outer bounding layer;
the Gram-positive bacteria, which synthesize a monolayered
cell wall; and the Gram-negative bacteria, which synthesize a
cell wall composed of at least two structurally distinct layers.”
Although they could not know the extent of the problem, many
earlier bacteriologists recognized the importance of cell struc-
ture and the bounding layer in the classification of prokaryotes:
“It is self evident that the shape of the cell is of outstanding
importance for determining the place of bacterium in any
phylogenetic system” (140). However, as noted in a leading
textbook, distinguishing between cells containing different
types of envelopes was not an easy task (228): “The Gram-
staining procedure is not always a wholly reliable method (and)
the differentiation of these two subgroups (i.e., Gram-positive
and Gram-negative) by other and more reliable methods is not
easy; it requires either electron microscopic examination of
wall structure in thin sections of the cells or chemical detection
of the group specific polymers.” In view of these difficulties, the
results obtained were often difficult to integrate into a coherent
scheme (24, 121, 174, 194, 195, 227, 228, 230, 245).
By the late 1950s and early 1960s, when microbiologists were
feeling increasingly frustrated in their attempts to understand
the natural relationship among prokaryotes, the era of molec-
ular biology dawned. With this came the important realization,
spelled out clearly by Zuckerkandl and Pauling (264), that the
linear sequences of bases and amino acids in nucleic acids and
proteins are informative documents containing a record of
organismal evolutionary history from the very beginning and
that in this regard the prokaryotic organisms are just as com-
plex and informative as any eukaryote (65, 264). Thus, a com-
parison of sequences of the same gene or protein from various
species could be used to deduce and reconstruct the evolution-
ary history of organisms. This marked the beginning of the field
of molecular evolution. The rationale for using molecular se-
quence data to deduce the evolutionary relationship between
organisms is described in a number of excellent reviews (58, 60,
61, 64, 65, 178, 236) and is not covered here except for certain
relevant points.
The initial molecular approaches based on DNA base com-
position, nucleic acid hybridization, and immunological cross-
reactivities were of limited use and were generally successful in
establishing or rejecting relationships only among bacteria that
were thought to be closely related species (224, 226, 228). The
full impact of the molecular approach on evolutionary biology
did not become evident until Woese and coworkers (71, 250,
256) had completed systematic studies of a significant number
of living organisms based on the small-subunit rRNA se-
quences (SSU or 16S rRNA). The earlier studies in this regard
were based on comparison of the oligonucleotide catalogs of
the 16S rRNA, but these were later supplanted by phylogenetic
analysis based on complete sequences of the molecules. These
studies revealed that, based on genetic distances and signature
sequences in the 16S rRNA, various prokaryotic and eukary-
otic organisms fell into three distinct groups (71, 250, 256).
One group consisted of all eukaryotic organisms, the second
consisted of all commonly known bacteria (the term “eubac-
teria” was suggested for this group) including various genera of
gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria and cyanobacteria,
and the third group consisted of a number of previously little-
studied prokaryotes (methanogens, extreme thermoacidophiles,
and extreme halophiles) which grow in unusual habitats. Because
of their assumed antiquity, this last group of prokaryotes was
named “archaebacteria” (256).
In terms of their genetic distances (or similarity coefficients
from oligonucleotide catalogs) based on rRNA, the archaebac-
teria were no more closely related to the eubacteria than to the
eukaryotes. This observation, in conjunction with a number of
unique characteristics of archaebacteria (e.g., lack of muramic
acid in cell walls [127)] membrane lipids that contain ether-
linked isoprenoid side chains [127, 133)], distinctive RNA poly-
merase subunits structures [263], and lack of ribothymine in
the TCC loop of tRNA), led Woese and collaborators to
propose that the archaebacteria were totally distinct from
other bacteria and constituted one of the three aboriginal lines
of descent from the universal ancestor (71, 250, 256). The
prokaryotes thus consisted of two distinct and non-overlapping
(i.e., monophyletic) groups: eubacteria and archaebacteria,
which were no more specifically related to each other than
either was to the eukaryotes (250, 256). Since microbiology at
the time was lacking any formal basis for phylogeny, this pro-
posal, based on more defined and quantitative molecular char-
acteristics, was generally favorably received, and within a de-
cade most microbiology textbooks took notice of or were
revised in the light of these new findings (6, 8, 14, 121, 192,
229).
The archaebacterial proposal received a major boost in 1989
when the phylogenies based on a number of protein sequences
were added to the analysis, including those for the protein
synthesis elongation factors EF-1a/Tu and EF-2/G, RNA poly-
merase subunits II and III, and F- and V-type ATPases (82,
126, 196). These studies again supported the distinctness of
archaebacteria from eubacteria. Further, in contrast to the
rRNA phylogeny, where only an unrooted tree was possible for
archaebacteria, eubacteria, and eukaryotes, for the paralogous
pairs of protein sequences (namely, EF-Tu and EF-G; and F-
and V-ATPases) which appeared to be the results of ancient
gene duplication events in the common ancestor of all extant
life, it was possible to root the universal tree by using one set
of genes as an outgroup for the other (82, 126). These studies
indicated that the root of the universal tree lay between ar-
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1437
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
chaebacteria and eubacteria, and in both cases the eukaryotes
were indicated as specific relatives of archaebacteria (82, 126).
In 1990, Woese et al. (258) adopted this rooting, and a formal
three-domain proposal for the classification of organisms was
put forward. The proposal assigned each of the three groups,
archaebacteria, eubacteria, and eukaryotes, a Domain status (a
new highest taxonomic level) and renamed them Archaea, Bac-
teria, and Eucarya. The name Archaea was specifically pro-
posed to indicate that this group of prokaryotes bear no spe-
cific relationship to the other prokaryotes (i.e., Bacteria or
eubacteria) (258). This rooted version of the universal tree
(Fig. 1a), commonly referred to as the archaebacterial or
three-domain tree, is now widely accepted as the current par-
adigm in the field (54, 91, 171, 187, 258).
But does this tree or view represent the true relationship
between the organisms? In recent years, much new informa-
tion based on a large number of gene and protein sequences,
including the complete genomes of several prokaryotic and
eukaryotic organisms, has become available (26, 45, 66, 72, 73,
80, 119, 128, 138, 147, 215, 242). Based on this information, it
is now possible to critically evaluate the three-domain proposal
and its various predictions and to determine if this view is
supported by all data or is true only for a subset of gene and
protein sequences. These studies should also indicate whether
a different sort of relationship between the organisms is more
consistent with most of the available data. Since most biologists
are not familiar with the assumptions and pitfalls of phyloge-
netic analyses, I will try to point out the strengths as well the
subjective and weak aspects of such analyses so that the read-
ers can understand and evaluate the results which form the
bases for any classification.
MOLECULAR PHYLOGENIES: ASSUMPTIONS,
LIMITATIONS, AND PITFALLS
The use of molecular sequences for phylogenetic studies is
based on the assumption that changes in gene sequences occur
randomly and in a time-dependent manner and that a certain
proportion of these become fixed in the molecules (58, 65, 136,
178, 236). The accumulation of changes in gene sequences in a
quasi clock-like manner has given rise to the concept of “evo-
lutionary clock” or molecular chronometer (136). Following
the clock analogy (252), just as different hands or features (e.g.,
the month, day, minute, and second) in a clock move at very
different rates, the changes in different gene sequences (or
sometimes within different parts of the same gene) also occur
at vastly different rates. Thus, some sequences which change
very slowly (like the year, month, or day) are well suited for
monitoring ancient events, while others, with a higher rate of
change (like the hour, minute, or second), provide the sensi-
tivity and resolution to measure relatively recent occurrences.
Since the evolutionary history of life on this planet spans a vast
period (approximately 3.8 Ga, 109 years), different sequences
have different utilities in evolutionary studies. In the present
context, where our main focus is on examining very ancient
evolutionary events (e.g., relationships within the higher pro-
karyotic taxa and the origin of eukaryotic cells), the sequences
which change very slowly and hence show a high degree of
conservation in all extant organisms (i.e., the best-preserved
molecular fossils) are most useful.
Phylogenetic analysis can be carried out based on either
nucleic acid or protein sequences. For noncoding sequences
such as various rRNAs, tRNAs, and introns, phylogenetic anal-
ysis can be carried out based on only the nucleotide sequence
data. However, for gene sequences that encode proteins, anal-
yses can be performed based on either the nucleic acid or the
amino acid sequence data. For proteins, the two kinds of anal-
yses appear analogous at first. In fact, the analysis based on
nucleic acid sequences, with three times as many characters,
would seem to be more informative (181, 250). While this is
true in principle, for phylogenetic analyses involving distantly
related taxa the increased information content in nucleic acid
sequences as opposed to protein sequences is merely an illu-
sion and in most cases is a major liability. The main reason for
this lies in the degeneracy of the genetic code. All but two
amino acids (Met and Trp) are encoded by at least two codons
which differ in the third position. In view of this degeneracy,
most changes in the third codon positions are selectively neu-
tral (i.e., they do not result in any change in the protein se-
quence) and, as a consequence, change frequently even in
closely related species (58, 60, 136). In distantly related taxa,
which diverged from each other a long time ago, the bases at
the third codon positions may have changed so many times that
the actual bases found at these positions are random in nature
and their information content is virtually nil. The inclusion of
such bases in the analyses, therefore, would lead to uncertainty
at every third position, thereby reducing the signal (i.e., posi-
tions which are evolutionary important)-to-noise (i.e., posi-
tions or changes which provide no evolutionary information)
ratio in the data set.
Another important factor affecting the usefulness of nucleic
acid sequences compared to protein sequences relates to the
differences in the genomic G1C content of species (113, 231).
The G1C content of different species is known to differ greatly
(this is often true for two species within the same genus as
well), and it is generally homogenized over the entire genome.
In the protein-coding sequences, these differences in the G1C
contents are accommodated by selective changes (i.e., codon
preferences) in the third codon positions. The species which
are rich in G1C show a strong preference for codons that have
G or C in the third position (often .90%), whereas species
with low G1C content predominantly utilize the codons with
A or T in these positions. Thus, two unrelated species with
similar G1C contents (e.g., either very high or very low) may
have very similar bases in the third codon positions. If phylo-
genetic analysis is carried out based on nucleic acid sequences,
these species may show a strong affinity for each other but for
the wrong reason (113, 231). Thus, the third codon positions,
rather than being informative, can introduce major bias into
the analyses. For a similar reason but to a lesser extent, the
bases in the first codon positions are also evolutionarily less
informative and can cause reduced signal-to-noise ratio. Thus,
FIG. 2. Alignment of representative Hsp70 sequences from archaebacteria (A), gram-positive bacteria (G1), gram-negative bacteria (G2), eukaryotic-organellar
(O), and eukaryotic nuclear-cytosolic (E) homologs. Small regions from the N- and C-terminal ends, which are not properly aligned in the global alignment of sequences
and hence are not included in phylogenetic analyses, are not shown. The dashes indicate identity to the residue in the top line. The accession numbers of the sequences
are shown. The boxed region shows the large insert in the N-terminal region present in all gram-negative bacteria and eukaryotic homologs. The solid lines above the
sequence alignment identify several highly conserved regions that have proven useful to design degenerate primers for cloning purposes (57, 76, 102, 103, 107). The
numbers at the beginning and at the end of the alignment denote the positions of the first and last amino acids included in individual protein sequences. The sequences
were aligned by using the CLUSTAL program from PC Gene software package (IntelliGenetics), and minor changes were made to correct any visible misalignments.
The abbreviations (m) and (chl) identify mitochondria and chloroplasts.
1438 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1439
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
FIG. 2—Continued.
1440 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
in the phylogenetic analyses of distantly related taxa with vary-
ing G1C contents, the larger number of characters in the
nucleic acid sequences does not offer any real advantage, and
if the bases at the third codon positions (and often those at the
first positions as well) are not excluded from the analyses,
misleading results could be obtained. In view of these consid-
erations, for the protein-coding regions, the amino acid se-
quences, which are minimally affected by the differences in the
G1C contents of the species, have proven more reliable and
are the preferred choice for phylogenetic analyses (111, 113,
231).
In contrast to the protein-coding regions, where the codon
degeneracy provides a natural mechanism for accommodating
changes caused by G1C drifts, the effect of varying G1C
compositions on structural nucleic acid sequences such as
rRNA or tRNA remains largely undetermined. Thus, when
comparing sequences from different species with varying G1C
compositions, it is difficult to distinguish between the changes
that are due to G1C drift (evolutionarily not significant) from
those that are evolutionarily important. Thus, in any analyses
based on structural nucleic acid sequences, the signal-to-noise
ratio is inherently low. The effect that this will have on phylo-
genetic reconstruction cannot be easily determined or cor-
rected, but this is a major and continuing source of concern in
phylogenetic studies based on structural nucleic acids such as
the 16S rRNA. As pointed out by Woese (251), “The problem
(of) disparity in base composition is far more troublesome than
is generally recognized and has almost received no attention to
date. . . . It is important to understand the extent to which the
general pattern reflects rRNA compositional disparity rather
than the true phylogeny.”
Another major problem in phylogenetic analyses is the reli-
ability of the sequence alignment. The alignment of homolo-
gous positions in a set of sequences is the starting point in
phylogenetic analyses from which all inferences are derived.
Hence, the importance of having a reliable alignment for phy-
logenetic studies cannot be overemphasized. Most sequence
alignment programs work by recognizing local similarity in
different parts of molecules and then creating an alignment of
all positions which maximizes the number of matches between
the sequences, keeping the number of gaps introduced to a
minimum (117). Although the alignment programs work sim-
ilarly for both nucleic acid and protein sequences, there are
important differences. In nucleic acid sequences there are only
four characters, and hence the number of matches between any
two sequences (unrelated) is expected to be a minimum of
25%; with the introduction of a small number of gaps, it is
commonly in the range of 40 to 50%. In view of this, the
probability of chance alignment of nonhomologous regions in
two sequences is quite high, particularly if the sequences being
compared are of different lengths and have either unusually
high or low G1C contents. In contrast, in proteins each char-
acter has 20 states, which greatly reduces the probability of
chance alignment between nonhomologous regions. There are
no standard criteria for a good alignment, but it is generally
assessed empirically by means of visual inspection. If the set of
sequences contains highly conserved regions dispersed
throughout the alignment, the proper alignment of such re-
gions in all sequences is indicative of a good alignment. How-
ever, for sequences which do not contain many such regions, it
is often difficult to get a reliable alignment for phylogenetic
studies. Very often, differences in sequence alignment, the
regions included in the phylogenetic analyses, or even the
order in which the sequences are added in an alignment (151)
could lead to important differences in the inferences drawn
(42, 112).
Most extensive phylogenetic studies of living organisms have
been carried out based on the SSU rRNA sequences (8, 77, 86,
149, 152, 224), which have been called the “ultimate molecular
chronometers” by Woese (250). However, the alignment of
rRNA sequences from various prokaryotic and eukaryotic spe-
cies presents unique problems. In view of the large differences
in the lengths of prokaryotic ('1,500 nucleotides) and eukary-
otic ('2,000 nt) SSU rRNAs (mitochondrial SSU rRNA from
some species is only 612 bp long [89]) and the wide variations
in the G1C contents of species, a reliable alignment of rRNA
sequences from distantly related taxa cannot easily be obtained
based on the primary sequence data alone. The approach
taken to get around this problem is to rely on the secondary-
structure models of rRNA, based on the assumption that the
secondary structure of the rRNA is highly conserved and pro-
vides a reliable guide for identification of homologous posi-
tions (252, 257, 259). Based on this, portions of the folded
molecules (i.e., particular loops or stems) that are postulated
to be similar in different sequences are aligned and used for
phylogenetic studies.
The use of secondary-structure models for identification and
alignment of homologous positions in the SSU rRNA is a very
serious and far-reaching assumption. From an energetic point
of view, the SSU rRNA can assume many different but equally
likely secondary structures (259). While the proposed struc-
tures of rRNAs are supported by enzymatic digestion and
chemical modification studies of some species (257, 259), their
validity in distantly related prokaryotic and eukaryotic taxa is
far from established. The effect that these far-reaching as-
sumptions, on which all rRNA alignments are based (8, 33,
181, 184, 189, 224, 251), will have on the deduced phylogenetic
relationships remains to be determined. However, it is clear
that these assumptions have the potential to profoundly influ-
ence the outcome of any analyses (111).
In contrast to the rRNA sequence alignment, alignment of
amino acid sequences of a highly conserved protein such as the
70-kDa heat shock chaperone protein (Hsp70) requires mini-
mal or no assumptions. Because of the similar size of this
protein in various prokaryotic and eukaryotic species (includ-
ing organellar homologs) and its high degree of sequence con-
servation, a good alignment of the sequences from various
species is readily obtained by using any common sequence
alignment program (117) or even manually by placing the se-
quences next to each other. Figure 2 shows an alignment of 25
Hsp70 sequences covering the prokaryotic and eukaryotic
spectrum as well as organellar homologs. The alignment shown
was obtained with the CLUSTAL program from the PCGENE
software, and only minor corrections to it have been made
manually. The large number of identical and conserved resi-
dues present throughout the length of this alignment gives
confidence that the observed alignment is reliable. The global
alignment of Hsp70 sequences shows many regions that are
nearly completely conserved in all species. Degenerate primers
based on these sequences have been successfully used to clone
the gene encoding Hsp70 from a wide range of prokaryotic and
eukaryotic organisms (56, 57, 76, 102, 103, 107, 108).
Once a (reliable!) sequence alignment has been obtained,
three main types of methods are used for phylogenetic recon-
struction: those based on maximum parsimony (58, 64), those
based on pairwise genetic distances between the species (65,
207), and the maximum-likelihood method (58, 137). These
methods interpret the sequence alignment in different ways,
and therefore the results obtained from them often differ (110,
238). All these methods, as well as the others (e.g., evolution-
ary parsimony [152]), can give rise to incorrect relationships
under different conditions. Five main factors affecting the out-
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1441
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
come of these analyses are (i) an underestimation of the num-
ber of genetic changes between the species (often multiple
changes in a position are counted as either one or no change);
(ii) the long-branch-length effect, where two distantly related
taxa may appear more closely related than they truly are if
there are no intermediate taxa to break the long branches (62);
(iii) large differences in the evolutionary rates among different
species in the data set; (iv) horizontal or lateral gene transfers
between the species (236a); and (v) comparison of paralogous
sequences which are the results of unidentified ancient gene
duplication events (62, 110, 152, 233, 238). In most cases, it is
difficult to ascertain the effects of different factors and to de-
termine which phylogenetic method is more suitable or reli-
able. Hence, phylogenetic analyses are generally carried out by
different methods to see if all the methods give similar results.
The reliability of phylogenetic relationships inferred from
the above methods is commonly assessed by performing a
bootstrap test (59). In this test, the aligned sequences are
sampled randomly and certain numbers of columns in the
original alignment are replaced with columns from elsewhere
in the sequences to obtain 100 or more different alignments,
each containing the same number of columns. Thus, in a given
bootstrap set, some columns will not be included at all, others
will be included once, and still others will be repeated two or
more times. Phylogenetic analysis is then performed on each of
the bootstrap replicates, and a consensus tree from this data is
drawn. The main purpose that bootstrap analyses serve is to
provide a measure of the variability of the phylogenetic esti-
mate or confidence levels in the observed evolutionary rela-
tionships. If the sample data throughout the sequence length
support a particular relationship, this will be reflected in the
grouping of the species in all (or a vast majority) of the boot-
straps. The results of these analyses are presented by placing
bootstrap scores (indicated by the percentages or the number
of times that different species group together in bootstrap
trees) on different nodes in the tree. Bootstrap values of .80
to 85% are generally considered to provide good support for a
specific phylogenetic relationship.
Despite due care in the alignment and analyses of the se-
quence data, interpretation of the phylogenetic trees that are
obtained is not straightforward. The most common problem in
this regard is that phylogenetic trees based on different genes
or proteins may differ from each other in terms of the evolu-
tionary information that they provide. Based on the clock anal-
ogy discussed above, some genes are better suited to resolve
certain relationships than are others. Thus, while a particular
relationship may be clearly resolved and strongly supported by
one gene phylogeny, the same relationship may not be obvious
from a different gene phylogeny. Such results are generally
regarded as controversial by many scientists, including evolu-
tionary biologists (49, 53, 69, 70), but it is important to realize
that they are not. Part of the problem in the interpretation of
new data stems from the commonly held perception that phy-
logenetic trees based on just one or two molecules (e.g., 16S
rRNA) can clearly establish the evolutionary relationships be-
tween all extant species (181, 184, 188, 202, 224, 250–252). This
means that any results that do not concur with the 16S rRNA
phylogenies are generally considered deviant and suspicious
(69). However, such a notion is clearly erroneous, in view of
the limitations of the rRNA-based phylogenies noted above
and the inability of the 16S rRNA trees to resolve the branch-
ing orders of the deeply lying taxa within eubacteria: “(In the
16S rRNA phylogeny) the majority of the bacterial phyla arise
in such a tight radiation that their exact order of branching has
yet to be resolved” (252).
Cognizant of these problems, many scientists working in this
area have urged caution in the interpretation of phylogenetic
data. Woese wrote (252): “The scientifically proper stance for
the microbiologists to take at this juncture will be to treat these
phylogenies (bacterial) as hypotheses, and test them using
other molecules, phenotypic characteristics of the organisms,
and so on. When the same or very similar relationships are
given by different molecular systems or when new phenotypic
similarities consistent with the projected phylogenies turn up,
then that phylogeny can be confidently accepted”; Rothschild
et al. wrote (202): “We encourage phylogenetic analyses where
molecular approaches are evaluated in the light of other avail-
able data, and where the strengths as well as subjective and
weak aspects of the analyses are made explicit”; and Murray et
al. stated (177): “The integrated use of phylogenetic and phe-
notypic characteristics, called polyphasic taxonomy (38), is nec-
essary for the delineation of taxa at all levels from Kingdom to
genus”. I do not think any evolutionary scientist will disagree
with the above statements or suggested approaches.
It is clear from the above discussion that the results of
phylogenetic analyses should not be uncritically accepted but
instead should be evaluated in the light of other available data,
including data from morphological, geological, and fossil
sources. There is also a pressing need to develop additional
sequence-based criteria for determining the evolutionary rela-
tionships among species, which are based on minimal assump-
tions and which could be readily understood and interpreted by
both specialists and nonspecialists. In the next few sections, I
present evidence that conserved inserts or deletions restricted
to specific taxa (170), which are referred to as signature se-
quences in the present work, provide such criteria.
SEQUENCE SIGNATURES AND THEIR IMPORTANCE
IN EVOLUTIONARY STUDIES
Signature sequences in proteins could be defined as regions
in the alignments where a specific change is observed in the
primary structure of a protein in all members of one or more
taxa but not in the other taxa (99, 107, 198). The changes in the
sequence could be either the presence of particular amino acid
substitutions or specific deletions or insertions (i.e., indels). In
all cases, the signatures must be flanked by regions that are
conserved in all the sequences under consideration. These
conserved regions serve as anchors to ensure that the observed
signature is not an artifact resulting from improper alignment
or from sequencing errors. Although changes of various kinds
can serve as sequence signatures (56, 99), in the analyses pre-
sented here I have mainly considered only signatures involving
indels. My reason for focusing on indels is that I think they are
less likely to result from independent mutational events occur-
ring over a long period (see below), compared with change in
nucleotides and hence amino acids. Since this review is the first
detailed attempt to use conserved indels as phylogenetic mark-
ers to discern the course of evolutionary history, a discussion of
the rationale for such studies as well as their limitations and
pitfalls is provided.
The rationale of using conserved indels in evolutionary stud-
ies could briefly be described as follows. When a conserved
indel of defined length and sequence, and flanked by conserved
regions (which ensure that the observed changes are not due to
improper alignment or sequencing errors), is found at precisely
the same position in homologs from different species, the sim-
plest and most parsimonious explanation for this observation is
that the indel was introduced only once during the course of
evolution and then passed on to all descendants. This is a
minimal assumption implicit in most evolutionary analyses.
1442 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Thus, based on the presence or absence of a signature se-
quence, the species containing or lacking the signature can be
divided into two distinct groups, which bear a specific evolu-
tionary relationship to each other. A well-defined indel in a
gene or protein also provides a very useful milestone for evo-
lutionary events, since all species emerging from the ancestral
cell in which the indel was first introduced are expected to
contain the indel whereas all species that existed before this
event or which did not evolve from this ancestor will lack the
indel. Further, if specific indels could be identified in proteins
that coincide with or were introduced at critical branch points
during the course of evolution, such signatures could serve as
important phylogenetic markers for distinguishing among ma-
jor groups of organisms.
In using conserved indels as phylogenetic markers, two po-
tentially serious problems that could affect the interpretation
of any data should be kept in mind. First, there is the possibility
that the observed indel was introduced on multiple occasions
in different species due to similar functional constraints and
selection pressure rather than being derived from a common
ancestor. Second, lateral gene transfer between species could
also readily account for the presence of shared sequence fea-
tures in particular groups of organisms. While a definitive
resolution of the question whether a given sequence signature
is due to common ancestry or results from these two causes is
difficult in most cases, important insights concerning the sig-
nificance of such data are often provided by consideration of
information from other sources.
The most important and relevant information bearing on
this issue is provided by consideration of cell structure and
physiology. In this context, it should be emphasized that the
aim of phylogenetic analysis is to explain and reconstruct the
evolutionary history of organisms. Hence, the structural and
physiological characteristics of organisms are of central impor-
tance, and they should be the ultimate arbiter in determining
the significance of such data. Without this context, phyloge-
netic analysis of sequence data could become an end in itself,
bearing little relation to the organisms. Therefore, if the infer-
ence derived from a given signature sequence or phylogenetic
analysis is consistent with an important structural (e.g., cell
envelope structure) or physiological attribute of the organisms,
it is likely that we are on the right track, and it gives confidence
in the correctness of the inference. On the other hand, if the
inferences based on signature sequences and phylogenetic
analyses are at a variance with important structural and
physiological characteristics, one should ask questions about
why it is so rather than distrusting or ignoring these char-
acteristics.
Another useful criterion in assessing whether a given signa-
ture is of evolutionary significance is provided by its species
distribution. If a given sequence signature is present in all
known members of a given taxa, it is more probable that it was
introduced only once in a common ancestor of the group and
then passed on to all descendants. In such cases, phylogenies
based on other gene sequences are also expected to be gener-
ally consistent with and support the inference drawn from the
signature. In contrast, when a shared indel is present either in
only certain members of particular taxa or when species con-
taining the signature show no obvious structural or physiolog-
ical relationship, the possibility that the observed signature is a
result of independent evolutionary events or horizontal gene
transfers becomes more likely. In our analysis, we have come
across several examples of signature sequences which provide
evidence of lateral gene transfers between species (unpub-
lished results). Such signatures are of limited use in deducing
phylogenetic analysis and, except for a few, will not be de-
scribed here.
The presence of well-defined signature sequences in pro-
teins should allow one to establish evolutionary relationships
among species by means of molecular cladistic analysis. This
approach, although not generally applicable to all proteins
(because most proteins do not contain useful sequence signa-
tures), has certain advantages over traditional phylogenetic
analyses based on the gene or protein sequences. First, in
traditional phylogenetic analysis, the evolutionary relation-
ships among different species are determined based upon the
assumption of a constancy of evolutionary rate in all species
(58, 60, 65, 136). Since this assumption is rarely correct over
long periods (84), the differences in evolutionary rates could
lead to incorrect species relationships. However, the signature
sequences, such as conserved indels of defined sizes, should
not be greatly affected by the differences in evolutionary rates.
The proteins which are greatly affected by the differences in
evolutionary rates are unlikely to contain well-defined indels in
conserved regions and hence will be excluded from consider-
ation. A second common and serious source of problems in
phylogenetic analysis involves sequencing errors, and anyone
involved in DNA sequencing should be familiar with this. For
example, sequence compressions which are not satisfactorily
resolved are a common occurrence, particularly in G1C-rich
sequences. The errors introduced in reading such regions
could lead to either localized (from base and amino acid sub-
stitutions) or extended (from frameshifts) changes in the gene
or protein sequences. In one study, the error frequency in
DNA sequences in the databases has been estimated at 3.55%
(146), although other estimates indicate it to be much lower
(145). An additional but related problem involves the increas-
ing number of sequences in the databases which have been
obtained by PCR amplification and sequenced by automated
means. The higher rates of sequence errors and contamination
in such sequences should be a cause of concern. These factors
could affect the branching orders of species in phylogenetic
trees. However, it is highly unlikely that a sequencing error
could give rise to an indel of a defined length and sequence at
a precise position within a conserved region. A signature of
even one amino acid involves the addition or deletion of three
nucleotides in the DNA sequence at a precise position and
hence is highly significant. Third, a very common problem in
evolutionary analyses (discussed in the previous section) is that
the phylogenetic trees based on certain genes (or proteins)
may fail to resolve the branching orders (e.g., low bootstrap
scores for the nodes) for particular groups of species and hence
the results of these studies will be indeterminate; i.e., they
neither support nor refute a particular relationship (21, 85).
However, this is not a problem in the case of signature se-
quences, where the relationship is assessed based on the pres-
ence or absence of a given signature and thus its interpretation
is unambiguous. One expects that the relationship indicated by
signature sequences should generally be consistent with and
supported by the phylogenetic analysis based on other gene or
protein sequences. However, the analyses based on signature
sequences are limited in one sense: whereas a phylogenetic
tree provides information about evolutionary interrelation-
ships among all species in a tree, a given signature sequence is
limited to distinguishing and establishing the evolutionary re-
lationship between the two groups of species, i.e., those con-
taining and those lacking the signature.
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1443
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
ROOT OF THE PROKARYOTIC TREE: ANCESTRAL
NATURE OF ARCHAEBACTERIA AND
GRAM-POSITIVE BACTERIA
To fully understand and correctly interpret the implications
of a given sequence signature, a reference point is required.
When an indel is present in one group of species and absent
from others, it is difficult to say a priori which of these groups
is ancestral and which is derived. While this problem cannot be
resolved in most cases, one instance where valuable additional
information helpful in resolving this question is available cor-
responds to a signature identified in the Hsp70 family of pro-
teins. Hsp70 homologs from different gram-negative bacteria
contain a conserved insert of 21 to 23 amino acids which is not
present in any homolog from gram-positive bacteria or archae-
bacteria (Fig. 3) (103, 107, 108). This sequence signature could
result either from a deletion in the common ancestor of all
archaebacteria and gram-positive bacteria or from an insertion
in the common ancestor of all gram-negative bacteria. De-
pending upon which of these scenarios is correct, one of these
groups of prokaryotes becomes ancestral and the other be-
comes derived. Resolution of this question is provided by a
number of different observations.
First, based on the duplicated gene sequences for EF-1a/Tu
and EF-2/G proteins, where one set of sequences could be
used to root the other tree, the roots of both EF-1a/Tu and
EF-2/G trees have been shown to lie between the archaebac-
terial lineage and the eubacterial species Thermotoga maritima
(7, 21, 112). A tree for EF-1a/Tu sequences, which was rooted
by using EF-2/G, is shown in Fig. 4. As seen in this figure, the
root of the tree lies in between archaebacteria and eubacteria
and the deepest branches within eubacteria consist of T. ma-
ritima and other gram-positive bacteria. A similar rooting of
the universal tree in between archaebacteria and T. maritima
has been independently made based on trees constructed from
homologous isoleucine-, leucine-, and valine-tRNA synthetase
sequences (20). Although the species T. maritima has been
assumed to be a gram-negative bacterium in the past (184, 250,
251, 258), recent studies based on several proteins provide
evidence that it should in fact be grouped with gram-positive
bacteria (22). This inference is supported by signature se-
quences in Hsp70 (Fig. 3) and a number of other proteins (see
“Evolutionary relationships among prokaryotes”), where T.
maritima behaves similarly to various gram-positive bacteria
and differently from different gram-negative bacteria. Phyloge-
netic analyses based on a number of proteins, i.e., Rec A (55,
131, 247) and sigma factor 70 (39), also provide evidence of a
grouping of T. maritima with gram-positive bacteria. Most im-
portantly, Cavalier-Smith (31) has pointed out that T. mari-
tima, similar to other gram-positive bacteria, is bounded by
only a single unit lipid membrane, which I consider to be the
main defining characteristic of gram-positive bacteria. In view
of these observations, the results of the above rootings indicate
that the root of the prokaryotes lies between archaebacteria
and gram-positive bacteria.
A second independent line of evidence supporting the an-
cestral nature of the clade consisting of archaebacteria and
gram-positive bacteria is provided by a comparison of se-
quences for the Hsp70 and the MreB families of proteins. We
have previously shown that MreB protein, which is about half
the length of Hsp70 (about 340 amino acids [aa], with respect
to 600 to 650 a.a. for Hsp70) and is present in all major groups
of prokaryotes (archaebacteria, gram-positive bacteria, and
gram-negative bacteria), shows significant similarity to the N-
terminal half of Hsp70 sequences (107), where the large indel
in the Hsp70 homologs is present. The three-dimensional
structures of the MreB protein and the N-terminal half of
Hsp70 are also very similar (18, 65a), supporting the view that
these proteins have evolved from a common ancestor (18).
Since both Hsp70 and MreB proteins are found in all main
groups of prokaryotes, they very probably evolved by an an-
cient gene duplication in the universal ancestor, before Hsp70
acquired the C-terminal domain (104, 107). In view of this, we
expect that if the above indel in Hsp70 is an insert in gram-
negative bacteria, the MreB protein sequences should not pos-
sess it. On the other hand, if the homologs containing the
insert are ancestral, this insert should also be found in the
MreB sequences. A comparison of MreB and Hsp70 sequences
from the major group of prokaryotes (Fig. 5) shows that, sim-
ilar to the Hsp70 from archaebacteria and gram-positive bac-
teria, this insert is not present in any of the MreB sequences,
including those from gram-negative bacteria. (It should be
mentioned that since MreB and Hsp70 are very distant ho-
mologs, the sequence similarity between these proteins is lim-
ited. However, despite this fact, the inference that MreB pro-
tein does not contain the insert is quite apparent.) This
observation provides strong independent evidence that the
prokaryotic organisms lacking the insert (i.e., archaebacteria
and gram-positive bacteria) are ancestral and that this insert
was introduced into Hsp70 in a common ancestor of the gram-
negative bacteria (104, 107). I will refer to this insert, which is
a distinguishing feature of gram-negative bacteria and eu-
karyotes, as the diderm insert, signifying its point of evolution-
ary origin.
Lastly, the view that archaebacteria and gram-positive bac-
teria are ancestral lineages is also consistent with the available
evidence concerning the planet’s early environment. Based on
Earth’s geological history, the conditions under which the ear-
liest organisms evolved were hot and anaerobic (Fig. 6). The
widespread prevalence of the ability to exist under these con-
ditions in various archaebacteria and gram-positive bacteria
(67, 186, 232, 250) is consistent with the view that these groups
are ancestral. Based on the above pieces of evidence, all of
which lead to a similar inference, I am going to assume that the
rooting of the prokaryotic tree between (or within) archaebac-
teria and gram-positive bacteria is correct, and I will examine
whether this rooting can explain other observations and phy-
logenies.
The root provides an important reference point for evolu-
tionary studies. By using this reference point, it should now be
possible to understand and interpret signature sequences in
different proteins to piece together the evolutionary relation-
ship and history of the other groups of prokaryotes. In the
following sections, I describe signature sequences in different
groups of species and my interpretation of them based on the
above rooting. Since a great deal of work that follows is based
on signature sequences that are reported for the first time, it is
appropriate to describe the approach taken to identify the
signature sequences. The signature sequences in a number of
proteins such as Hsp70 and Hsp60 were empirically discovered
(96, 104, 107, 108). However, the complete genomes of several
gram-positive bacteria (Mycoplasma genitalium [73], Myco-
plasma pneumoniae [119], and Bacillus subtilis [147], gram-
negative bacteria (Haemophilus influenzae [66], Escherichia coli
[15], Synechococcus sp. strain PCC 6803 [128], Helicobacter
pylori [242], Borrelia burgdorferi [72], and Aquifex aeolicus [45]),
and archaebacteria (Methanococcus jannaschii [26], Meth-
anobacterium thermoautotrophicum [215], and Archaeoglobus
fulgidus [138]) have recently been reported. In view of this, to
search for signature sequences in different proteins, a system-
atic approach was used. For these purposes, we performed a
BLAST search (5) on each of the unique proteins identified in
1444 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
FIG. 3. Signature sequence in Hsp70 proteins showing a specific relationship between archaebacteria (A) and gram-positive bacteria (G1) (both monoderm
prokaryotes) and the distinctness of gram-negative bacteria (G2) (diderm prokaryotes). The large indel common in all gram-negative bacteria (referred to as the diderm
insert) but absent in all monoderm prokaryotes is boxed. In the top diagram, W denotes the root of the prokaryotic tree as inferred in the text. The thick arrow indicates
the probable stage where this signature was introduced. The dashes in all sequence alignments show identity to the amino acids in the top line.
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1445
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
the genomes of M. genitalium, H. influenzae, and M. jannaschii.
The BLAST program compares a given query sequence against
all other proteins and nucleic acid sequences in the databases
(with the nucleic acid sequences translated in different possible
frames) to identify related proteins and present them in the
order from highest to lowest similarity scores. For many pro-
teins, too few high-scoring sequences, which are suggestive of
true homologs, were available to be useful for evolutionary
studies. These proteins were not further considered at this
stage. However, for proteins for which sufficient high-scoring
sequences were identified from the major groups of pro-
karyotes, the sequences for various homologs were retrieved
and a multiple sequence alignment was created with the
CLUSTAL program (117). The sequence alignments were in-
spected visually for signature sequences (indels) that were
shared by all members from particular taxa of prokaryotes. The
indels which were not flanked by conserved regions were
judged to be unreliable and were not considered as signature
sequences in the present work. In cases where useful sequence
signatures were observed in prokaryotic organisms, homologs
from eukaryotic species were also retrieved and aligned to
determine the relationship to the prokaryotes. Much of the
work on the identification of signature sequences was com-
pleted by October 1997, and hence information released after
this date may not be included here.
EVOLUTIONARY RELATIONSHIPS AMONG
PROKARYOTES
That the ancestral organisms were prokaryotes and that the
eukaryotes originated from these at a later time is a view
consistent with the fossil record, which supports the existence
of prokaryotic organisms as far back as 3.5 to 3.8 Ga whereas
the earliest identifiable eukaryotic fossils are only about 1.8 Ga
old (30a, 141, 162, 209). The Earth’s geological and environ-
mental history also supports this view (Fig. 6). There is good
evidence that for the first 2.0 to 2.5 Ga, the Earth’s atmosphere
contained little, if any, oxygen, and hence the earliest organ-
isms that evolved were anaerobic, whereas aerobic organisms
evolved from these at a later time (132, 141, 208, 209). Since
most eukaryotic organisms require oxygen for growth, it is very
likely that they arose at a time when the atmospheric oxygen
content was stable and relatively high (162, 208). There is thus
little doubt that “All of the planet’s early evolutionary history
and well over 90% of life’s phylogenetic diversity lie in the
microbial world” (183). In view of this, the problem of under-
standing the evolutionary relationships among living organisms
could be divided into two distinct parts. In the first part, we will
examine the evolutionary relationship within the prokaryotes
that pre-dated the eukaryotes. In the second part, based on our
understanding of the prokaryotes, we will try to determine how
FIG. 4. A rooted neighbor-joining tree of prokaryotic organisms based on EF-1a/Tu sequences. The tree was rooted by using aligned EF-2/G sequences, which are
derived from an ancient gene duplication in the common ancestor of prokaryotes (126). The tree shown is a neighbor-joining consensus tree obtained after 100
bootstraps. The bootstrap scores for various nodes are shown. The tree reveals that the root of the prokaryotes lies in between two groups of monoderm prokaryotes.
A, G1, and G2 refer to archaebacteria, gram-positive bacteria, and gram-negative bacteria, respectively.
1446 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
eukaryotic organisms are related to the prokaryotes. It should
be emphasized that these two questions are completely inde-
pendent. Therefore, while considering the evolutionary rela-
tionships within prokaryotes, there is no need to confound or
bias the evolutionary relationships by considering sequences
from various prokaryotes and eukaryotes at the same time, as
has been commonly done in most earlier studies (7, 21, 49, 53,
69, 70, 81, 112, 126, 196, 198, 258, 262).
Signature Sequences Showing the Distinctness
of Archaebacteria
Signature sequences consisting of distinct nucleotides that
are present at particular positions in the SSU rRNA and that
distinguish archaebacteria from other prokaryotes have been
described by Woese (251, 253). The view that archaebacteria
are distinct from other prokaryotes is also supported by signa-
ture sequences in many proteins. The elongation factor EF-
1/Tu provides a well-studied example (Fig. 7a), where a 12-aa
indel is present in various archaebacteria but not in any of the
eubacteria including different genera of gram-positive bacteria
(99, 112). Some other proteins where signature sequences
unique to archaebacteria are found include ribosomal proteins
L5 (Fig. 7b), S5 (Fig. 7c), and L14 (Fig. 7d). As expected from
these signatures, the inference that archaebacteria are distinct
from other prokaryotes is strongly supported by phylogenetic
analyses based on rRNA, EF-1/Tu, and these other proteins (7,
21, 71, 87, 112, 126, 250). For all the above proteins, the
FIG. 5. Alignment of Hsp70 and MreB sequences from different groups of species showing the absence of the diderm insert in the MreB sequences. The absence
of the insert in all MreB proteins, as well as Hsp70 homologs from archaebacteria and gram-positive bacteria (boxed region), provides evidence that the homologs
lacking the insert are ancestral. (104, 107). The numbers at the beginning and at the end indicate the position of the sequence in individual proteins.
FIG. 6. Time line showing some of the main events in the history of this planet based on geological and fossil evidence (132, 141, 208, 209).
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1447
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
1448 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
identified signature sequences are present only in archaebac-
teria but not in any eubacteria. These results support the view
that archaebacteria are monophyletic and distinct from other
prokaryotes. (The question of archaebacterial monophyly and
of the evolutionary relationships within archaebacteria is ex-
amined in detail below; see “Nature of the archaebacterial
group and its relationship to gram-positive bacteria”). In my
working model, which places the root between archaebacteria
and gram-positive bacteria, these signatures were probably in-
troduced in a common ancestor of either archaebacteria or
gram-positive bacteria after separation of the two lineages
(diagram in Fig. 7). In addition to these signature sequences,
the distinctness of archaebacteria from eubacteria is supported
by a number of other genes (21, 144, 183). These include
large-subunit (LSU) rRNA (48); many genes involved in DNA
replication (54), transcription (158, 197, 203), translation (47,
183), tRNA splicing (9), and in histones (197); and the Tcp-1
chaperonin (96). For a number of these genes and proteins, no
eubacterial homologs or any closely related eubacterial ho-
mologs have been found (9, 21, 47, 54, 95, 96, 144, 183, 197).
Signature Sequences Distinguishing Archaebacteria and
Gram-Positive Bacteria from Gram-Negative Bacteria
A specific relationship between archaebacteria and gram-
positive bacteria to the exclusion of other prokaryotes is sug-
FIG. 7. Excerpts from EF-1a/Tu (a), ribosomal protein L5 (b), ribosomal protein S5 (c), and ribosomal protein L14 (d) alignments identifying signature sequences
that show the distinctness of archaebacteria (A) from eubacteria (G1 and G2). The common indels that distinguish archaebacteria from eubacteria are boxed. (The
relationship of prokaryotes to the eukaryotes [E] is considered in later figures). W denotes the root of the prokaryotic tree as inferred in the text, and the thick arrow
indicates the probable stage where these signatures were introduced.
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1449
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
gested by a number of protein sequences. The Hsp70 protein
discussed above provides the best-studied example of such
sequences. As seen in Fig. 3, the Hsp70 homologs from various
archaebacteria and gram-positive bacteria are distinguished
from all other prokaryotic homologs by the absence of the
large diderm insert in their N-terminal quadrant. The species
which do not contain the insert include the methanogenic,
thermoacidophilic (Thermoplasma acidophilum), and halo-
philic archaebacteria and different genera of low-G1C and
high-G1C gram-positive bacteria. The Mycoplasma species,
which lack a cell wall, and a number of other species, e.g.,
Thermotoga maritima and Megasphaera elsdenii, showing anom-
alous Gram staining (251), also lacked the diderm insert, pro-
viding strong evidence for their placement in this group. In
contrast to these groups, all members of other eubacterial
divisions, including the alpha, beta, gamma, delta, and epsilon
subdivisions of the proteobacteria, chlamydias, spirochetes, cy-
tophagas, flavobacteria, cyanobacteria, green nonsulfur bacte-
ria, Deinococcus, Thermus, and Aquifex, which traditionally
form the gram-negative group, contained this insert. The in-
ference from this shared signature sequence that archaebacte-
ria are specific relatives of and more closely related to gram-
positive bacteria than to gram-negative bacteria is strongly
supported by the detailed phylogenetic analyses based on
Hsp70 sequences (56, 57, 85, 103, 104, 108). A neighbor-joining
tree based on Hsp70 sequences is shown in Fig. 8. Various
archaebacteria and gram-positive bacteria grouped together in
99% of the bootstraps, indicating strongly that they are evolu-
tionarily closely related. In contrast, all of the gram-negative
bacteria formed a separate clade, indicating their phylogenetic
distinctness. A close relationship of archaebacteria to gram-
positive bacteria and the distinctness of gram-negative bacteria
are also supported by other phylogenetic methods such as
maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood (85, 104, 108).
Furthermore, it should be noted that the archaebacterial spe-
cies in the Hsp70 tree do not form a monophyletic clade but
instead show polyphyletic branching within gram-positive bac-
teria. The significance and possible interpretations of this ob-
servation are discussed below (see “Nature of the archaebac-
terial group and its relationship to gram-positive bacteria”).
A close and specific relationship between archaebacteria
and gram-positive bacteria is also supported by signature se-
quences in a number of other proteins. In the glutamine syn-
thetase I (GS I) sequences, a conserved insert of 26 aa is
present in all gram-negative bacteria but not in various archae-
bacteria or gram-positive bacteria (Fig. 9a) (22). Similar to the
Hsp70 sequence, T. maritima also lacked the insert in its GS I
sequence, supporting the view that it is a gram-positive bacte-
rium. Aquifex aeolicus, on the other hand contained this insert,
supporting its grouping with gram-negative bacteria as indi-
cated by its Hsp70 sequence signature (Fig. 3). Phylogenetic
analyses of GS I sequences again strongly support the view that
archaebacteria are evolutionarily close relatives of the gram-
positive bacteria and show polyphyletic branching within them
(22, 85, 239). It should be mentioned that although both Hsp70
and GS I sequences show similar relationships, the presence of
two different families of GS sequences in a number of different
soil bacteria means that the evolutionary inferences based on
GS I sequences are not as clear-cut as those based on Hsp70
(22, 239). The GS II homologs from certain soil bacteria in-
cluding some gram-positive bacteria (Streptomyces coelicolor
and S. roseosporus) contain the insert, which is absent in their
GS I sequences (Fig. 9a). These homologs in gram-positive
bacteria are likely derived by means of horizontal gene transfer
from the gram-negative species (146a).
The protein glutamate-1-semialdehyde 2,1-aminomutase
provides another example where a conserved indel is shared by
various archaebacteria and gram-positive bacteria (Fig. 9b) but
not by any of the gram-negative bacteria that have been exam-
ined.
The presence of signatures that are common to archaebac-
teria and gram-positive bacteria but not present in gram-neg-
ative bacteria is best explained in terms of their introduction in
a common ancestor of all gram-negative bacteria (Fig. 9, top
diagram). Further, based on these signatures and those dis-
tinctive for archaebacteria (Fig. 7), it is clear that gram-positive
bacteria are related on the one hand to archaebacteria and on
the other to gram-negative bacteria. Thus, gram-positive bac-
teria occupy an intermediate position between archaebacteria
and gram-negative bacteria, and based on the rooting, the
latter group has evolved from them.
The distinctness of gram-positive bacteria from gram-nega-
tive bacteria is also supported by signature sequences in a
number of other proteins. In the highly conserved Hsp60 or
GroEL protein, where sequence information is available for
most of the known bacterial phyla, including different subdivi-
sions of proteobacteria, chlamydia, spirochetes, cytophagas,
flavobacteria, cyanobacteria, Deinococcus, Thermus, Aquifex,
and different groups of gram-positive bacteria, a 1-aa insert is
present in various gram-negative bacteria (Fig. 10). The spe-
cies Thermus aquaticus and Deinococcus proteolyticus, which
contain an outer membrane, are exceptions which are dis-
cussed below (see “Signature sequences indicating that Deino-
coccus and Thermus are intermediates in the transition from
gram-positive to gram-negative bacteria”). Additional exam-
ples of proteins which show similar behavior to Hsp60 are also
described in this later section. In phylogenetic trees based on
Hsp60 sequences, the gram-negative bacteria form a monophy-
letic clade distinct from various gram-positive bacteria (Fig.
11) (96, 98, 246). The tree shown in Figure 11 is unrooted.
However, in other studies where the Hsp60 tree was rooted
with the TCP-1 protein, which is a distant Hsp60 homolog
present in archaebacteria (95, 243), the low-G1C gram-posi-
tive bacteria were the deepest-branching group within the eu-
bacteria (96, 98).
A Specific Relationship between Archaebacteria and Gram-
Positive Bacteria and the Distinctness of Gram-Negative
Bacteria Is Consistent with Prokaryotic Cell
Structures and Other Gene Phylogenies
The presence of the indicated signatures in Hsp70, GroEL,
and GS I sequences in all members of the main phyla or
divisions within the gram-negative bacteria provides evidence
that this group of prokaryotes is monophyletic and distinct
from archaebacteria and gram-positive bacteria. This inference
is in sharp contrast to that reached based on SSU rRNA
sequences. The trees based on SSU rRNA generally place
gram-positive bacteria between different divisions of gram-
negative bacteria (55, 75, 181, 184, 250, 251). The eubacterial
divisions, consisting of Thermotogales, green nonsulfur bacte-
ria, deinococci, and cyanobacteria, generally show deeper
branching than do gram-positive species, whereas other divi-
sions, including proteobacteria, planctomycetes, spirochetes,
chlamydiae, cytophagas, and flavobacteria, branch either lower
than or in a similar position to gram-positive bacteria (35, 181,
184, 250, 251). However, most published eubacterial phylog-
enies based on rRNA do not give any bootstrap scores or other
measures by which the confidence of these branching orders
may be assessed (181, 184, 250, 251). In a few cases, where
bootstrap scores are indicated, the values for most of the crit-
ical nodes leading to gram-positive bacteria are in the range of
1450 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
25 to 50%, indicating that these branching orders are unreli-
able (55, 75). Thus, as acknowledged by Woese (251, 252), the
branching orders of major eubacterial phyla cannot be resolved
based on SSU rRNA phylogenies. A number of other gene and
protein phylogenies that have been previously studied, e.g., 5S
rRNA (122, 211), LSU rRNA (48), EF-Tu (42, 126), EF-G (16,
42), Rho (185), aspartate aminotransferase (249), glyceralde-
hyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (114), sigma factor 70 (94),
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (20), and RecA (55, 247), and a
large number of proteins examined by Brown and Doolittle
(21) similarly lacked the resolution to clarify the relationship
between gram-positive bacteria and gram-negative bacteria.
The inability of these phylogenies to resolve this relationship
occurs in part because these genes and proteins are not highly
conserved (see also other factors discussed in “Molecular phy-
logenies: assumptions, limitations, and pitfalls”), and for many
of them only limited representation of eubacterial phyla was
available.
Although most earlier gene phylogenies did not resolve the
relationship between gram-positive and gram-negative bacte-
ria, it is important to note that in the vast majority of these
cases, gram-positive prokaryotes were indicated to be the clos-
est relatives of archaebacteria. For example, in the reported
phylogenies for 16S rRNA, EF-1a/Tu, EF-2/G, RNA polymer-
ase, aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, and various ribosomal pro-
teins, which form the basis for defining archaebacteria as a
FIG. 8. Consensus neighbor-joining tree for prokaryotic organisms based on Hsp70 protein sequences. The tree, which was bootstrapped 100 times, is based on 362
aligned positions for which sequence information from all species are known. Other trees based on larger numbers of aligned characters also show similar results (see
Fig. 27) (57, 103, 108). The archaebacterial species (marked with asterisks) show a polyphyletic branching within gram-positive bacteria (both monoderm prokaryotes),
which is statistically strongly supported (95, 108). The gram-negative bacteria (diderm prokaryotes) form a distinct clade in 99% of the bootstraps, which is highly
significant. The relationships and branching orders of some of the main divisions within eubacteria are indicated.
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1451
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
FIG. 9. Signature sequence (boxed insert) in GS I (a) and glutamate-1-semialdehyde 2,1-aminomutase (b), showing the relatedness of archaebacterial (A) homologs
to gram-positive (G1) bacteria and the distinctness of gram-negative (G2) bacteria. The top diagram indicates the suggested interpretation that these signature, as well
as the large diderm insert in Hsp70 protein (Fig. 3), were introduced into a common ancestor of G2 bacteria. (a) G1 (II) identifies sequences from some of the GS
II family of proteins (22, 205). E, eukaryotes.
1452
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
unique domain, the species Thermotoga maritima, which is now
known to be gram positive, shows the closest relationship to
archaebacteria (7, 20, 21, 112, 250). Brown and Doolittle (21)
recently reported phylogenies based on 66 protein sequences
for which sequence information was available from archaebac-
teria, eubacteria, and eukaryotes. They tried to determine
which of the three possible relationships among these groups
(i.e., an archaebacterial-bacterial clade, an archaebacterial-eu-
FIG. 10. Excerpt from the GroEL (or Hsp60) protein sequence alignment showing a 1-aa insertion (boxed) that is shared by most divisions of G2 bacteria but absent
from all G1 bacteria. The absence of this insert in Thermus aquaticus and Deinococcus proteolyticus, which are diderm prokaryotes that contain thick cell walls, indicates
that this insert was introduced into an ancestral gram-negative lineage after the branching of the Deinococcus-Thermus group (thick arrow in the top diagram).
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1453
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
F
IG
.
11
.
E
vo
lu
tio
na
ry
re
la
tio
ns
hi
ps
be
tw
ee
n
eu
ba
ct
er
ia
ls
pe
ci
es
an
d
gr
ou
ps
ba
se
d
on
th
e
G
ro
E
L
(H
sp
60
)
se
qu
en
ce
s.
T
he
tr
ee
sh
ow
n
is
a
co
ns
en
su
s
ne
ig
hb
or
-jo
in
in
g
di
st
an
ce
tr
ee
ob
ta
in
ed
af
te
r
10
0
bo
ot
st
ra
ps
.T
he
di
st
in
ct
br
an
ch
in
g
of
lo
w
-G
1
C
an
d
hi
gh
-G
1
C
gr
am
-p
os
iti
ve
ba
ct
er
ia
an
d
th
ei
r
cl
os
e
re
la
tio
ns
hi
p
to
th
e
cy
an
ob
ac
te
ri
a
sh
ou
ld
be
no
te
d.
T
he
br
an
ch
in
g
or
de
r
of
ot
he
r
pr
ok
ar
yo
tic
gr
ou
ps
in
th
e
G
ro
E
L
tr
ee
is
ve
ry
si
m
ila
r
to
th
at
ob
se
rv
ed
fo
r
H
sp
70
se
qu
en
ce
s
(F
ig
.8
).
Si
m
ila
r
re
su
lts
w
ith
G
ro
E
L
/H
sp
60
se
qu
en
ce
s
ha
ve
be
en
re
po
rt
ed
in
ot
he
r
st
ud
ie
s
(9
6,
98
).
A
lth
ou
gh
th
e
tr
ee
sh
ow
n
he
re
is
un
ro
ot
ed
,i
n
ot
he
r
st
ud
ie
s
(9
6,
98
)
w
he
re
th
e
H
sp
60
tr
ee
w
as
ro
ot
ed
w
ith
th
e
di
st
an
tly
re
la
te
d
T
C
P-
1
pr
ot
ei
n
fr
om
ar
ch
ae
ba
ct
er
ia
(2
43
),
th
e
lo
w
-G
1
C
gr
am
-p
os
iti
ve
ba
ct
er
ia
w
er
e
fo
un
d
to
be
th
e
de
ep
es
t-
br
an
ch
in
g
gr
ou
p
w
ith
in
eu
ba
ct
er
ia
(m
ar
ke
d
w
ith
.
).
R
ep
ro
du
ce
d
fr
om
re
fe
re
nc
e
24
6
w
ith
pe
rm
is
si
on
of
th
e
pu
bl
is
he
r.
1454
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
karyote clade, or a bacterial-eukaryote clade) was supported by
different protein phylogenies. As pointed out above, it is con-
founding the problem to consider the evolutionary relation-
ships between prokaryotes and eukaryotes, as was done in this
study, in the absence of a good understanding of the phylogeny
of prokaryotes. However, if one examines the phylogenetic
trees reported in this review (21) and asks which group of
prokaryotes are the closest relatives of archaebacteria, then for
more than two-thirds of the genes studied, T. maritima or
another gram-positive bacterium was found to be the closest
relative of archaebacteria (Table 1). A closer relation of ar-
chaebacteria to gram-positive bacteria has been acknowledged
by these authors: “In phylogenies supporting an AB (archae-
bacteria-bacteria) grouping, the archael branches are often
among those of the gram-positive bacteria” (21). Thus, a spe-
cific relationship of archaebacteria to gram-positive bacteria is
not restricted to a few proteins but is generally observed for the
majority of the gene and protein sequences (21).
What is the significance of the observed close relationship
between archaebacteria and gram-positive bacteria on the one
hand and the distinctness of gram-negative bacteria on the
other? The answer becomes strikingly clear when the cell struc-
tures of the prokaryotes are considered (228, 241). As dis-
cussed above, based upon their cell structures, the prokaryotic
organisms can be divided into two major groups—those
bounded by a single membrane (termed monoderms) and
those containing inner and outer membranes (termed di-
derms) that define the periplasmic compartment (Fig. 12). All
archaebacteria and gram-positive bacteria belong to the first
group. Some species which lack a cell wall (e.g., Mycoplasma
and Thermoplasma species) or show gram-negative staining
due to other unusual characteristics (e.g., Megasphaera and
Thermotoga species) are also bounded by a single membrane.
The signature sequences and phylogenies based on Hsp70 and
other highly conserved proteins thus distinguish and separate
all monoderm prokaryotes from the diderm prokaryotes.
These results are thus in accordance with the most striking and
fundamental structural difference in the organization of pro-
karyotes (Fig. 12, top). In addition to the presence of an outer
membrane which defines the periplasmic compartment, the
gram-negative bacteria differ from the gram-positive bacteria
in several other respects including thickness of the cell wall,
flagellar structure, and general response to the environment
(124, 180a, 192, 206, 220, 241, 260). According to Tipper and
Wright (241): “The Gram-negative cell has a fundamentally
different strategy toward the external environment than the
Gram-positive cell. In the Gram-negative cells a membrane is
present, external to the peptidoglycan layer, that acts as a
permeability barrier between the external environment and the
cytoplasmic membrane. It is an essential component of all
Gram-negative cells and apparently cannot be dispensed with,
even under laboratory conditions.” Thus, the inferences de-
rived from molecular sequence data are in accordance with
and strongly vindicated by the morphological characteristics of
the prokaryotes.
In contrast to these results, which unite both molecular
sequence data and cell structure characteristics, gram-negative
bacteria (diderm prokaryotes) are not recognized as a distinct
taxon in the three-domain proposal. In the three-domain pro-
posal, while one group of monoderm prokaryotes (i.e., archae-
bacteria) form one domain, other domain is suggested to con-
tain a polyphyletic branching of different monoderm and
diderm prokaryotic phyla (Fig. 1a and 12, bottom) (181, 184,
250–252, 258).
Signature Sequence Distinguishing between Low-G1C
and High-G1C Gram-Positive Bacteria and Pointing
to a Specific Relationship of the Latter Group
to the Gram-Negative Bacteria
The gram-positive bacteria are traditionally divided into two
groups: the high-G1C group and the low-G1C group (6, 14,
TABLE 1. Protein phylogenies where gram-positive bacteria are indicated as the closest prokaryotic relatives of archaebacteriaa
Protein Fig. Protein Fig.
Gyrase B............................................................................................ 6A trpA .................................................................................................. 17A
Photolyase ......................................................................................... 6C trpB................................................................................................... 17Bb
EF-Tu................................................................................................. 8A trpC .................................................................................................. 17C
EF-G/2 ............................................................................................... 8B trpD .................................................................................................. 17D
Isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase.............................................................. 9B hisC .................................................................................................. 18Cb
Tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase ...................................................... 9C hisD .................................................................................................. 18D
Tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase................................................................. 9D hisF................................................................................................... 18Eb
Ribosomal protein L2...................................................................... 10A hisH .................................................................................................. 18Gb
Ribosomal protein L11.................................................................... 11B his1E ................................................................................................ 18H
Ribosomal protein L14.................................................................... 11C IMP dehydrogenase ....................................................................... 19A
Ribosomal protein L15.................................................................... 11D FGAM synthetase .......................................................................... 19B
Ribosomal protein L22.................................................................... 11E Glutamyl-tRNA reductase ............................................................ 19C
Ribosomal protein L23.................................................................... 11F trpG .................................................................................................. 17F
Ribosomal protein L30.................................................................... 12A SecY................................................................................................. 19E
Ribosomal protein S5 ...................................................................... 12B FeMn SOD ..................................................................................... 20Ab
Ribosomal protein S9 ...................................................................... 12E Hsp60/Tcp-1.................................................................................... 20B
Ribosomal protein S10 .................................................................... 12F Glutamine synthetase .................................................................... 16B
Ribosomal protein S15 .................................................................... 13C Glutamate dehydrogenase II ........................................................ 15Cb
Ribosomal protein S19 .................................................................... 13E Argininosuccinate synthase........................................................... 15D
Enolase .............................................................................................. 13F Aspartate aminotransferase.......................................................... 16A
Acetyl-CoA synthetase .................................................................... 15A Histidinol-P-aminotransferase ...................................................... 16A
Citrate synthase ................................................................................ 15B hisG.................................................................................................. 18Fc
Hsp70 ................................................................................................. 5b RNA polymerase A subunit ......................................................... 7ac
a This table is based on the phylogenetic trees published by Brown and Doolittle (21). The relationships indicated are observed upon excluding the eukaryotic
homologs and knowing that T. maritima is a gram-positive bacterium. Figure numbers in this table refer to figures in reference 21. CA, coenzyme A; SOD, superoxide
dismutase.
b Polyphyletic branching of archaebacteria within gram-positive bacteria.
c For these genes, no sequences for gram-positive bacteria were included in the analyses.
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1455
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
184, 192, 228, 229, 250). While the phylogenies based on some
gene sequences, i.e., Hsp 70, GroEL (Hsp60), and sigma 70,
show that these two groups are distinct from each other (94, 96,
99, 103, 108, 246), the relationship between these two subdivi-
sions of prokaryotes is not resolved in a number of other
phylogenies, including those based on SSU rRNA, LSU rRNA,
RecA, EF-Tu, and EF-G (7, 16, 48, 55, 131, 184, 250, 251).
Hence, the question whether these two groups are phyloge-
netically distinct is unclear. The signature sequences in pro-
teins again provide important insight in this regard. In the
ribosomal S12 protein, a 13-aa deletion is present in a highly
conserved region in various members of the high-G1C gram-
positive bacteria as well as gram-negative prokaryotes but not
in any of the low-G1C gram-positive bacteria examined (Fig.
13a). Although this sequence region is not highly conserved
between archaebacteria and bacteria, it is quite clear from the
alignment that this deletion is also not present in any of the
archaebacterial homologs. Another example of a protein show-
ing a similar signature sequence is provided by dihydroorotate
dehydrogenase, where a 2-aa insert in a conserved region is
found in various gram-negative bacteria and high-G1C gram-
positive bacteria examined but not in any of the low-G1C
gram-positive bacteria or archaebacterial homologs. The sig-
nature sequences in these two proteins provide evidence that
members of the high-G1C and the low-G1C gram-positive
bacteria are phylogenetically distinct from each other. Further-
more, based on the results presented above, which suggest that
archaebacteria and gram-positive bacteria are ancestral groups
and that gram-negative bacteria are derived from them, the
presence of these shared signatures in various high-G1C
gram-positive bacteria as well as different gram-negative bac-
teria is strongly indicative that these two groups of prokaryotes
are specifically related to each other and they had a common
ancestor exclusive of the low-G1C gram-positive bacteria (Fig.
13). As shown in Fig. 13, these signature sequences were prob-
ably introduced into the main stem of the tree leading to the
high-G1C gram-positive group as well as the gram-negative
bacteria. These results also provide evidence that among the
gram-positive bacteria, the low-G1C group is ancestral.
Additional signature sequences which appear to be specific
for only the low-G1C gram-positive and the high-G1C gram-
positive groups have been identified. Figure 14 shows a 2-aa
insert in pyruvate kinase that seems specific for only the low-
G1C gram-positive group but is not found in any of the other
prokaryotic homologs. This insert, as shown, was probably in-
troduced into the branch leading to the low-G1C gram-posi-
tive bacteria (Fig. 14). We have also come across a signature
sequence in gyrase A that appears to be specific for the high-
G1C gram-positive group (Fig. 15). This signature was prob-
ably introduced into the branch leading to the high-G1C
gram-positive group.
Signature sequences in the above proteins also provide in-
sights into the placement of T. maritima within the gram-
positive group. Although T. maritima is clearly a Gram-positive
bacterium based on signature sequences in Hsp70 (Fig. 3) and
GS I (Fig. 9a), signature sequences in pyruvate kinase (Fig. 14)
and gyrase A (Fig. 15) show that it does not contain the sig-
natures that appear distinctive for either the low-G1C or high-
G1C gram-positive groups. These observations indicate that
T. maritima probably evolved from the main stem indepen-
dently of the typical low-G1C and high-G1C gram-positive
groups. Signature sequences in Hsp70 (Fig. 3), ribosomal S12
(Fig. 13a), and dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (Fig. 13b) sug-
gest that this branching took place from the common ancestor
of high-G1C gram-positive bacteria and gram-negative bacte-
ria, before the evolution of gram-negative bacteria.
Signature Sequences Indicating that Deinococcus and
Thermus Are Intermediates in the Transition from
Gram-Positive to Gram-Negative Bacteria
The members of the genera Deinococcus and Thermus rep-
resent an interesting group of prokaryotes whose classification
and evolutionary position have presented problems by both
traditional and molecular criteria (19, 39, 176). As noted by
Murray (176) in Bergey’s Manual, the members of the genus
Deinococcus show a positive Gram-staining reaction and pos-
sess a peptidoglycan component of cell wall with a thickness
similar to that of the gram-positive bacteria. Accordingly,
Deinococcus species are recorded as gram positive. However,
Murray (176) also emphasized that on biochemical and struc-
tural grounds, the Deinococcus species are more akin to gram-
negative bacteria than to gram-positive bacteria. For example,
these bacteria have a fatty acid profile that is similar to the
gram-negative bacteria rather than to the gram-positive bacte-
ria (19, 39, 176). Of greater significance is the presence of an
outer cell membrane in the Deinococcus-Thermus group (157,
176), which is a unique and defining characteristic of all gram-
negative species. Phylogenies based on 16S rRNA place Deino-
coccus and Thermus species in a separate lineage branching
below the Thermotogales and in a similar position to cyanobac-
teria and green nonsulfur bacteria (115, 181, 250, 251).
The protein phylogenies and signature sequences provide
important information about the phylogenetic position of
Deinococcus and Thermus within prokaryotes. Interestingly,
similar to the phenotypic characteristics, the sequence data for
different proteins indicate that these organisms can be grouped
with either gram-positive or gram-negative bacteria. For exam-
ple, the presence of the large insert in their Hsp70 protein (Fig.
3), which is a characteristic of all gram-negative bacteria, in-
dicates that these organisms should be classified as gram-neg-
ative bacteria. This inference is in accordance with the pres-
FIG. 12. Evolutionary relationships within prokaryotes as indicated by the
monoderm-diderm model (top) versus the currently popular archaebacterial
model (bottom). It should be noted that the latter model does not recognize
diderm prokaryotes as a distinct taxon and that in phylogenetic trees based on
16S rRNA the gram-positive (monoderms) and gram-negative (diderms) bacte-
ria show polyphyletic branching within each other (183, 250, 251, 258). Abbre-
viations: CM, cytoplasmic membrane; OM, outer membrane; CW, cell wall.
Reproduced from reference 101 with permission of the publisher.
1456 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
FIG. 13. Signature sequence in ribosomal S12 protein (a) and dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (b), distinguishing archaebacteria (A) and the low-G1C gram-positive
bacteria from the high-G1C gram-positive group (G1) and gram-negative bacteria (G2). These signatures (boxed) provide evidence that the gram-negative bacteria
are specifically related to the high-G1C gram-positive group. The asterisks in this and all subsequent alignments identify sequences retrieved from the National Center
for Biotechnology Information unfinished microbial genomes database.
1457
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
ence of an outer cell membrane in these species. In contrast,
signature sequences in the Hsp60 protein (Fig. 10) indicate
that Deinococcus and Thermus lack the 1-aa insert common to
various other gram-negative bacteria and thus are similar to
gram-positive bacteria. Signature sequences in two additional
proteins, acetolactate synthase (Fig. 16a) and asparginyl-tRNA
synthetase (Fig. 16b), also indicate a specific relationship of
these species to the gram-positive bacteria. For asparginyl-
tRNA synthetase, the absence of the insert in the proteobac-
terium Helicobacter pylori is surprising and may represent a
case of horizontal gene transfer.
The above results showing a grouping of the Deinococcus-
Thermus genera with either gram-positive or gram-negative
bacteria, based on signature sequences in different proteins,
are not conflicting but, instead, suggest that the members of
these genera are probably derivatives of intermediates in the
transition from the gram-positive to the gram-negative group
of prokaryotes and hence possess some characteristics of each
group. The presence of an outer cell membrane in these or-
ganisms, together with a thick cell wall in the case of Deino-
coceaceae, indicates that in the evolution of gram-negative
bacteria from a high-G1C gram-positive ancestor, the outer
membrane developed first before the changes in the cell wall
took place. It is of interest in this context that in several
mycobacterial species (high-G1C gram-positive bacteria), the
membrane lipids are arranged in a highly ordered form, which
may represent an early stage in the development of outer cell
membrane (18a, 180b). The signature sequences in different
proteins thus provide molecular markers that correlate with
the phenotypic changes in the cell structure. Thus changes in
Hsp70 (or GS I) which correlate with the development of the
outer membrane (Fig. 3) took place in the common ancestor of
gram-negative bacteria before changes in the other proteins
(Hsp60, acetolactate synthase, and asparginyl-tRNA syn-
thetase) that show correlation with the changes in the cell wall
and other properties of the cells. Thus, the molecular and phe-
notypic characteristics of these organisms are in good agreement
and point to a unique phylogenetic position of the Deinococcus-
Thermus group as representing evolutionary intermediates.
Phylogenetic Placement of Cyanobacteria and Their
Close Evolutionary Relationship to the
Deinococcus-Thermus Group
The signature sequences discussed thus far have allowed us
to reconstruct the evolutionary history from monoderm pro-
FIG. 14. Signature sequence (boxed) in pyruvate kinase which appears specific for the low-G1C gram-positive group. This signature was probably introduced in
the branch leading to this particular group.
1458 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
karyotes (i.e., archaebacteria and gram-positive bacteria) to
the very early stages in the development of gram-negative
(diderm) bacteria. I now present evidence that among the
gram-negative bacteria, cyanobacteria constitute one of the
deepest-branching divisions specifically related to the Deino-
coccus-Thermus group. The signature sequences that are help-
ful in establishing the phylogenetic position of cyanobacteria
are present in a number of different proteins. These proteins
include FtszA, in which a 1-aa insert is present in various
proteobacteria and spirochetes but not in any of the archae-
bacteria, gram-positive bacteria, Deinococcus, cyanobacteria,
and chloroplast homologs (Fig. 17a). Likewise, in the gluta-
mate dehydrogenase (GDH) sequences, a 3-aa insert is present
in various proteobacteria, bacteroides, and spirochetes but not
in any cyanobacteria, Deinococcus, gram-positive bacteria, or
archaebacteria (Fig. 17b). The species distribution of these
signatures indicates that they were introduced after the evolu-
tion of cyanobacteria in a common ancestor of the various
other divisions of gram-negative bacteria.
The signature sequences in the above proteins, which define
a clade consisting of archaebacteria, gram-positive bacteria,
Deinococcus-Thermus, and cyanobacteria, reinforce the view
that archaebacteria and gram-positive bacteria are close rela-
tives and that within gram-negative bacteria, cyanobacteria
constitute one of the deepest-branching lineages. This infer-
ence is in accordance with the results of detailed phylogenetic
studies based on a number of different gene sequences includ-
ing Hsp70 (99, 103), Hsp60 (96, 98, 246), RecA (55, 131, 247),
and 16S (33, 250) and 23S (48) rRNAs. In the case of Hsp70
sequences, for which sequence information is available from
most bacterial phyla, a strong affinity of cyanobacteria to the
Deinococcus-Thermus group was observed in both neighbor-
joining and parsimony trees (bootstrap values, .99%) (103).
Furthermore, a clade consisting of Deinococcus-Thermus spe-
cies and cyanobacteria showed the deepest branching within
gram-negative eubacteria and exhibited the closest relation-
ship to the gram-positive bacteria. Similarly, a strong affinity of
gram-positive bacteria to cyanobacteria (grouping in 99% of
bootstraps) has been observed in the phylogenetic trees based
on the GroEL-Hsp60 family of protein sequences (Fig. 11) (96,
98, 246). The members of other divisions (such as green non-
sulfur bacteria and spirochetes) branched after this clade. A
close relationship of cyanobacteria to the gram-positive bacte-
ria has also been proposed based on the significant segment
pair alignment scores in the RecA protein sequences (131) and
FIG. 15. Signature sequence (boxed) in the DNA gyrase A subunit which is specific for the high-G1C gram-positive group. As indicated in the top diagram, this
signature was probably introduced in the branch leading to this group.
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1459
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
the presence of a G residue at position 1207 in these groups in
the 16S rRNA (250).
In addition to these sequence signatures, which are useful in
understanding the evolutionary relationships of Deinococcus-
Thermus and cyanobacteria to other prokaryotes, a number of
other proteins contain yet another kind of signature sequence
that is unique to only the Deinococcus-Thermus group and
cyanobacteria and is not found in any other prokaryotes. In the
DnaJ-Hsp40 family of proteins, the homologs from Deinococ-
cus-Thermus and cyanobacteria contain a large deletion (68 aa)
which removes the four cysteine-rich repeat domains that are
present in all other prokaryotic and eukaryotic homologs (Fig.
18a) (27). Likewise, in the elongation factor EF-Ts sequences,
the homologs from Deinococcus-Thermus and cyanobacteria
harbored a deletion of 55 aa that is not present in other
prokaryotes (Fig. 18b). Two other proteins where signatures
unique to only these groups of prokaryotes are found are the
protein synthesis elongation factor EF-Tu (Fig. 18c) and DNA
polymerase I (Fig. 18d) (106). The presence of these uniquely
shared sequence signatures in the Deinococcus-Thermus and
FIG. 16. Signature sequences (boxed) in acetolactate synthase (a) and asparginyl-tRNA synthetase (b) showing a grouping of the Deinococcus-Thermus species with
archaebacteria and gram-positive bacteria. Similar to the Hsp60 protein (Fig. 10), these signatures were introduced in an ancestral gram-negative lineage after the
branching of the Deinococcus-Thermus group.
1460 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
cyanobacterial phyla provides evidence of a close and specific
evolutionary relationship between these two groups. These
results also suggest that these two groups of organisms had a
common ancestor exclusive of all other prokaryotes. However,
this inference is difficult to reconcile with the signature se-
quences in other proteins (Hsp60, acetolactate synthase, and
asparginyl-tRNA synthetase [Fig. 10 and 16]), which indicate
that cyanobacteria and other gram-negative bacteria had a
common ancestor exclusive of the Deinococcus-Thermus group
and that the Deinococcus-Thermus lineage is more ancestral
than cyanobacteria. To account for these observations, it is
necessary to postulate that cyanobacteria and the Deinococcus-
Thermus group are themselves not the direct ancestor of other
gram-negative bacteria but branched off from the early ances-
tors as shown in the diagram in Fig. 18. Furthermore, to ex-
plain the presence of common sequence signatures in these
groups that are not found in any other prokaryotes, it is nec-
essary to postulate that some lateral gene transfers have oc-
curred between these groups, as shown by the thin dashed
arrow in Fig. 18. The possible significance of such lateral gene
transfer events is discussed below (see “Evolutionary relation-
ships within prokaryotes: an integrated view based on molec-
ular and phenotypic characteristics”).
Signature Sequences Defining Proteobacteria and
Some of Their Subdivisions
The proteobacteria, named after the Greek god Proteus and
meaning “capable of assuming many different shapes” (225),
comprise one of the largest divisions among gram-negative
bacteria. This group of bacteria, also called the “purple bacte-
ria and relatives,” exhibits diverse properties and is currently
defined based mainly on the 16S rRNA phylogeny and signa-
ture sequences. Proteobacteria comprise more than 200 genera
and have been divided into at least five subclasses: alpha
through epsilon (177). However, the taxonomic relationship
among proteobacteria, which include a very complex assem-
blage of phenotypic and physiological attributes, remains ill
defined and has been a cause of concern (177).
In the present work, although the signature sequences that
may be useful in defining proteobacteria and its subclasses
have not been examined in detail, I have identified some sig-
nature sequences that are useful in defining the proteobacte-
rial group and some subdivisions within it. The first signature
that is present in all proteobacteria examined, including mem-
bers of all five subdivisions, consists of a 2-aa insert in the
Hsp70 sequences (Fig. 19a). Interestingly, this signature is also
present in the Hsp70 homolog from Thermomicrobium roseum,
which is a member of the division “green nonsulfur bacteria
and relatives.” The branching position of the green nonsulfur
bacteria, which consists of only a few species (Thermomicro-
bium, Herpetosiphon, and Chloroflexus species) in different phy-
logenies, including rRNA and Hsp70, has not been satisfacto-
rily resolved (103, 184, 250). Hence, the above signature
sequence, which is uniquely shared by various proteobacteria
and a green nonsulfur bacterium but not by any other eubac-
terial groups, including cytophagas, flavobacteria, chlamydiae,
spirochetes, cyanobacteria, Deinococcus, Thermus, and
Aquifex, provides the first reliable evidence that some members
of the green nonsulfur group of bacteria show a specific rela-
tionship to proteobacteria compared with the other divisions of
eubacteria. The second signature sequence consists of a 4-aa
insert in alanyl-tRNA synthetase, which is present in various
species examined from the alpha, beta, gamma, and epsilon
subdivisions of proteobacteria (Fig. 19b). Thus far, no se-
quences are available for this protein from members of the
delta subdivision or green nonsulfur bacteria. These signature
sequences were probably introduced into a common ancestor
of proteobacteria after the branching of chlamydiae, cytopha-
gas, and related species (Fig. 19a), and they could be used to
define the proteobacterial group.
Another group of signature sequences that I have identified
provides evidence that the members of the beta and gamma
subdivisions are distinct from those of the other three subdi-
visions. The first of these signature consists of a 4-aa insert in
a highly conserved region of Hsp70 (Fig. 20a) that is found
uniquely in all members of the beta and gamma subdivisions
that have been examined. A 1-aa insert in a highly conserved
region, which is specific to only the members of the beta and
gamma subdivisions, is also present in DNA gyrase A (Fig.
20b). A close affinity of the bacterial species for the beta and
gamma subdivisions has also been observed in phylogenetic
trees based on a number of genes and proteins, including SSU
and LSU rRNA (48, 184, 250), Hsp60 (96, 246), Hsp70 (56,
103), RecA (55, 131), and sigma 70 (94). The signature se-
quences described above could be used to define the pro-
teobacterial group and to distinguish members of the alpha,
delta, and epsilon subdivisions (as well as Thermomicrobium
roseum) from those of the beta and gamma subgroups (Fig. 19
and 20). These two proteobacterial groups are referred to as
proteobacteria-1 and proteobacteria-2, respectively, in the re-
mainder of this review.
Nature of the Archaebacterial Group and Its Relationship
to Gram-Positive Bacteria
One of the main premises of current evolutionary thinking is
that archaebacteria comprise a monophyletic group and that
they are completely distinct from other prokaryotes (54, 183,
187, 250, 258). The uniqueness of archaebacteria is indeed
supported by signature sequences in a number of different
genes and proteins and by the major differences seen between
archaebacteria and eubacteria in the information transfer pro-
cesses (i.e., replication, transcription, and translation) (9, 47,
54, 144, 158, 183, 197). Several other characteristics of archae-
bacteria, including the unusual ether-linked nature of their
membrane lipids (127, 133), are also consistent with this view.
While these molecular features and characteristics point to the
differences between archaebacteria and other prokaryotes, it is
essential that we critically examine this relationship to under-
stand the significance of these differences and the overall re-
lationship of archaebacteria to other prokaryotes.
Within archaebacteria, phylogenetic analyses based on
rRNA and EF-1 and EF-2 sequences have identified two main
groups: Crenarchaeota and Euryarchaeota (149, 153, 184, 198,
250, 258). These groups are also distinguished from each other
based on a signature sequence in the EF-1a/Tu protein, iden-
tified by Rivera and Lake (198). The Crenarchaeota consist
almost exclusively of sulfur-dependent thermoacidophilic ar-
chaebacteria (250, 251, 258), and these genera are referred to
as “eocytes” by Lake and coworkers (149, 154, 155, 198). The
Euryarchaeota are phenotypically very diverse and have no
specific physiological attribute. As indicated by Woese (253),
this group is a “potpourri of all the archael types” and contains
members from all phenotypically diverse archaebacteria in-
cluding extreme halophiles, methanogens, sulfate-reducing ar-
chaebacteria, and sulfur-dependent thermoacidophilic archae-
bacteria. It is important to note that within the Euryarchaeota,
members of different physiologically diverse archaebacterial
phenotypes (halophiles, methanogens, thermoacidophiles, etc.)
are not resolved from each other but show polyphyletic branch-
ing within three main clusters of methanogens (the Methano-
1461
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
1462
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
coccales, the Methanobacteriales, and the Methanomicrobiales)
(184, 250–253). Likewise, the Crenarchaeota also does not
unite all thermoacidophiles, and members of the orders Ther-
moplasmales, Thermococcales, and Pyrodictales, which are sul-
fur-dependent thermoacidophilic archaebacteria with similar
phenotypes to Crenarchaeota, branch within the Euryarchaeota
group (184, 250–253). Thus, the two main archaebacterial
groups are merely phylogenetic constructs and they do not
separate or cluster the diverse groupings of archaebacteria.
Of the two archaebacterial groups, Crenarchaeota has been
proposed to be ancestral (253, 258). This suggestion is based
on the observation that both archaebacterial groups contain
members which are thermophilic, anaerobic, and sulfur metab-
olizing, and hence these characteristics, which are common in
most members of the Crenarchaeota, are ancestral (253, 258).
Lake and coworkers (148, 150, 155) have reached a similar
inference independently. Based on the observation that ribo-
somes from this group of archaebacteria had certain distinctive
features that were not present in other groups of prokaryotes
but were shared with the eukaryotic ribosomes, Lake has pro-
posed that the traits of this group are primitive and calls them
“eocytes” (meaning dawn1cell) (148, 150, 155). Lake’s pro-
posal divides the prokaryotes into two groups, one consisting of
only eocytes and the other encompassing all of the halophiles,
methanogens, and different divisions of eubacteria (148–150,
155). However, the view that Crenarchaeota is the ancestral
lineage of the two archaebacterial groups is not supported by
the signature sequence present in the EF-1a/Tu protein.
Rivera and Lake (198) have described an 11-aa insert that is
present in various members of the Crenarchaeota as well as in
all eukaryotes but not in other prokaryotes. An alternate align-
ment of the same sequence region shown in Fig. 21 suggests
that the length of the insert in Crenarchaeota may be only 7 aa
rather than 11 aa as originally proposed (198). A vestigial
insert of 2 to 3 aa is also present in the same position in some
members of the Euryarchaeota. However, the length of the
insert (7 or 11 aa) or the presence of a vestigial insert in some
other archaebacterial species does not change the main infer-
ence to be derived from this sequence signature. The impor-
tant point here is that based on evidence presented above, the
root of the prokaryotic tree has been placed between archae-
bacteria and gram-positive bacteria. The fact that this insert is
not present in any gram-positive bacteria or in members of the
Euryarchaeota but is found only in the Crenarchaeota group of
archaebacteria (Fig. 21) strongly indicates that the absence of
this insert (common to all eubacteria and members of the
Euryarchaeota) is the ancestral phenotype. Hence, of the two
archaebacterial groups, Euryarchaeota is ancestral (Fig. 21 di-
agram).
Current evolutionary thinking based on SSU rRNA shows a
monophyletic nature of the archaebacterial domain and led to
the view that archaebacteria constitute the third domain or
form of life, but this view is not universally supported by all
gene and protein phylogenies. Alternate phylogenetic trees can
be based on a number of different proteins including some of
the most conserved proteins found in the biota (Hsp70, GS I,
GDH, and the hisC, hisF, hisH, trpB, and trpD products); in
these trees the various archaebacterial species do not form a
monophyletic group but instead show polyphyletic branching
within gram-positive bacteria (10, 21, 22, 99, 103, 104, 108,
240). In Hsp70 trees, homologs from halobacterial species
branched with the high-G1C gram-positive group whereas
homologs from some methanogenic (and often thermoacido-
philic) archaebacteria grouped with the low-G1C gram-posi-
tive bacteria (108). The observed polyphyletic branching of
archaebacteria with gram-positive bacteria has been shown to
be reliable, and in studies where different alternative tree to-
pologies were considered, a polyphyletic branching such as that
observed was strongly preferred over a monophyletic grouping
of all archaebacteria by different phylogenetic methods (73,
104, 108). Similar relationships are adduced from signature
sequences in some proteins (Fig. 13). Additionally, in dihy-
droorotate dehydrogenase, various members of the low-G1C
gram-positive bacteria as well as methanogenic and thermoaci-
dophilic archaebacteria lacked a 2-aa insert that is present in a
halophilic archaebacterium and mycobacterial species (Fig.
22). It should be noted that the G1C content of halophilic
archaebacteria is in the range of 66 to 68% whereas that of
methanogens is ,50% and generally in the range of 30 to 40%
(229). This 2-aa insert is also present in various gram-negative
bacteria, supporting the evidence derived from other signature
sequences (see “Signature sequences distinguishing between
low-G1C and high-G1C gram-positive bacteria and pointing
to a specific relationship of the latter group to the gram-
negative bacteria”) that within gram-positive bacteria, mem-
bers of the high-G1C group are the closest relatives of the
gram-negative bacteria.
The above observations raise important questions about the
true relationship between archaebacteria and gram-positive
bacteria. While some genes and proteins provide evidence that
archaebacteria are distinct from other prokaryotes and the
primary division within them is between Euryarchaeota and
Crenarchaeota, for a number of other genes the archaebacteria
do not form a monophyletic group but instead show polyphyl-
etic branching within gram-positive bacteria, with the halo-
philic archaebacteria showing affinity for the high-G1C group
and some methanogens branching with the low-G1C group.
To explain these results, it is necessary to postulate that some
lateral or horizontal gene transfers have taken place between
these two groups of prokaryotes. Although the exact nature of
the gene transfer events between these groups remains un-
clear, the observed results could be explained by two different
scenarios (Fig. 23).
The first scenario (I in Fig. 23) assumes that archaebacteria
are indeed a monophyletic group distinct from gram-positive
bacteria. In this case, to explain the observed results, one has
to postulate that genes for many of the proteins for which
archaebacteria show a polyphyletic branching within gram-
positive bacteria (e.g., Hsp70, GS I, GDH, the hisC, hisF, hisH,
trpB, and trpD products, and dihydroorotate dehydrogenase)
have been transferred from low-G1C gram-positive bacteria
to methanogens and thermoacidophilic archaebacteria and
from high-G1C gram-positive bacteria to the halophiles. At
the same time, the corresponding genes from the archaebac-
teria (if any unique genes for these proteins were present in
archaebacteria) have been lost. The alternate scenario (II in
Fig. 23) to explain these results assumes that archaebacteria
are indeed closely related to gram-positive bacteria, as sug-
gested by some of the most highly conserved proteins, and that
they may have evolved from specific members of low- and
FIG. 17. Sequence signatures in FtsZ (a) and glutamate dehydrogenase (b) showing the relatedness of cyanobacteria (and chloroplast homologs) to gram-positive
bacteria and archaebacteria. As shown in the diagram above, these signatures (boxed) were probably introduced in a common ancestor of other gram-negative bacteria
after the branching of cyanobacteria.
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1463
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
FIG. 18. Signature sequences in DnaJ (a), EF-Ts protein (b), EF-Tu protein (c), and DNA polymerase I (d) that are unique to only the Deinococcus-Thermus group
and cyanobacteria. To explain the presence of these signatures (boxed), as well as those in Fig. 10 and 16, it was suggested that these signatures were introduced initially
into the branch leading to cyanobacteria (thick arrow) and then laterally transferred to the Deinococcus-Thermus group (thin dashed arrow). The alternate possibility,
that these signatures were first introduced into the branch leading to Deinococcus-Thermus and then transferred to cyanobacteria, is also possible. Panels b through
d reproduced from reference 106 with permission of the publisher.
1464 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
high-G1C gram-positive bacteria, as suggested by these phy-
logenies and signature sequences, as well as the G1C content
of the halophilic (high-G1C) and methanogenic (low-G1C)
archaebacteria (229). In this case, to account for the results
from different gene phylogenies, one has to postulate that the
genes for many functions that indicate a monophyletic nature
of archaebacteria were transferred from one or more gram-
positive bacteria that originally evolved such changes into oth-
ers. This latter scenario, if true, suggests that the earliest pro-
karyote was a low-G1C gram-positive bacterium.
Both of these possibilities could explain the observed results,
and neither should be dismissed a priori without serious con-
sideration. In the past, supporters of the three-domain pro-
posal have favored the first of these possibilities (7, 21, 53, 183,
216), and the alternate possibility has not been considered.
Possible Selective Forces Leading to Horizontal
Gene Transfers
From the signature sequences that I have described thus far,
it should be evident that the horizontal gene transfer between
species is not all that common. If this was occurring commonly
and indiscriminately between species, the clear distinction be-
tween different phylogenetic groups that we have observed
based on signature sequences in different proteins would not
have been possible. These results are at variance with the
FIG. 18—Continued.
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1465
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
FIG. 19. Signature sequences (boxed) in Hsp70 (a) and alanyl-tRNA synthetase (b), defining and distinguishing proteobacterial group from all other divisions of
prokaryotes.
1466 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
FIG. 20. Signature sequences in Hsp70 (a) and DNA gyrase B (b) which appear specific for the beta and gamma subdivisions of proteobacteria. These signature
sequences (boxed), in combination with those in Fig. 19, could be used to define and distinguish between proteobacterial subdivisions alpha, delta, and epsilon
(proteobacteria-1) and subdivisions beta and gamma (proteobacteria-2).
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1467
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
recently developing consensus that the horizontal gene transfer
between species is very common (21, 118, 142, 143, 191, 236a,
260). For lateral or horizontal transfer of genes between spe-
cies to occur generally two related conditions are required.
First, the gene to be transferred should confer a selective
advantage on the recipient species. Second, a strong selective
environment favoring the growth and survival of the species
containing the transferred gene should exist. To understand
the nature of horizontal gene transfers that may have taken
place in the past, it is necessary to consider or speculate about
the selective forces that may have been operative or existed in
the primitive environment. Of the two possible scenarios for
gene transfer suggested above (Fig. 23), I cannot think of any
strong selective advantage that transfer of genes such as the
Hsp70, GS I, GDH, and dihydroorotate dehydrogenase genes,
from gram-positive bacteria will confer on the recipient ar-
chaebacteria (i.e., scenario I). On the other hand, a number of
observations can be cited which support the second scenario.
In this context, it is important to point out that the main
differences between archaebacteria and gram-positive bacteria
are with regard to the functions that are involved either in
information transfer processes (9, 47, 54, 144, 183, 197) or in
the synthesis of cell wall components and membrane lipids
(127, 133). These processes provide the main targets for the
action of many commonly used antibiotics, e.g., chloramphen-
icol, erythromycin, tetracycline, streptomycin, kanamycin, neo-
mycin, rifampin, actinomycin D, mitomycin C, adriamycin, no-
vobiocin, gentamicin, bacitracin, and polymyxins, produced by
different genera of gram-positive bacteria (6, 14, 179). Table 2
gives the site of action and the source of producing organisms
for several antibiotics. This list is not exhaustive, and there are
hundreds of less well studied antibiotics, produced by different
gram-positive bacteria, that act on these targets (79, 179, 204,
228, 229). The production of these antibiotics or secondary
metabolites by the producing bacteria provides them with a
great selective advantage over other biota. As noted by Cava-
FIG. 21. Excerpts from EF-1a/Tu protein sequences showing a conserved insert (originally identified by Rivera and Lake [198]) that is present in various
Crenarchaeota archaebacteria (eocytes), as well as eukaryotic homologs, but absent in Euryarchaeota archaebacteria and eubacteria. This insert indicates that of the two
archaebacterial groups, Euryarchaeota, are ancestral.
1468 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
lier-Smith (31): “Secondary metabolites (antibiotics) are most
often beneficial to their producers as agents of the chemical
warfare which is perpetually being waged against competitors,
predators and parasites.” Thus, it is quite likely that in the
primitive environment some groups of gram-positive bacteria
were producing antibiotics and others were sensitive to them,
so that their survival was at stake. To survive in this environ-
ment, the sensitive bacteria had to undergo changes in the
target sites of the above antibiotics so that their growth was no
longer inhibited (6, 14, 44, 79, 179, 204, 223). There was thus
very strong selection pressure on the genes that were the tar-
gets for these antibiotics to undergo changes to survive in the
selective environment.
It is possible that under these conditions, after a long period
of (repeated) selection in the primitive environment, assisted
by every conceivable sort of stress (83), a resistant strain
evolved that had undergone extensive changes in the genes
that are the targets of the above antibiotics. This resistant
strain may have been an ancestor of the present-day archae-
bacteria. Once a bacterium has developed a successful strategy
to combat the effects of antibiotics, the other sensitive bacteria
can readily acquire the resistance by means of genetic ex-
change or horizontal gene transfer from the resistant strain
(36, 37, 44, 204, 223). As stated by Cohan (37): “Adaptations
may be passed from one bacterial species to another, either by
homologous recombination or by plasmid exchange. . . . The
genes that can be transferred across taxa are necessarily a very
small set that confer general adaptations which are not limited
to the ecological and genetic context of a particular taxon (e.g.,
genes conferring resistance to widely used antibiotics). . . . A
single genetic exchange in which an adaptation is transferred
across taxa can change forever the course of adaptive evolution
in the recipient species.” This scenario can readily explain why
in phylogenies based on such gene sequences as those encod-
ing rRNA, EF-1a/Tu, EF-2/G, etc., phenotypically and physi-
ologically diverse groups of monoderm prokaryotes (methano-
FIG. 22. Signature sequence in dihydroorotate dehydrogenase showing the relatedness of halophilic archaebacteria to the high-G1C gram-positive bacteria and of
the methanogenic and thermoacidophilic archaebacteria to the low-G1C group. The thick arrow indicates that similar to other protein sequences (Fig. 13), this
signature provides evidence that gram-negative bacteria are specifically related to the high-G1C gram-positive group. To explain the results with archaebacterial
homologs, it is necessary to postulate either that there was a lateral gene transfer from high-G1C gram-positive bacteria to the halophilic archaebacteria or that the
two groups of archaebacteria bear specific relationships to the two divisions of gram-positive bacteria (thin solid arrows). The question mark indicates that these results
raise questions about the evolutionary relationship between archaebacteria and gram-positive bacteria.
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1469
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
gens, halophiles, and thermoacidophiles) form a monophyletic
group (i.e., archaebacteria) and also exhibit paraphyletic rela-
tionships within the Euryarchaeota division (184, 250–253). It
has been noted by Woese (250) and others that the evolution-
ary distances in rRNA between some of the archaebacterial
groups are very short: “Since their last common ancestor, ar-
chaebacterial rRNA on average have accumulated substan-
tially fewer mutations than the rRNA of either eukaryotes or
eubacteria” (186), leading to the inference that the archaebac-
terial lineage is slowly evolving (250, 258). However, the ap-
parent slow evolution of the archaebacterial lineage could also
be readily explained if many of the archaebacterial genes,
rather than being ancestral, were acquired more recently by
means of horizontal gene transfer between archaebacteria and
Gram-positive bacteria. The exchange of genetic information
in archaebacteria at a high frequency, at the high temperatures
at which many of them grow, has been reported (93). Although
the scenario presented here for the origin of archaebacteria is
speculative, it is realistic, and it should be possible to test it
experimentally.
The evolution of gram-negative bacteria, which possess an
outer membrane, from gram-positive bacteria may also have
been a defensive strategy on the part of some gram-positive
bacteria to combat or at least minimize the effect of antibiotics
(180a). As stated by Inouye: “The outer membrane serves as a
selective barrier to the cell exterior. . . . gram-negative bacteria
are more resistant to the actions of certain dyes, chemicals and
antibiotics. This is because gram-negative bacteria have an
outer membrane that prevents toxic compounds from entering
the cells” (124). It is of interest in this regard that in the
recently reported genomic sequence for the gram-positive bac-
teria Bacillus subtilis, a very large number of genes (77 in all)
encoding the ABC transporter proteins were found (147). As
noted in reference 147, these transporter proteins probably
allow these bacteria to escape the toxic action of many com-
pounds (antibiotics). Thus, the prokaryotic organisms have
developed a number of different strategies to protect them-
selves from the toxic effects of antibiotics.
It should be clear from the above discussion that there is a
lot to be learned about the relationship between the archae-
bacteria and gram-positive bacteria and the monophyletic and
distinct nature of archaebacteria is far from established.
Evolutionary Relationships within Prokaryotes: an
Integrated View Based on Molecular and
Phenotypic Characteristics
Based on the phylogenies and signature sequences I have
described thus far, the evolutionary relationship within the
prokaryotic organisms that emerges is depicted in Fig. 24. The
evolutionary relationship within the prokaryotic species is in-
dicated to be a continuum, and the different groups shown in
this figure appeared to have evolved from the common ances-
tor in the order shown. Of these groups, archaebacteria and
gram-positive bacteria, the prokaryotes surrounded by a single
membrane, are indicated to be the most ancient lineages within
prokaryotes. The question whether the earliest prokaryote was
a gram-positive bacterium, an archaebacterium, or a common
ancestor from which both these lineages evolved indepen-
dently is unclear at present. As discussed above, the answer to
this question depends upon clarification of the evolutionary
relationship between gram-positive bacteria and archaebacte-
FIG. 23. Possible scenarios to explain the evolutionary relationship between archaebacteria and gram-positive bacteria. Scenario I assumes the archaebacteria to
be monophyletic; to explain various other gene phylogenies where archaebacteria show polyphyletic branching within gram-positive bacteria (e.g., Hsp70, GS 1, GDH,
dihydroorotate dehydrogenase), lateral transfer of genes from different groups of gram-positive bacteria to the archaebacteria (as indicated by thin dashed arrows) is
postulated. Scenario II, on the other hand, suggests that the ancestral archaebacterial phenotype may have evolved from gram-positive bacteria (solid arrows) in
response to antibiotic selection pressure and that the genes involved in antibiotic resistance (which may include many genes involved in the information transfer
processes) were subsequently acquired laterally by other gram-positive bacteria to create additional monoderm prokaryotes with an archaebacterium-like genotype.
1470 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
ria. However, irrespective of whether archaebacteria constitute
a monophyletic group distinct from other bacteria or whether
they evolved from within the gram-positive bacteria, the infer-
ence that archaebacteria are more closely related to gram-
positive bacteria than to gram-negative bacteria is supported
by signature sequences in numerous proteins and by most of
the gene and protein phylogenies. A specific relationship be-
tween archaebacteria and gram-positive bacteria is also
strongly corroborated by the structural organization of their
cells: within prokaryotes, only these two groups of organisms
are bounded by a single lipid membrane (i.e., monoderm pro-
karyotes). Thus, the phylogenetic inferences based on macro-
molecular sequence data are in accord with the most important
structural distinction seen within prokaryotes and there are no
major conflicts between molecular phylogenies and phenotypic
characteristics (Fig. 24), unlike previously (181, 252).
These results raise the important question of the primary
division within the prokaryotes. The three-domain proposal
divides prokaryotes into two primary groups: archaebacteria
(Archaea) and eubacteria (Bacteria), and it does not recognize
gram-negative bacteria (diderm bacteria with an inner and
outer membrane defining a periplasm) as a distinct phylum. It
is important to point out that the taxon Archaea has been
defined only by biochemical and sequence characteristics and
that its members show no unique morphological features by
which they could be distinguished from gram-positive eubac-
teria (99, 258). Since the phylogenetic distinctness of Archaea
is now highly questionable, and in view of the concerns raised
that “It is not appropriate to separate kingdoms on any basis
but a major, reasonably easily determined difference in orga-
nization” (175), I conclude that the basic premise of the three-
domain proposal, i.e., that the primary division within pro-
karyotes is between Archaea and Bacteria, is not justified. In
contrast to this proposal, the division of prokaryotes into two
naturally defined, nonoverlapping primary taxa, Monodermata
(prokaryotic cells surrounded by a single unit lipid membrane;
includes all archaebacteria and gram-positive bacteria) and
Didermata (prokaryotic cells containing both inner and outer
unit lipid membranes enclosing a periplasmic compartment;
includes all true gram-negative bacteria), is strongly supported
by both morphological and molecular sequence characteristics
(100, 101). Based on signature sequences, the monoderm pro-
karyotes could be divided into two main groups: gram-positive
bacteria and archaebacteria. Any lateral gene transfer between
these two groups of monoderm prokaryotes, as seems to have
taken place, should not affect or influence their placement in
the same taxon. Archaebacteria can be further divided into two
subtaxa: Euryarchaeota and Crenarchaeota (eocyte), based on
signature sequences in EF-1a/Tu (Fig. 21) (198). The signature
sequences also support the division of gram-positive bacteria
into two distinct group corresponding to low-G1C and high-
G1C species (101). A clear phylogenetic distinction between
the latter groups of species in the past has not been made.
Further studies should clarify whether gram-positive bacteria
contain additional groups which may include species such as
Thermotoga maritima. It should be emphasized that although I
have used the common names to designate various higher taxa
and subtaxa within prokaryotes, these names do not constitute
the defining characteristics of these groups. All of the taxa
described here are defined based on specific signature se-
quences in one or more proteins (Fig. 24) (100, 101).
Signature sequences also provide evidence that within mo-
noderm prokaryotes, “high-G1C” gram-positive bacteria are
the closest relatives of gram-negative bacteria. Phylogenies and
signature sequences in a number of proteins provide evidence
that all diderm prokaryotes (gram-negative bacteria) are
monophyletic and had a common ancestor. The species of the
genera Deinococcus and Thermus are indicated to be interme-
TABLE 2. Sources and sites of action of some antibioticsa
Mechanism of action Antibiotic Producing organism
Inhibition of protein synthesis (acting on 30S ribosomal subunit) Streptomycin Streptomyces griseus
Neomycin S. fradiae
Tetracyclines S. aureofaciens
Spectinomycin S. spectabilis
Gentamycin Micromonospora purpurea
Tobramycin S. tenebrarius
Pactamycin S. pactum
Kanamycin S. kanamyceticus
Inhibition of protein synthesis (acting on 50S ribosomal subunit) Erythromycin S. erytherus
Carbomycin S. halstidii
Chloramphenicol S. venezuelae
Lincomycin S. lincolenesis
Streptogramins S. graminofaciens
Inhibition of synthesis or damage to cell wall Penicillins Penicillium chrysogenum
Cephalosporins Cephalosporium acremonium
Bacitracin Bacillus subtilis
Vancomycin S. orientalis
Cycloserine S. garyphalus
Inhibition of synthesis or damage to cytoplasmic membrane Polymyxin B. polymyxa
Tyrothricin B. brevis
Gramicidin S B. brevis
Inhibition of synthesis or metabolism of nucleic acids Rifampin S. mediterranei
Novobiocin S. niveus
a Compiled from information in references 6, 14, 44, 79, 179, 204, and 229.
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1471
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
diate in this transition by both their phenotypic characteristics
and molecular sequence data. The molecular phylogenies and
phenotypic characteristics again show good agreement in this
regard. The sequence data indicate that in the transition from
a monoderm prokaryote to a diderm cell organization (i.e.,
gram-negative bacteria), the outer membrane developed first,
followed by changes in the cell wall and other characteristics.
Within diderm prokaryotes, signature sequences and phy-
logenies based on several genes and proteins provide evidence
that cyanobacteria are one of the earliest lineages. This group
of bacteria which are capable of carrying out oxygenic photo-
synthesis, had a profound influence on the environment. Based
on the oxygen requirement and oxygen sensitivity of different
biochemical reaction, Schopf (208) has concluded that cya-
nobacteria occupy a middle ground between the anaerobes and
the fully aerobic bacteria and eukaryotes, suggesting that this
group originated during a time of fluctuating oxygen concen-
tration. The development of oxygenic photosynthesis by cya-
nobacteria and the consequent release of oxygen into the at-
mosphere was very likely the key event that changed the
environment from anaerobic to aerobic. Based on the geolog-
ical and mineral evidence of the major episode of sedimenta-
tion of dissolved iron from oceans (i.e., banded iron forma-
tions), which is believed to have resulted from the release of
oxygen by the earliest oxygenic photosynthetic organisms, the
time when such organisms first evolved can be estimated to be
between 2.0 and 2.5 billion years ago (132, 141, 208).
As mentioned above, although cyanobacteria are physiolog-
ically and phylogenetically distinct from the Deinococcus and
Thermus genera, signature sequences in several proteins
(DnaJ, EF-Tu, EF-Ts, and DNA polymerase) indicate that
these two groups had a common ancestor exclusive of all other
prokaryotes. The presence of unique shared sequence signa-
tures in these two groups, which is inconsistent with the mor-
phological features and phylogenetic relationship deduced
from other sequences, is very likely a result of lateral gene
transfer between the two groups. Similar to the situation en-
countered in the relationship between archaebacteria and
gram-positive bacteria, it is unclear whether the gene transfer
took place from cyanobacteria to Deinococcus and Thermus or
vice versa. It would be helpful in this context to know if the
transferred genes offered any selective advantages to the re-
cipient organisms. While such information is lacking, one can
speculate that the oxygen released by cyanobacteria was highly
toxic to the Deinococcus and Thermus group of species and that
transfer of selected genes from cyanobacteria (which have de-
veloped a mechanism to protect themselves from oxygen) pro-
vided a means to survive in the oxygen-containing atmosphere.
Following the evolution of cyanobacteria, a number of other
groups of diderm bacteria, namely, cytophagas, spirochetes,
planctomycetes, and green sulfur bacteria, evolved. Because of
the paucity of sequence information on these bacterial phyla,
no unique signature sequences that can distinguish these
groups of bacteria from other diderm prokaryotes have so far
been identified. The phylogenetic relationships and the relative
branching orders of these phyla in most phylogenies, including
FIG. 24. Evolutionary relationships within prokaryotes as deduced from signature sequences in various proteins. Although, due to ease of presentation, this figure
depicts archaebacteria as distinct from other prokaryotes, the alternate view where archaebacteria are derived from gram-positive bacteria (Fig. 23) is favored based
on the available evidence. Beginning with the universal ancestor (W), the order of evolution of different prokaryotic groups as deduced from signature sequences in
different proteins is as shown in this diagram. The asterisks on certain proteins indicate that the timing when these signature sequences were introduced may change
with sequence information from additional bacterial phyla. The branching order of various eubacterial groups is consistent with the detailed phylogenies based on Hsp70
and GroEL sequences (Fig. 8 and 11).
1472 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
rRNA (184, 250), Hsp70 (Fig. 8) (103, 108) and GroEL (Fig.
11) (96, 246), are not resolved. However, these groups of pro-
karyotes consistently branch in between cyanobacteria and
proteobacteria (Fig. 8 and 11). The placement of these bacte-
rial phyla in a group between cyanobacteria and proteobacte-
ria-1 (the alpha, delta, and epsilon subdivisions) can be confi-
dently made based on the signature sequences in the FtsZ and
GDH proteins (Fig. 15) on the one hand and Hsp70 and
alanyl-tRNA synthetase on the other (Fig. 19). Although at
present I have placed all these bacteria in a single group, it is
likely that as further sequence information becomes available,
additional signature sequences that make clear distinction be-
tween these groups and clarify the evolutionary relationships
between these phyla will be identified.
Signature sequences in proteins also define and provide dis-
tinction between two different groups corresponding to pro-
teobacteria. One group consists of the alpha, delta, and epsilon
subdivisions, whereas the other consists of the beta and gamma
subdivisions. The association of Thermomicrobium with the
first group is surprising, and it remains to be determined
whether other members of the green nonsulfur group (Herpe-
tosiphon and Chloroflexus) also show such a relationship. The
group consisting of the beta and gamma proteobacteria, based
upon signature sequences in different proteins, appears to have
evolved most recently among all the various prokaryotic groups
or divisions. In earlier work, specific amino acid substitutions
in Hsp60 protein that distinguish the alpha proteobacteria
from other subdivisions have also been described (96). It is
expected that additional signature sequences providing further
distinctions between proteobacterial groups will be uncovered
in future studies.
The evolutionary picture reconstructed here based upon sig-
nature sequences in different proteins (Fig. 24) is in accor-
dance with the phylogenies derived from a number of highly
conserved proteins (Fig. 8 and 11).
EVOLUTIONARY RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
EUKARYOTES AND PROKARYOTES
Based on the purported evolutionary relationships among
the prokaryotic organisms just considered, we can now ask how
the eukaryotic organisms are related to the prokaryotes. The
evolutionary relationship between prokaryotes and eukaryotes
has been studied based on a large number of sequences and
other characteristics (21, 249a, 263), and I do not plan to
provide an exhaustive list of these studies or characteristics.
Instead, my objective here is to determine what kind of pro-
posal or model for the origin of eukaryotic cells can best
account for most of the available molecular sequence data as
well as other relevant information.
Some Critical Assumptions in Studying
Prokaryote-Eukaryote Relationships
As discussed above (see “Current evolutionary perspec-
tive”), the three-domain proposal postulates that the eu-
karyotes and archaebacteria had a common ancestor exclusive
of any eubacteria (258), in other words, that the nuclear ge-
nome of the ancestral eukaryotic cell (exclusive of organellar
genes) directly descended from an archaebacterial cell. A spe-
cific relationship of the eukaryotes to archaebacteria, as sug-
gested in this proposal, is based on the rooting derived from
the duplicated gene sequences for EF-1a/Tu and EF-2/G (and
the a and b subunits of F- and V-ATPases) (81, 126). Although
the subsequent discovery of V-ATPases in bacteria and an
F-ATPase in an archaebacterium have called into question the
rooting based on ATPase sequences (69, 118), the rooting
based on EF-1a/Tu and EF-2/G proteins is widely accepted
and continues to have a major influence on the field (7, 126).
A similar rooting of the universal tree between archaebacteria
and eubacteria has been derived based on homologous amino-
acyl (isoleucyl, valyl-, and leucyl) tRNA synthetase sequences
(20).
However, the question of the root of the universal tree is a
hotly debated and very contentious issue (49, 53, 69, 129, 205).
Depending upon the protein sequences that are considered,
different types of relationships among the three primary groups
(archaebacteria, eubacteria, and eukaryotes) could be ob-
served. These include (i) all three groups equidistant from
each other, (ii) archaebacteria and bacteria closely related to
each other compared to the eukaryotic homologs, (iii) archae-
bacteria as specific relatives of eukaryotes and eubacteria
distantly related to them, and (iv) a specific relationship of
eukaryotic homologs to eubacteria as compared to the archae-
bacteria (49, 53, 69, 85, 197a, 205). Since all of the indicated
relationships are strongly supported for different proteins, ra-
tionally it is difficult to choose among them unless it is postu-
lated that extensive lateral gene transfer occurred between
species to support one relationship in preference to the other.
This controversy, in my view, has stemmed in large part from
a very basic and profound assumption that the eukaryotic cells
have evolved from prokaryotes by normal evolutionary mech-
anisms (mutations, recombination, etc.). However, as empha-
sized by many prominent biologists (28, 34, 46, 159, 168, 173,
237), the transition from prokaryotes to eukaryotes represents
a major discontinuity in the evolutionary history. If the pro-
karyote-to-eukaryote transition came about by normal evolu-
tionary mechanisms, then given the enormity of the structural
and molecular differences between these two cell types, this
transformation must have occurred over a very long period
involving numerous intermediate species, each developing lim-
ited selective advantages and evolving certain eukaryotic char-
acteristics. However, there is no evidence (living or fossil) for
the existence of any such “intermediate” organisms, despite
the great diversity of the prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms
that preceded or followed this major change. However, if the
transition from prokaryote to eukaryote did not come about by
a normal evolutionary mechanism but instead resulted from
some unusual event such as fusion and integration of genomes
from different prokaryotes, any attempt to root the eukaryotic
tree based on any one particular gene or even a set of genes
(e.g., the EF-1a/Tu, EF-2/G, and aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases
genes) will provide information about the origin of that gene
(or sets of genes) and not of the eukaryotic cell. In view of
these considerations, the proper approach to understanding
the origin of the eukaryotic cell from prokaryotic ancestors, in
my view, would be to examine the relationship of different
eukaryotic genes to prokaryotic homologs without any prior
assumptions and then to suggest a model which is consistent
with most of the data. This is the approach I have followed in
this review.
Most Genes for the Information Transfer Processes
Are Derived from Archaebacteria
For a number of the gene and protein sequences originally
studied, namely, EF-1a/Tu, EF-2/G, RNA polymerase II and
III subunits and F- and V-type ATPases, the eukaryotic ho-
mologs exhibited greater similarity to archaebacteria than to
eubacteria (81, 126, 196). A close and specific relationship of
archaebacteria to the eukaryotic homologs is also supported by
a number of other genes e.g., ribosomal proteins, DNA poly-
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1473
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
merase B, TATA binding proteins, transcription factors IIB
and IIIB, TCP-1 chaperone (54, 96, 98, 134, 158, 203, 213),
most of which are involved in aspects of transcription and
translation. In the past 2 or 3 years, due to the complete
sequencing of the genomes of a number of bacterial and ar-
chaebacterial species and a eukaryotic species, Saccharomyces
cerevisiae (15, 26, 45, 66, 72, 73, 80, 119, 128, 138, 147, 215,
242), a much larger database has become available to examine
the relationships among species in the three domains. Detailed
analyses of the archaebacterium Methanococcus jannaschii se-
quences indicate that 44% of its gene products showed a closer
relationship to eubacteria whereas about 13% of the proteins
showed a closer relationship to the eukaryotic homologs (144).
The rest of the proteins showed approximately the same level
of similarity to the eubacterial and eukaryotic homologs. An
important understanding that resulted from such analyses is
that the vast majority of genes for which the archaebacterial
homologs exhibited greater similarity to eukaryotes were re-
lated to the information transfer processes such as replication,
transcription, and translation (9, 47, 54, 144, 158, 183, 197). In
fact, for many genes involved in DNA replication and tran-
scription, no eubacterial homologs have been found (54, 158,
183, 197). Thus, in terms of their informational transfer ma-
chineries “archaea look very eukaryotic” (54).
A close and specific relationship between archaebacteria
and eukaryotes for the information transfer processes is also
readily apparent from signature sequences in many proteins.
EF-1a/Tu (Fig. 7a) and ribosomal proteins L5 (Fig. 7b) and S5
(Fig. 7c) provide examples where all archaebacterial and eu-
karyotic homologs contain prominent shared signature se-
quences not found in any eubacterial homologs. The protein
EF-1a/Tu contains another important signature sequence
identified by Rivera and Lake (198). This signature sequence
consists of a 7-aa insert that is uniquely present in the eocytes
or Crenarchaeota group of archaebacteria and all eukaryotic
homologs but is not found in the Euryarchaeota division of
archaebacteria (Fig. 21). This signature provides evidence that
within archaebacteria, the eocyte archaebacteria are the clos-
est relatives of eukaryotes (Fig. 25) (198). A specific relation-
ship of the eocyte archaebacteria to eukaryotic homologs is
also strongly supported by the detailed phylogenetic studies
based on EF-1a/Tu sequences (7, 21, 112). Based on the above
observations, it is now indisputable that many of the eukaryotic
nuclear genes, particularly those related to the information
transfer machinery, are of archaebacterial origin. In relation to
the origin of eukaryotic cells, the key question now becomes
whether all of the eukaryotic nuclear-cytosolic genome (i.e.,
exclusive of organelles) are derived from archaebacteria or
whether other groups of prokaryotes (i.e., eubacteria) also
made significant contributions.
Hsp70 Provides the Clearest Example of the Contribution of
Eubacteria to the Nuclear-Cytosolic Genome
The question of establishment of any eubacterial contribu-
tion to the eukaryotic nuclear-cytosolic genome is far more
difficult than connecting archaebacteria and eukaryotes. (Note
that the term “nuclear-cytosolic” as used in this review refers
to those genes and proteins which originated with the forma-
tion of the ancestral eukaryotic cell.) The main difficulty lies in
the fact that in contrast to archaebacteria, which have contrib-
uted only to the nuclear genome, two classes of eukaryotic cell
organelle genomes, mitochondria and plastids, were derived
from eubacteria in later endosymbiotic acquisitions (90, 92,
159). Most organellar genes were later transferred to the nu-
cleus. Thus, eukaryotes often have multiple homologs of pro-
teins with sequence similarity to eubacteria. For most se-
quences in the databases, information that distinguishes
nuclear-cytosolic genes from organellar homologs is lacking.
Thus, in many cases it is difficult to know whether a given
eukaryotic homolog corresponds to an organellar gene or to a
nuclear-cytosolic gene product. The presence of multiple genes
inside eukaryotes also raises the possibility that genes for some
presumed nuclear-cytosolic proteins are in fact derived from
organellar genes by means of horizontal transfer followed by
divergence (135, 165). Furthermore, many eukaryotes harbor
bacterial endosymbionts, and some of the eubacterial genes
could be derived from them by horizontal transfers. Thus, it
has proven difficult to establish whether a given eubacterial
gene present in eukaryotic cells is of nuclear-cytosolic origin or
is derived from other sources. However, in recent years, the
enlarged sequence database, in conjunction with extensive
characterization of many eukaryotic protein families at the
molecular, biochemical, subcellular localization, and phyloge-
netic levels, has provided specific examples where these prob-
lems can be clearly resolved.
The Hsp70 protein, discussed above, provides the best-stud-
ied examples of such proteins (17, 99, 102, 108). The Hsp70
homologs have been sequenced and characterized from a
broad range of prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms covering
the entire evolutionary spectrum. In eukaryotic cells, specific
Hsp70 homologs are found in various cellular compartments,
including the cytosol, endoplasmic reticulum (ER), mitochon-
dria, and chloroplasts (17, 41, 102, 108). The homologs present
in different compartments are well characterized both bio-
chemically and by cellular localization studies (2, 214, 221).
Most importantly, global alignment of Hsp70 sequences from
prokaryotic, eukaryotic, and organellar sources shows that the
different types of Hsp70 homologs are readily and unambigu-
ously distinguished from each other based on specific signature
sequences (99, 102, 105, 108). The eukaryotic nuclear-cytosolic
Hsp70s contain a large number of unique amino acid substi-
tutions and sequence signatures not found in any of the pro-
karyotic or organellar homologs. Figure 26 gives an excerpt
from Hsp70 alignment showing some of the important se-
quence signatures. As seen in this figure, all the eukaryotic
cytosolic and ER homologs, including those from the earliest-
diverging eukaryotic lineage such as Giardia, contain two sig-
nature sequences (a 4-aa deletion marked ­ and a 1-aa insert
marked ®) that are not present in any prokaryotic or organel-
lar Hsp70s. Since these signatures are not present in any mi-
tochondrial, hydrogenosomal (from Trichomona vaginalis), or
prokaryotic homologs, they could not have been derived from
the latter groups by means of horizontal gene transfer. These
signatures are thus uniquely eukaryotic, and they were proba-
bly introduced into the common ancestor of eukaryotic cells at
the time of its origin. The homologs containing these sequence
signatures thus are nuclear-cytosolic in origin.
The inference from the above signature sequences that the
eukaryotic nuclear-cytosolic homologs are altogether distinct
from organellar homologs is strongly reinforced by the phylo-
genetic analysis based on Hsp70 sequences (Fig. 27). In phy-
logenetic trees based on Hsp70 sequences, the nuclear-cytoso-
lic homologs consistently form a distinct monophyletic clade
(100% of the time by different phylogenetic methods) branch-
ing within gram-negative bacteria but showing no relationship
to the organellar homologs (i.e., mitochondria, hydrogeno-
some, or chloroplasts) (56, 102–104, 108). If the mitochondrial
and nuclear-cytosolic homologs were paralogous sequences
that originated by a gene duplication event and subsequent
divergence, one would expect them to form distinct but related
1474 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
clades. Since this is not observed in any phylogenetic trees
based on Hsp70 sequences, such a possibility is considered
highly unlikely. In contrast to the cytosolic homologs, the mi-
tochondrial and hydrogenosomal Hsp70s grouped within the
same clade, showing an expected close relationship to the
alpha proteobacteria (Fig. 27) (25, 78). The homologs from
these two organelles also shared a number of unique amino
acid substitutions with the alpha proteobacteria (signatures
marked E2 in Fig. 28) (25, 78), providing additional evidence
of their origin from this group of prokaryotes. The absence of
these signatures in the nuclear-cytosolic homologs provides
further evidence that they have originated independently of
these groups. In phylogenetic trees based on Hsp70, the chlo-
roplast homologs showed the expected strong affinity to cya-
nobacteria, supporting their origin from this group of pro-
karyotes (90, 92, 159, 162, 170a, 246a).
Having presented evidence that the cytosolic homologs of
Hsp70s are of nuclear-cytosolic origin which originated inde-
pendently of organellar homologs and that their sequence
characteristics and phylogeny cannot be accounted for by lat-
eral gene transfers between species, the question of which
group of prokaryotes contributed them now arises. As seen in
Fig. 26, all of the nuclear-cytosolic homologs contain the large
insert in their N-terminal quadrant (box marked ¬), which is a
defining characteristic of gram-negative bacteria (i.e., diderm
insert). As mentioned above, this insert is not found in any
homolog from archaebacteria or gram-positive bacteria. The
presence of this shared insert in all nuclear-cytosolic homologs
and gram-negative bacteria provides strong evidence that these
eukaryotic homologs have originated from a gram-negative
bacterium rather than from archaebacteria. This inference is
strongly supported by phylogenetic analysis based on Hsp70
sequences (Fig. 27) (85, 102, 108).
The lineage of the gram-negative bacteria that contributed
the eukaryotic nuclear-cytosolic homologs has not been iden-
tified up to now. However, based upon signature sequences in
the Hsp70 family of proteins, it is now possible to infer that the
gram-negative bacterium from which these are derived was a
member of the proteobacteria-1 (which includes members of
the alpha, delta, and epsilon subdivisions as well as Thermo-
microbium) group (Fig. 28). This inference is based upon the
facts that all nuclear-cytosolic homologs of Hsp70 contain a
2-aa insert (signature P1) that is present in different proteobac-
teria (as well as the green nonsulfur bacterium T. roseum) but
do not contain the 4-aa insert (signature P2) which is specific
for the beta and gamma proteobacteria (i.e., proteobacteria-2).
The eukaryotic nuclear-cytosolic homologs also share two ad-
ditional sequence signatures (specific amino acid substitutions
marked E1 in Fig. 28) with the proteobacteria, indicating their
origin from this group. However, it should be emphasized that
the proteobacteria in general, and the proteobacteria-1 group
as defined here in particular, is one of the most diverse and
complex assemblages of prokaryotes (177). Although this
group includes the alpha proteobacteria, from which mito-
chondria are derived (57, 90, 162, 261), it also includes numer-
ous other genera of very divergent prokaryotes such as myx-
obacteria, sulfur- and sulfate-reducing bacteria, helicobacteria,
Campylobacter, and green nonsulfur bacteria. Thus, a specific
relationship of the eukaryotic nuclear-cytosolic homologs to
the proteobacteria-1 group should not be construed as evi-
dence that they are derived from the same lineage that gave
rise to mitochondrial homologs. As pointed out above, the
eukaryotic nuclear-cytosolic homologs do not branch with the
mitochondrial homologs in any of the phylogenetic trees and
are distinguished from these homologs by numerous sequence
features (Fig. 26 and 28) (17, 56, 85, 99, 102–105).
The Eukaryotic Nuclear Genome Is a Chimera of Genes
Derived from Archaebacteria and Gram-Negative Bacteria
In addition to Hsp70, many other examples of proteins
where the eukaryotic nuclear-cytosolic homologs are derived
from eubacteria and not archaebacteria are observed. (i) In the
Hsp90 protein family, which carry out a molecular chaperone
function in cells (193), the eukaryotic nuclear-cytosolic ho-
mologs (including from Giardia lamblia [unpublished results])
and those from gram-negative bacteria contain a 5-aa deletion
not present in low-G1C or high-G1C gram-positive bacteria
(Fig. 29a). The Hsp90 homologs from eukaryotic cells have
been well characterized, and thus far no organellar homolog of
Hsp90 has been identified in any species, including the
genomic sequence of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (80). It is also of
interest that thus far no Hsp90 homolog has been found in any
archaebacteria, including the three completely sequenced ge-
nomes from Methanococcus jannaschii, Methanobacterium ther-
moautotrophicum, and Archaeoglobus fulgidus (26, 138, 215).
Therefore, it is very likely that Hsp90 homologs do not exist in
archaebacteria. For the sake of argument, even if such ho-
mologs were to be found in other archaebacteria, then based
on our understanding of the relationships within prokaryotes
(see “Evolutionary relationships among prokaryotes”), such
homologs should exhibit closer relationship to the gram-posi-
tive bacteria than to the gram-negative bacteria. From the
above observations and considerations, it should be clear that
similar to Hsp70, the nuclear-cytosolic homologs of Hsp90 are
not of archaebacterial origin but instead are derived from
gram-negative eubacteria. (ii) In IMP dehydrogenase, all eu-
bacterial and eukaryotic homologs contain a 2-aa conserved
indel not present in any archaebacteria (Fig. 29b). Likewise, in
adenylosuccinate synthetase, a 2-aa insert is present in various
archaebacteria but not in any of the eubacterial or eukaryotic
homologs (Fig. 29c). (iii) A number of other proteins where
signature sequences uniquely shared between eukaryotic ho-
mologs and certain groups of gram-negative bacteria have
been observed: glutamate-1-semialdehyde 2,1-aminomutase
(Fig. 9b), alanyl-tRNA synthetase (Fig. 19b), and the FGA-
FIG. 25. The eocyte version of the archaebacterial tree based on signature
sequence in the EF-1a/Tu protein sequences, as suggested by Rivera and Lake
(198). This tree indicates that the ancestral eukaryotic cell has directly descended
from within the archaebacterial lineage, with eocyte archaebacteria as its closest
relatives.
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1475
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
FIG. 26. Excerpt from the Hsp70 sequence alignment showing some of the important sequence signatures (boxed regions) distinguishing eukaryotic nuclear-
cytosolic homologs from prokaryotic and organellar homologs. G2 and G1 refer to gram-negative bacteria and gram-positive bacteria, respectively. The boxed region
marked ¬ shows the diderm insert in the N-terminal quadrant common to all eukaryotic homologs and gram-negative bacteria. The signatures marked ­ and ® identify
two indels that distinguish eukaryotic nuclear-cytosolic homologs from all organellar and prokaryotic homologs. Other prokaryotic homologs not included in this
alignment (e.g., some shown in Fig. 3) also contained the indicated signature sequences. Not all signature sequences of the above kinds are shown. The notation (e)
in parentheses identifies ER Hsp70 homologs. Mitochond. and hydrogeno. refer to mitochondria and hydrogenosome homologs.
1476 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
RAT protein (105). These signatures provide evidence that the
eukaryotic homologs of these proteins are of eubacterial rather
than archaebacterial origin.
In a recent study, Feng et al. (63) reported that of the 34
protein families that they examined, for 17 a closer relationship
of the eukaryotic homologs to eubacteria was observed. In
contrast, only 8 of the 34 proteins indicated a eukaryote-ar-
chaebacteria relationship. In addition to these results, our
BLAST searches of the proteins encoded by the Haemophilus
influenzae genome (66) have identified a number of proteins
for which the eubacterial and eukaryotic homologs are present
but no related protein has thus far been found in archaebac-
teria (Table 3). Although some of these proteins may corre-
spond to organellar homologs, or for some archaebacteria ho-
mologs showing closer affinity may be found in the future, it is
likely that for many of these proteins the nuclear-cytosolic
homologs are again derived from gram-negative bacteria
rather than archaebacteria. Another striking characteristic of
eukaryotic cells not explained by an archaebacterial origin is
their membrane lipid composition (156). All eukaryotic cell
membranes contain ester-linked fatty acid lipids like eubacte-
ria rather than the ether-linked lipids that define archaebacte-
ria (127, 258). Thus, the eukaryotic cell membranes are of
eubacterial rather than archaebacterial origin. It should be
clear from the above examples that eubacteria have also made
significant contribution to the eukaryotic nuclear-cytosolic
genes. Hence, the premise that archaebacteria and the ances-
tor eukaryotic cell had a common ancestor exclusive of eubac-
teria is doubtful.
Upon examination of different gene and protein phylog-
enies, where the relationships between the prokaryotic and
eukaryotic homologs have been studied, one finds that these
generally fall into one of the following three groups: those
favoring an archaebacterial-eukaryote clade, those supporting
a gram-negative-eukaryote clade, and a third equivocal group
where the phylogenies are unable to support or refute any
specific relationship between prokaryotes and eukaryotes (49,
53, 69, 85, 126, 197a, 205, 258). The overall inference from
these phylogenies that the eukaryotic homologs in different
cases show greater similarity to either archaebacteria or gram-
negative bacteria is thus consistent with the signature se-
quences in various proteins described here.
The question now arises of how we can explain the mutually
discordant histories of different eukaryotic nuclear genes,
where some genes (particularly those related to the informa-
tion transfer processes) are clearly derived from archaebacte-
ria whereas many others show a close affinity to the gram-
negative bacteria (and it is unlikely that they are derived from
organellar homologs). These results cannot be explained or
accounted for by the three-domain proposal (258) or the eo-
cyte tree (149, 198), which posits that the eukaryotic cell and
archaebacteria (or eocytes) had a common ancestor exclusive
of any eubacteria. Likewise, other proposals for the origin of
eukaryotic cells, including evolution of eukaryotic cells from a
transient intermediate between archaebacteria and gram-pos-
itive bacteria (30), evolution of eukaryotic cells by engulfment
of an archaebacterium by a hypothetical protoeukaryotic lin-
eage that contained RNA-based metabolism (109, 217), origin
of eukaryotic cell nucleocytoplasm from an archaebacterium
such as Thermoplams acidophilum (212) and undulipodia (i.e.,
motility components such as microtubules) from a spirochete
(161, 162), and evolution of eukaryotic cell from a hypothetical
prokaryotic lineage that somehow developed phagocytic capac-
ity (46), also cannot account for or explain these results.
To explain the global phylogenies of eukaryotic nuclear-
cytosolic genes and proteins, we have proposed that the ances-
tral eukaryotic cell, rather than originating from any one par-
ticular group of prokaryotes, evolved by means of a unique
fusion event between an archaebacterium and a gram-negative
bacterium (Fig. 1) (85, 99, 102, 105, 108, 125). The observation
of Rivera and Lake (198) on EF-1a sequences suggests that the
archaebacterial partner in this fusion was an eocyte or Cren-
archaeota archaebacterium, and the signature sequences in
Hsp70 now provide evidence that the eubacterial partner be-
longed to the proteobacteria-1 lineage (Fig. 28). At an early
stage after the suggested fusion, an assortment or selection of
genes from the two fusion partners occurred, during which
most of the genes for information transfer such as replication,
transcription, and translation were retained from the archae-
bacterial partner whereas many of the genes for other compo-
nents and functions such as membrane lipids, Hsp70, Hsp90,
adenylosuccinate synthetase, IMP dehydrogenase, FGARAT,
and alanyl-tRNA synthetase, were kept from the gram-nega-
tive bacterium. The ancestral eukaryotic cell is thus a true
chimera that retained and integrated different characteristics
from each of the prokaryotic parents (85, 99, 102, 105, 108).
It should be mentioned that the chimeric origin of the an-
cestral eukaryotic cell by a fusion between an archaebacterium
and a eubacterium was first proposed by Zillig (263) to account
for the observation that while the large subunits of eukaryotic
RNA polymerase II and III exhibited greater similarity to
archaebacteria, RNA polymerase I appeared more closely re-
lated to eubacteria (196). However, in the later work of Zillig
and coworkers, this chimeric model was not favored (139, 158).
Lake et al. (154) also mentioned the possibility that the eu-
karyotic cell nucleus was derived via endosymbiotic capture of
an archaebacterium by a eubacteria, but this possibility was not
supported in later work (149, 150, 198). However, more re-
cently, based upon the increasing evidence pointing to the
contribution of both archaebacteria and gram-negative bacte-
ria to the eukaryotic nuclear genome, many investigators have
supported a chimeric origin of the ancestral eukaryotic cell (52,
63, 156, 163, 166, 218).
Origin of the Nucleus and Endoplasmic Reticulum
The key defining characteristics of all eukaryotic cells is the
presence of a membrane-bounded nucleus, and hence any in-
sight relating to the origin of the nucleus or the events which
accompanied its formation should be of central importance in
understanding the origin of the eukaryotic cell. Important in-
sight into this regard is provided by the proteins which are
found in the ER. Since the ER is contiguous and forms the
nuclear envelope in eukaryotic cells (3, 162), its evolution most
probably took place in concert with the nucleus. Thus, the
origin of the proteins found in the ER and their evolutionary
relationship to other prokaryotic and eukaryotic proteins is
critical in understanding the origin of the nucleus. For a num-
ber of proteins (Hsp70 and Hsp90) which function as molec-
ular chaperones in the transport of other “passenger proteins”
across membranes (40, 190), distinct homologs are found in the
ER and cytosolic compartments in all eukaryotic species ex-
amined (17, 97, 102, 180).
In our earlier work (102), both ER and cytosolic homologs
for Hsp70s were cloned from Giardia lamblia, which is one of
the earliest-branching eukaryotic lineages (32, 102, 112, 219,
234). The two types of homologs could be readily distinguished
based on a number of different sequence features including the
N-terminal ER targeting sequence and a C-terminal ER re-
tention signal. The cloning of an ER Hsp70 homolog from G.
lamblia provided the first strong molecular evidence that the
ER originated very early in the eukaryotic cell (102). Direct
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1477
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
1478 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
evidence for the presence of an ER and of a complex endo-
membrane system in G. lamblia has now been obtained by
immunoelectron microscopy with antibodies to the ER Hsp70
(221). Based upon their signature sequences, both the ER and
cytosolic Hsp70s from all eukaryotic organisms are shown to be
of nuclear-cytosolic origin and are derived from gram-negative
bacteria (Fig. 26). Although both cytosolic and ER Hsp70s
contain numerous unique shared sequence signatures not
found in any prokaryotic or organellar homologs, phylogenetic
analyses of these sequences show that they form paralogous
gene families (Fig. 27) that evolved by a gene duplication event
very early in the evolution of eukaryotic cells (102).
Phylogenetic studies with another molecular chaperone pro-
tein, Hsp90, also clearly indicate that the ER and cytosolic
forms of this protein form paralogous gene families that re-
sulted from an ancient gene duplication event (Fig. 30) (97).
The ER homologs of Hsp90, in addition to their characteristic
N-terminal ER-targeting sequence and C-terminal ER reten-
tion sequence (97), can be distinguished from the cytosolic
homologs by a 2-aa insert present in them (signature ­ in Fig.
31). Figure 31 also shows another signature sequence in Hsp90
(marked ¬), which distinguishes all eukaryotic homologs from
the prokaryotic homologs. Similar to the Hsp70 protein, this
signature was again probably introduced into the common
ancestor of eukaryotic cells at the time of its origin. In addition
to Hsp70 and Hsp90, preliminary evidence also exists that the
cytosolic and ER forms of another molecular chaperone pro-
tein, DnaJ/Hsp40, also resulted from a gene duplication event
at a very early stage in eukaryotic cell history (reference 27 and
unpublished results).
The question should be asked why these molecular chaper-
ones are present in the ER and why duplication of their genes
accompanied, or was necessary for, the origin and evolution of
the ER (nucleus). As mentioned above, one of the main func-
tions of these molecular chaperone proteins is that they facil-
itate protein transport across intracellular membranes (40, 190,
193). To account for these observations as well as the chimeric
nature of eukaryotic nuclear genes, we have suggested that the
ancestral eukaryotic cell originated by a unique fusion event
between a gram-negative bacterium and an eocyte archaebac-
terium (99, 102, 105). Although the details of this fusion event
are not clear, it is postulated to be distinct from a normal
endosymbiotic event (154, 156, 210), where the guest species
retains its structural identity at least in a vestigial form. In a
simplistic scenario (Fig. 32), a gram-negative eubacterium,
probably lacking a cell wall, developed a symbiotic relationship
with an archaebacterium. This symbiotic relationship led to the
loss of the outer membrane from the gram-negative partner,
which no longer needed it to shield itself from antibiotics in the
external environment. The loss or extensive divergence of
many genes which were no longer essential under these con-
ditions from the two partners also took place under these
conditions. The eukaryote-specific signature sequences present
in many genes were also probably introduced at this early
stage. Over time, the bacterial partner developed numerous
membrane infolds that completely surrounded the archaebac-
terium. The detachment of these membrane infolds from the
bacterium eventually led to the creation of the ER, which
surrounded the archaebacterium. The membrane of the ar-
chaebacterial partner became redundant under these condi-
tions and was eventually lost (Fig. 32). The formation of the
nuclear envelope and ER by detachment of membrane infolds
would create a new compartment in the cell, which had to
communicate (i.e., import and export proteins and other mol-
ecules) with the rest of the cell. Therefore, the formation of
this compartment was either accompanied or, more likely, pre-
ceded by duplication of the genes for the chaperone proteins
(Hsp70, Hsp90, DnaJ, etc.), which are essential for this pur-
pose (97, 102). Subsequently, the genome of the eubacterial
partner was transferred to the newly formed nucleus, leading
to a complete integration of the two parental cells types and
the creation of a new cell: the common ancestor of all eu-
karyotes (97, 99, 102). It should be mentioned that unlike other
endosymbiotic events leading to the origins of mitochondria
and plastids, which have resulted in the formation of cells with
“host plus endosymbiont” phenotypes, the primary fusion
event postulated here involved complete integration and loss
of identity of the two fusion partners, creating a new cell which
was very different from a simple combination of the two fusion
partners, i.e., “archaebacterium plus eubacterium.”
The phylogenies and signature sequences in different genes
and proteins provide strong evidence that the postulated fusion
event that gave rise to the ancestral eukaryotic cell was unique
and that a successful fusion between prokaryotic parents that
gave rise to the eukaryotic cell took place only once in the
history of life (99). The evidence for this is derived from sig-
nature sequences in a number of proteins, namely, Hsp70 (Fig.
26), Hsp90 (Fig. 31), and glucose-6-phosphate transaminase
(Fig. 33), which are unique to all eukaryotic nuclear-cytosolic
homologs but are not found in any prokaryotic or organellar
homologs. These eukaryotic specific signatures were probably
introduced into the common ancestor of eukaryotic cells at the
time of its formation and then passed on to all descendants.
The presence of these unique signature sequences provides
strong evidence that all extant eukaryotic species are mono-
phyletic (99, 102, 105, 250).
The origin of eukaryotic cell by a unique fusion event in-
volving two different groups of prokaryotes, as suggested here,
is preferable to the three-domain model, or a number of other
proposals for the origin of the eukaryotic cell, for the following
reasons. (i) In contrast to the three-domain proposal, which
accounts for only some of the gene phylogenies, the chimeric
model is the most parsimonious way to explain all of the gene
and protein sequence data. (ii) Unlike a number of earlier
proposals which postulate the origin of eukaryotic cell from
some hypothetical lineages possessing unique characteristics
(30, 46, 109, 217), the present model indicates that the ances-
tral eukaryotic cell was derived from prokaryotic parents re-
lated to the extant lineages. (iii) It readily explains why certain
characteristics of eukaryotic cells are similar to archaebacteria
(e.g., components of transcription and translation machinery)
while others are clearly derived from eubacteria (e.g., ester-
linked straight-chain membrane lipids, fatty acids, Hsp70,
Hsp90, and adenylosuccinate synthetase). (iv) It provides a
FIG. 27. A consensus neighbor-joining tree based on Hsp70 sequences (bootstrapped 100 times) showing the relationship between prokaryotic and various
eukaryotic homologs. The tree is based on 531 aligned amino acid positions. The main points to be noted are as follows: mitochondrial and chloroplasts homologs show
a specific relationship to the a proteobacteria and cyanobacteria, respectively; the hydrogenosome homolog from Trichomonas branches with the mitochondrial clade;
the eukaryotic nuclear-cytosolic homologs form a distinct clade within gram-negative bacteria unrelated to the organellar homologs; the ER and cytosolic homologs
form paralogous gene families; and archaebacterial homologs (marked with asterisks) show polyphyletic branching within gram-positive bacteria. In the tree shown, only
a small number of divergent eukaryotic homologs are included. However, inclusion of additional eukaryotic homologs does not alter the phylogenetic relationship shown
here (unpublished results).
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1479
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
FIG. 28. Signature sequences (boxed and shaded) in the Hsp70 protein showing the relationship of eukaryotic cytosolic homologs to proteobacteria-1 group (alpha,
delta, and epsilon subdivisions as well as Thermomicrobium roseum). The homologs from various prokaryotic phyla as well as different eukaryotic homologs are
identified. The notations (m), (c), (e), and (h) denote mitochondrial, chloroplast, ER, and hydrogenosome homologs, respectively. The signatures P1 and P2 identify
sequences that distinguish between proteobacteria-1 and -2. The presence in all nuclear-cytosolic homologs of the 2-aa proteobacteria-1 signature but not the 4-aa
proteobacteria-2 signature provides evidence that these homologs are derived from a member of the proteobacteria-1 group. The signatures marked E1 are also
common to proteobacteria-1 and proteobacteria-2 as well as eukaryotic cytosolic Hsp70s, supporting the above inference. The signatures E2 identify two substitutions
that are present in all members of the alpha proteobacteria as well as mitochondrial and hydrogenosome homologs but absent in other groups of proteobacteria and
eukaryotic cytosolic homologs. These signature suggest that the eukaryotic nuclear-cytosolic homologs have originated independently of mitochondria and hydrogeno-
somes.
1480 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
plausible explanation for the origin of the eukaryotic cell nu-
cleus and endomembrane systems. (v) Although the enormous
structural differences between the eukaryotic and prokaryotic
cell types (169) and the absence of any intermediates in this
transition, cannot be readily explained by normal evolutionary
mechanisms, this major evolutionary discontinuity can be ex-
plained by an origin of the eukaryotic cell by fusion of two
different groups of prokaryotes. (vi) Doolittle and coworkers
(51, 63) have inferred that the eukaryotic species diverged
from either archaebacteria or eubacteria about 2 Ga ago based
on genetic distances between protein sequences. Although
these estimates involve many assumptions (84) (see “Molecu-
lar phylogenies: assumptions, limitations, and pitfalls”), the
inferences derived are consistent with the present model.
Did Mitochondria and the First Eukaryotic Cell Originate
from the Same Fusion Event?
In the past, it has been generally accepted that the ancestral
eukaryotic cell lacked mitochondria, which were acquired in a
later endosymbiotic event (90, 92, 159, 162, 258). However, the
recent finding of certain glycolytic and fermentation enzymes,
i.e., glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, triosephos-
phate isomerase, pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase, ferre-
doxin, and alcohol dehydrogenase E, and other mitochondri-
on-specific proteins (e.g., Hsp60 and mitHsp70) in a number of
protist phyla, namely, Parabasala (e.g., Trichomonas vaginalis),
Archamoebae (e.g., Entamoeba, Pelomyxa), Microsporidia
(Vairimorpha nectarix), and Diplomonands (Giardia), which
were previously thought to lack mitochondria, has suggested
that the mitochondrial endosymbiosis occurred much earlier
than was previously suspected (25, 35, 52, 78, 113a, 120, 123,
135, 165, 199–201, 218). Based on these studies, while the exact
time when mitochondria originated will no doubt be moved
considerably earlier, the interpretation of these results con-
cerning the origin of eukaryotic cells requires caution. The
phylogenies based on glycolytic and fermentation enzymes are
ambiguous. For glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase,
multiple homologs are present in both prokaryotic and eukary-
otic species and their relationships to each other is not clear
(116, 165, 201). The phylogenies of pyruvate:ferredoxin oxi-
doreductase, ferredoxin, and alcohol dehydrogenase E have
led Rosenthal et al. (201) to conclude that the eukaryotic genes
for these proteins in early-branching protists were derived
from bacteria by means of horizontal gene transfers.
More credible evidence for the presence of mitochondrial
genes in early-branching protists comes from the study of the
heat shock molecular chaperone proteins Hsp60 (or Cpn60)
and Hsp70 (25, 35, 78, 120, 123, 199, 200, 218), where the
phylogenies and the relationship between different homologs
are well understood (17, 96, 98, 105, 108, 246). In eukaryotes,
Hsp60 genes are derived primarily from organellar genomes
(i.e., mitochondria and chloroplasts) and no close homologs of
nuclear-cytosolic origin are known (96, 98). Thus, the presence
of any Hsp60 gene in a species is generally taken as evidence
that it once contained mitochondria. However, it is important
to point out that mitochondrial Hsp60 possesses no unique
sequence characteristic, except for the presence of a N-termi-
nal mitochondrial targeting presequence (MTP), by which it
could be distinguished from bacterial homologs. In contrast to
Hsp60, all eukaryotes contain a number of distinct Hsp70 ho-
mologs. The mitochondrial Hsp70 homologs, in species which
contain mitochondria, are clearly distinguished from nuclear-
cytosolic homologs by signature sequences and phylogenetic
branching patterns (Fig. 26 and 27), but they are indistinguish-
able from the alpha proteobacterial homologs, except for the
presence of a N-terminal MTP (214). Thus, the main basis for
concluding that a given Hsp60 or Hsp70 homolog, from a
species lacking mitochondria, is of mitochondrial origin is
based on three lines of evidence: (i) localization of the ho-
molog to a subcellular compartment that may be related to
mitochondria (i.e., hydrogenosomes), (ii) the presence of char-
acteristic MTP sequences found in mitochondrial homologs,
and (iii) branching of the homologs with the mitochondrial
clade in phylogenetic trees. Of these three lines of evidences,
in my view the first two are more reliable indicators of mito-
chondrial origin. Since many protist species, including Giardia
lamblia, harbor intracellular bacterial symbionts and/or sur-
face-attached bacteria (1, 160), some of which could be derived
from the same group of prokaryotes as mitochondria, based on
the branching pattern of the homolog with the mitochondrial
clade alone, the possibility that the observed gene is either a
bacterial contaminant or derived from bacteria via horizontal
gene transfer cannot be excluded.
Examined in this light, there is good evidence that Hsp60 or
Hsp70 genes identified in Trichomonas vaginalis are of mito-
chondrial origin. These genes are localized in hydrogenosomes
which, based on biochemical criteria, are related to mitochon-
dria (172); some of these genes contain targeting sequence
similar to those found in mitochondria; and they branch con-
sistently with mitochondria in independent studies (25, 78,
199). The homologs for these proteins in Entamoeba histolytica
and Vairimorpha nectarix are also probably of mitochondrial
origin, since in addition to their branching with the mitochon-
drial clade, they contain MTP-like sequences (35, 120). How-
ever, evidence for the ancestral presence of mitochondria in
diplomonads from studies on G. lamblia (200, 218), which
constitutes one of the earliest-branching lineages in many gene
phylogenies (32, 102, 113, 219, 234), must be viewed with
caution. Evidence for the presence of mitochondria in this
protist is based mainly on the branching of Hsp60 homolog
with the mitochondrial clade (200). The cloned gene contains
no N-terminal MTP sequence characteristic of mitochondria
or other related organelles. In this context, it should be pointed
out that the presence of an Hsp60-related protein in Giardia
was first suggested in our work based on cross-reactivity of
Hsp60 antibodies to a giardial protein (222). However, our
cloning studies with Giardia (unpublished results) resulted in
the isolation of a novel Hsp60 gene that has all the character-
istics of a bacterial rather than a mitochondrial gene: (i) it lacks
any upstream targeting sequence characteristic of organellar
genes, and (ii) it hybridized to Giardia cultures grown under
standard conditions but showed no hybridization when the
cells were grown in the presence of antibiotics such as strep-
tomycin. It should be emphasized that in these studies no
bacterial contaminant could be detected by light or electron
microscopic investigation or by staining with Hoechst 33258,
indicating the cryptic nature of these bacteria (reference 222
and unpublished results). These observations emphasize the
need for caution in interpreting the results of finding mito-
chondrion-like genes in the earliest-branching eukaryotic lin-
eages for the origin of eukaryotic cells.
The question may now be considered whether the primary
fusion event that led to the origin of the eukaryotic cell was
identical to or distinct from the one that gave rise to mitochon-
dria (52, 129, 166). In view of the recent findings, it is clear that
the endosymbiotic event leading to the acquisition of mito-
chondria took place much earlier than was previously believed
(29, 32, 218). However, the available data in my view still
strongly indicate that mitochondrial endosymbiosis was distinct
from the primary fusion event that gave rise to the ancestral
eukaryotic cell. Some key observations which support this con-
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1481
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
1482
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
tention are as follows. (i) The mitochondria, like later endo-
symbionts (plastids), have retained most of the structural and
functional characteristics of the prokaryotic parent from which
they evolved, including their distinct information transfer ma-
chinery. There appears to be no direct contribution from ar-
chaebacteria to the mitochondrial function. In contrast to the
distinctly eubacterial nature of mitochondria and the genes
encoding various mitochondrial proteins, the eukaryotic cell
and nuclear genome are totally distinct from mitochondria and
represent a true integration of different characteristics from
both archaebacterial and eubacterial partners, which lost their
identity in the process. (ii) For the Hsp70 protein, which rep-
resents the best-studied eukaryotic protein family, the mito-
chondrial and nuclear cytosolic homologs are quite different
and show no affinity for each other (102, 103, 108). All of the
nuclear-cytosolic homologs of Hsp70 contain a large number
of sequence characteristics that are not present in any mito-
chondrial homologs or alpha proteobacteria. (iii) While the
cytosolic and ER-specific Hsp70 have been identified in all
eukaryotes, no gene for the mitochondrial Hsp70 has thus far
been detected in the earliest-branching eukaryotic lineages
such as Giardia. (iv) Even if such a gene is identified in Giardia
in future studies, then to account for the very different se-
quence characteristics of the mitochondrial and nuclear-cyto-
solic homologs, one would have to postulate that the endosym-
biotic event leading to the formation of the eukaryotic cell was
immediately followed by a duplication of genes for the Hsp70
protein and then by extensive divergence of one gene copy
corresponding to one of the nuclear-cytosolic homologs. This
gene duplication event then needs to be immediately followed
by another gene duplication in the earliest eukaryotic ancestor
to account for the paralogous families of ER and cytosolic
homologs, which are found in all eukaryotic organisms. It
would also require that the Hsp70 gene from the archaebac-
terial host be lost in the earliest eukaryotic ancestor, since no
archaebacterium-like Hsp70 is present in any eukaryote. (v)
The formation of eukaryotic cell by endosymbiotic capture of
a gram-negative bacterium by an archaebacterium does not
explain how the eukaryotic cell nucleus and ER were formed
and how the membrane of the archaebacterial host was re-
placed by those of the endosymbiont. The application of Ock-
ham’s razor “Non sunt entia multiplicanda practor necessi-
tatum” (“unnecessary assumptions should be avoided in
formulating hypotheses”) to this problem indicates that it is
highly unlikely that the endosymbiotic event which gave rise to
mitochondria also resulted in the origin of the ancestral eu-
karyotic cell.
Lastly, the nature of the selective forces that led to the origin
of the eukaryotic cell should be considered. Martin and Muller
(166) have recently proposed the hydrogen hypothesis for the
formation of the eukaryotic cell, which posits that the eukary-
otic cell resulted from a symbiotic association between a hy-
drogen-dependent archaebacterium (such as a methanogen)
and an alpha proteobacterium, which under anaerobic condi-
tions produced molecular hydrogen as a waste product. The
driving (or selective) force in this symbiotic association was the
dependence of the archaebacterium on the molecular hydro-
gen produced by the symbiont. Martin and Muller (166), by
making different assumptions, have suggested how this single
symbiotic event could lead to the origin of the eukaryotic cell,
mitochondria, and hydrogenosomes. While the model pro-
posed by Martin and Muller satisfactorily accounts for the
origin of mitochondria and hydrogenosomes from the same
endosymbiotic event, it does not explain or even consider the
phylogeny or sequence characteristics of some of the best-
studied eukaryotic protein families which provide the main
evidence about the earliest events in the origin of the eukary-
otic cell, i.e., formation of the ER and nucleus (see the previ-
ous paragraph). In addition to the problems outlined in the
previous paragraph, this model for the origin of the eukaryotic
cell is inconsistent with the following facts. (i) The endosym-
biotic capture of an anaerobic hydrogen-producing bacterium
by a strictly anaerobic archaebacterium should produce a cell
TABLE 3. Proteins in the H. influenzae genome that are found in
both eubacteria and eukaryotes but for which no archaebacterial
homologs have been found
Namea
Gene
identification
no.b
1-Acyl-snglycerol-3-phosphate acetyltransferase .................... HI0734
ATP-dependent protease (sms) ............................................... HI1597
Acetoacetate CoA-transferase (a subunit)............................. HI0774
Catalase ....................................................................................... HI0928
Dehydroquinase.......................................................................... HI0970
Deoxyribose-phosphate aldolase .............................................. HI0047
7,8-dihydro-6-hydroxymethylpterin phosphokinase ............... HI0064
Dihydrolipoamide acetyltransferase ........................................ HI1232
Dihydrolipoamide succinyltransferase ..................................... HI1661
Dihydropterate synthase ........................................................... HI1336
DNA binding protein HU......................................................... HI0430
DNA mismatch repair protein (MutL) ................................... HI0667
DNA polymerase I..................................................................... HI0856
Formyltetrahydrofolate hydrolase............................................ HI1588
Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase ..................................................... HI1645
Galactokinase ............................................................................. HI0819
Glucose6-phosphate-1-dehydrogenase .................................... HI0558
GTP cyclohydrolase I ................................................................ HI1447
Ketoacyl reductase ..................................................................... HI0155
Leukotoxin secretion ATP binding protein ............................ HI1051
5,10-Methylenetetrahydrofolate dyhydrogenase..................... HI1444
NAD(P) transhydrogenase (a subunit)................................... HI1362
Peptide chain release factor 1 .................................................. HI1561
Peptidyl-tRNA hydrolase homolog.......................................... HI0394
Phosphatidylserine synthase...................................................... HI0425
Phosphatidylserine decarboxylase proenzyme........................ HI0160
Protein translocase subunit (SecA) ......................................... HI0909
Replicative DNA helicase (DnaB) .......................................... HI1574
Ribonucleoside-diphosphate reductase ................................... HI1660
Ribosomal protein L9................................................................ HI0544
Ribosomal protein L16.............................................................. HI0784
Ribosomal protein L19.............................................................. HI0201
Ribosomal protein L20.............................................................. HI1320
Ribosomal protein S6................................................................ HI0547
S-Adenosylmethionine synthetase............................................ HI1172
Single-stranded DNA binding protein .................................... HI0250
Thioredoxin................................................................................. HI1115
Translation initiation factor IF3 .............................................. HI1318
Uracil DNA glycosylase ............................................................ HI0018
Uridine kinase ............................................................................ HI0132
a CoA, coenzyme A.
b Refers to the gene identification number in the H. influenzae genome (66).
FIG. 29. Signature sequences (boxed) in the Hsp90 (a), IMP dehydrogenase (b), adenylosuccinate synthetase (c) proteins showing the relatedness of the eukaryotic
cytosolic homologs (E) to eubacteria (G1 and G2) rather than archaebacteria (A). For Hsp90, no archaebacterial homolog has been identified in the three genomes
that have been completely sequenced (26, 138, 215).
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1483
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
which should also be a strict anaerobe; however, to my knowl-
edge, no free-living eukaryotic organism is strictly anaerobic.
(ii) Since this fusion took place in an oxygenic atmosphere
(based upon the evolutionary position of proteobacteria in the
prokaryotic lineage [see “Evolutionary relationships among
eukaryotes”]), an anaerobic cell will be at a great selective
disadvantage under such conditions. (iii) Since endosymbiotic
association between hydrogen-producing bacteria and hydro-
gen-dependent archaebacteria is indicated to be very common,
it does not explain the uniqueness of the fusion event. (iv)
Molecular sequence data indicate that among archaebacteria,
the eocyte group of archaebacteria (i.e., thermoacidophilic)
and not methanogens are the closest relatives of eukaryotes
(198).
In contrast to the hydrogen hypothesis, which posits hydro-
gen dependence as the major selective force, I propose that the
two major selective forces that had a profound influence in
shaping the evolutionary history of life were (i) the antibiotic
selection pressure, which probably led to the evolution of both
archaebacteria and the diderm prokaryotes (see “Possible se-
lective forces leading to horizontal gene transfers”) and (ii)
oxygen sensitivity of the organisms when the atmosphere
changed from anaerobic to aerobic (208). In my view, a com-
bination of these two selective forces led to the association and
ultimate fusion of an antibiotic-resistant archaebacterium with
an oxygen-tolerant eubacterium to produce a novel eukaryotic
cell which was antibiotic resistant and oxygen tolerant. This
scenario explains why, during the gene assortment process in
the ancestral eukaryotic cell, most of the genes for the infor-
mation transfer processes (which provide the main targets for
different antibiotics) were retained from the archaebacterial
partner whereas a large number of genes for the metabolic
processes were acquired from the eubacterial parent. To ac-
count for the uniqueness of the fusion event, it is likely that the
FIG. 30. Neighbor-joining distance tree based on Hsp90 sequences indicating that the cytosolic and ER resident forms of these protein form paralogous gene
families, which resulted from a gene duplication event very early in the history of eukaryotic cells. The bootstrap scores out of 1,000 replicates are shown. Reproduced
from reference 97 with permission of the publisher.
1484 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
two groups of prokaryotes came together under a unique set of
atmospheric and environmental conditions, which led to an
association and selection of the new cell type.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Signature sequences and phylogenies based on different pro-
teins permit a reconstruction of the basic evolutionary history
of prokaryotes involving minimal assumptions. These studies
reveal that the evolutionary relationship within the prokaryotic
species is a continuum from the earliest-diverging prokaryotes
(low-G1C gram-positive bacteria and euryarchaeota archae-
bacteria) to the most recent groups (beta and gamma pro-
teobacteria), which can be accounted for by normal evolution-
ary mechanisms. The sequence data on a number of different
proteins suggest that the archaebacteria are polyphyletic and
are close relatives of gram-positive bacteria. The genes which
support a monophyly of archaebacteria are generally those
which are targets for the antibiotics produced by gram-positive
bacteria. Thus, antibiotic-induced selection pressure may have
played an important role in the evolution of archaebacteria,
diderm prokaryotes, and eukaryotes. A previously unrecog-
nized and important distinction within prokaryotes, forming
the primary taxonomic division within them, which is sup-
ported by both molecular sequence data and morphological
features, is of the monoderm prokaryotes (Monodermata, i.e.,
those bounded by a single cell membrane) and the diderm
prokaryotes (Didermata, i.e., those bounded by inner and outer
cell membranes defining a periplasmic compartment). In that
sense, both archaebacteria and gram-positive bacteria are mo-
noderm prokaryotes, and the distinction between archaebac-
teria and eubacteria is misplaced. Based on molecular se-
quences, it is possible to infer that the monoderm prokaryotes
are ancestral and the diderm prokaryotes have been derived
from them. The signature sequences in different proteins sup-
port the division of Archaebacteria into two distinct groups
(Euryarchaeota and Crenarchaeota) and of gram-positive bac-
teria into at least two groups, corresponding to the low-G1C
and high-G1C species, of which the high-G1C group is spe-
cifically related to the diderm prokaryotes. The Deinococcus-
Thermus group of species appears to be intermediate in the
transition between monoderm (i.e., gram-positive bacteria)
and diderm (i.e., gram-negative bacteria) prokaryotes. Within
gram-negative bacteria, evolution seems to have proceeded by
splitting off new groups in the following order: Deinococcus
FIG. 31. Signature sequences (boxed) in Hsp90 proteins showing the distinctness of eukaryotic homologs from prokaryotic homologs ¬ and the distinction between
ER homologs and the cytosolic homologs ­.
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1485
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
and Thermus 3 cyanobacteria 3 chlamydia, spirochetes and
relatives 3 proteobacteria-1 (includes green nonsulfur bacte-
ria and alpha, delta, and epsilon proteobacteria)3 proteobac-
teria-2 (includes beta and gamma proteobacteria).
The evolutionary history deduced here based on signature
sequences in some of the most highly conserved protein se-
quences in the biota is in contrast to the rather confusing
picture that seems to be emerging from other analyses of the
completed bacterial genomes (21, 50, 68, 130, 143, 144, 182,
191, 255). However, as has been pointed out (50, 143, 144,
182), of the large number of sequences in individual genomes,
many are unique to particular organisms or are found in only
closely related species and thus are of limited use for evolu-
tionary studies. Many others show limited sequence conserva-
tion, again limiting their usefulness for resolving distant evo-
lutionary relationships. Hence, the number of gene sequences
that show a high degree of conservation and can provide reli-
able evolutionary relationships (unaffected by horizontal gene
transfers, etc.) that correlate with the structural and physiolog-
ical attributes of organisms may turn out to be relatively small.
However, the relationships based on these should be consistent
with and should help explain other information.
The phylogenies and signature sequences based on a range
of proteins also provide evidence that all eukaryotic cells, in-
FIG. 32. Origin of the eukaryotic cell nucleus and endomembrane system as per the chimeric model. The key event in the origin of the eukaryotic cell is postulated
to be a symbiotic association between a gram-negative eubacterium (from the proteobacteria-1 group) and likely an “eocyte” archaebacterium. This association led to
the loss of the outer membrane from the gram-negative bacterium (not shown). As the membrane of the gram-negative bacterium surrounded the eocyte species, the
membrane of the latter species, containing ether-linked lipids (wavy line), became redundant and was lost. Eventual separation of the membrane infolds led to the
formation of the nuclear envelope and ER. The formation of these new compartments was preceded or accompanied by duplication of the genes for the chaperone
proteins (Hsp70, Hsp90, DnaJ, etc.), which are necessary for protein transport and communication within the compartments. The transfer of the genome from the
gram-negative eubacterium to the newly formed nucleus and an assortment and integration of genes from the two partners led to the formation of the ancestral
eukaryotic cell. Modified and reproduced from reference 105 with permission of the publisher.
FIG. 33. Signature sequence in glucose-fructose-6-phosphate transaminase, showing the presence of a unique signature (boxed) in eukaryotic homologs. The
eukaryotic homologs for Hsp70 (Fig. 26) and Hsp90 (Fig. 31) also contain several unique sequence signatures not found in any prokaryotic homologs. These signature
provides evidence that all of the eukaryotes are derived from a single ancestor and that the postulated fusion event was unique.
1486 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
cluding amitochondriate and aplastidic cells, received major
gene contributions to the nuclear genome from both an ar-
chaebacterium (very probably of the eocyte group) and a gram-
negative bacterium (related to proteobacteria-1). From these
data, it is proposed that in contrast to the basic premise of the
three-domain proposal, the ancestral eukaryotic cell never di-
rectly descended from archaebacteria but instead was a chi-
mera formed by fusion and integration of the genomes of an
archaebacterium and a gram-negative bacterium. The avail-
able data indicate that the primary fusion event that gave rise
to the ancestral eukaryotic cell was unique and that it was very
probably distinct from (and preceded) the one that gave rise to
mitochondria and hydrogenosomes. These results provide ev-
idence for an alternative view of the evolutionary relationships
among the extant organisms that differs from the three-domain
proposal.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Vanessa Johari, Charu Chandrashekhar, and Thuyanh Le
for database searches on different proteins. Thanks are also due to
R. G. E. Murray, K. B. Freeman, B. J. Soltys, and two anonymous
reviewers for their critical reading and many helpful comments on the
manuscript. Several helpful suggestions received from Lynn Margulis
and R. G. E. Murray concerning taxonomic terms and conventions are
also gratefully acknowledged. I am also indebted to B. Singh for his
involvement in cloning and sequencing of different genes, which
formed the foundation of our work in this area.
The work from my laboratory was supported by a research grant
from the Medical Research Council of Canada.
REFERENCES
1. Adam, R. D. 1991. The biology of Giardia spp. Microbiol. Rev. 55:706–732.
2. Ahmad, S., R. Ahuja, T. J. Venner, and R. S. Gupta. 1990. Identification of
a protein altered in mutants resistant to microtubule inhibitors as a member
of the major heat shock protein (hsp70) family. Mol. Cell. Biol. 10:5160–
5165.
3. Alberts, B., D. Bray, J. Lewis, M. Raff, K. Roberts, and J. D. Watson. 1994.
Molecular biology of the cell. Garland Publishing, Inc., New York, N.Y.
4. Allsopp, A. 1969. Phylogenetic relationships of the procaryota and the
origin of the eucaryotic cell. New Phytol. 68:591–612.
5. Altschul, S. F., W. Gish, W. Miller, E. W. Myers, and D. J. Lipman. 1990.
Basic local alignment search tool. J. Mol. Biol. 215:403–410.
6. Atlas, R. M. 1988. Microbiology: fundamentals and applications. Macmillan
Publishing Co., New York, N.Y.
7. Baldauf, S. L., J. D. Palmer, and W. F. Doolittle. 1996. The root of the
universal tree and the origin of eukaryotes based on elongation factor
phylogeny. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93:7749–7754.
8. Balows, A., H. G. Tru¨per, M. Dworkin, W. Harder, and K. H. Schleifer.
1992. The prokaryotes. Springer-Verlag, New York, N.Y.
9. Belfort, M., and A. Weiner. 1997. Another bridge between kingdoms: tRNA
splicing in archaea and eukaryotes. Cell 89:1003–1006.
10. Benachenhou-Lahfa, N., P. Forterre, and B. Labedan. 1993. Evolution of
glutamate dehydrogenase genes: evidence for two paralogous protein fam-
ilies and unusual branching patterns of the archaebacteria in the universal
tree of life. J. Mol. Evol. 36:335–346.
11. Beveridge, T. J. 1990. Mechanism of gram variability in select bacteria. J.
Bacteriol. 172:1609–1620.
12. Beveridge, T. J., and J. Davies. 1983. Cellular response of Bacillus subtilis
and Escherichia coli to the Gram stain. J. Bacteriol. 156:846–858.
13. Beveridge, T. J., and S. Schultze-Lam. 1996. The response of selected
members of the archaea to the Gram stain. Microbiology 142:2887–2895.
14. Black, J. G. 1993. Microbiology: principles and applications. Prentice-Hall,
Inc., Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
15. Blattner, F. R., G. Plunkett III, C. A. Bloch, N. T. Perna, V. Burland, M.
Riley, J. Collado-Vides, J. D. Glasner, C. K. Rode, G. F. Mayhew, J. Gregor,
N. W. Davis, H. A. Kirkpatrick, M. A. Goeden, D. J. Rose, B. Mau, and Y.
Shao. 1997. The complete genome sequence of Escherichia coli K-12. Sci-
ence 277:1453–1462.
16. Bocchetta, M., E. Ceccarelli, R. Creti, A. M. Sanangelantoni, O. Tiboni,
and P. Cammarano. 1995. Arrangement and nucleotide sequence of the
gene (fus) encoding elongation factor G (EF-G) from the hyperthermo-
philic bacterium Aquifex pyrophilus: phylogenetic depth of hyperthermo-
philic bacteria inferred from analysis of the EF-G/fus sequences. J. Mol.
Evol. 41:803–812.
17. Boorstein, W. R., T. Ziegelhoffer, and E. A. Craig. 1994. Molecular evolu-
tion of the HSP70 multigene family. J. Mol. Evol. 38:1–17.
18. Bork, P., C. Sander, and A. Valencia. 1992. An ATPase domain common to
prokaryotic cell cycle proteins, sugar kinases, actin, and hsp70 heat shock
proteins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89:7290–7294.
18a.Brennan, P. J., and H. Nikaido. 1995. The envelope of mycobacteria. Annu.
Rev. Biochem. 64:29–63.
19. Brooks, B. W., R. G. E. Murray, J. L. Johnson, E. Stackebrandt, C. R.
Woese, and G. E. Fox. 1980. Red-pigmented micrococci: a basis for taxon-
omy. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol. 30:627–646.
20. Brown, J. R., and W. F. Doolittle. 1995. Root of the universal tree of life
based on ancient aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase gene duplications. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 92:2441–2445.
21. Brown, J. R., and W. F. Doolittle. 1997. Archaea and the prokaryote-to-
eukaryote transition. Microbiol. Rev. 61:456–502.
22. Brown, J. R., Y. Masuchi, F. T. Robb, and W. F. Doolittle. 1994. Evolu-
tionary relationships of bacterial and archaeal glutamine synthetase genes.
J. Mol. Evol. 38:566–576.
23. Buchanan, R. E. 1925. General systematic bacteriology. The Williams &
Wilkins Co., Baltimore, Md.
24. Buchanan, R. E., and N. E. Gibbons. 1974. Bergey’s manual of deteminative
bacteriology, The Williams & Wilkins Co., Baltimore, Md.
25. Bui, E. T., P. J. Bradley, and P. J. Johnson. 1996. A common evolutionary
origin for mitochondria and hydrogenosomes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
93:9651–9656.
26. Bult, C. J., O. White, G. J. Olsen, L. Zhou, R. D. Fleischmann, G. G. Sutton,
J. A. Blake, L. M. FitzGerald, R. A. Clayton, J. D. Gocayne, A. R. Kerlavage,
B. A. Dougherty, J. F. Tomb, M. D. Adams, C. I. Reich, R. Overbeek, E. F.
Kirkness, K. G. Weinstock, J. M. Merrick, A. Glodek, J. L. Scott, N. S. M.
Geoghagen, J. F. Weidman, J. L. Fuhrmann, and J. C. Venter. 1996. Com-
plete genome sequence of the methanogenic archaeon, Methanococcus
jannaschii. Science 273:1058–1073.
27. Bustard, K., and R. S. Gupta. 1997. The sequences of heat shock protein 40
(DnaJ) homologs provide evidence for a close evolutionary relationship
between the Deinococcus-Thermus group and cyanobacteria. J. Mol. Evol.
45:193–205.
28. Cavalier-Smith, T. 1986. The kingdoms of organisms. Nature 324:416–417.
29. Cavalier-Smith, T. 1987. Eukaryotes with no mitochondria. Nature 326:
332–333.
30. Cavalier-Smith, T. 1987. The origin of eukaryotic and archaebacterial cells.
Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 503:17–54.
30a.Cavalier-Smith, T. 1991. The evolution of cells, p. 271–304. In S. Osawa and
T. Honjo (ed.), Evolution of life. Springer-Verlag, Tokyo, Japan.
31. Cavalier-Smith, T. 1992. Origins of secondary metabolism. Ciba Found.
Symp. 171:64–80.
32. Cavalier-Smith, T., and E. E. Chao. 1996. Molecular phylogeny of the
free-living archezoan Trepomonas agilis and the nature of the first eu-
karyote. J. Mol. Evol. 43:551–562.
33. Cedergren, R., M. W. Gray, Y. Abel, and D. Sankoff. 1988. The evolutionary
relationships among known life forms. J. Mol. Evol. 28:98–112.
34. Chatton, E. 1937. Titres et travaux scientifiques (1906–1937) de Edouard
Chatton. E. Sottano, Sete, France.
35. Clark, C. G., and A. J. Roger. 1995. Direct evidence for secondary loss of
mitochondria in Entamoeba histolytica. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92:
6518–6521.
36. Cohan, F. M. 1994. Genetic exchange and evolutionary divergence in pro-
karyotes. Science 264:382–388.
37. Cohan, F. M. 1996. The role of genetic exchange in bacterial evolution.
ASM News 62:631–636.
38. Colewell, R. R. 1970. Polyphasic taxonomy of bacteria, p. 421–436. In H.
Iizuka and T. Hasegawa (ed.), Culture collections of microorganisms. Uni-
versity of Tokyo Press, Tokyo, Japan.
39. Counsell, T., and R. G. E. Murray. 1986. Polar lipid profiles of the genus
Deinococcus. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol. 36:202–206.
40. Craig, E. A. 1993. Chaperones: helpers along the pathways to protein
folding. Science 260:1902–1903.
41. Craig, E. A., B. D. Gambill, and R. J. Nelson. 1993. Heat shock proteins:
molecular chaperones of protein biogenesis. Microbiol. Rev. 57:402–414.
42. Creti, R., E. Ceccarelli, M. Bocchetta, A. M. Sanangelantoni, O. Tiboni, P.
Palm, and P. Cammarano. 1994. Evolution of translational elongation
factor (EF) sequences: reliability of global phylogenies inferred from EF-1
alpha(Tu) and EF-2(G) proteins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91:3255–3259.
43. Darwin, C. 1859. The origin of species by means of natural selection, or the
preservation of favoured races in the struggle for life. John Murray, Lon-
don, United Kingdom.
44. Davies, J. 1994. Inactivation of antibiotics and the dissemination of resis-
tance genes. Science 264:375–382.
45. Deckert, G., P. V. Warren, T. Gaasterland, W. G. Young, A. L. Lenox, D. E.
Graham, R. Overbeek, M. A. Snead, M. Keller, M. Aujay, R. Huber, R. A.
Feldman, J. M. Short, G. J. Olsen, and R. V. Swanson. 1998. The complete
genome of the hyperthermophilic bacterium Aquifex aeolicus. Nature 392:
353–358.
46. de Duve, C. 1996. The birth of complex cells. Sci. Am. 274:50–57.
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1487
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
47. Dennis, P. P. 1997. Ancient ciphers: translation in Archaea. Cell 89:1007–
1010.
48. De Rijk, P., Y. Van de Peer, I. Van den Broeck, and R. De Wachter. 1995.
Evolution according to large ribosomal subunit RNA. J. Mol. Evol. 41:366–
375.
49. Doolittle, R. F. 1995. Of archae and eo: what’s in a name? Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 92:2421–2423.
50. Doolittle, R. F. 1998. Microbial genomes opened up. Nature 392:339–342.
51. Doolittle, R. F., D. F. Feng, S. Tsang, G. Cho, and E. Little. 1996. Deter-
mining divergence times of the major kingdoms of living organisms with a
protein clock. Science 271:470–477.
52. Doolittle, W. F. 1998. A paradigm gels shifty. Nature 392:15–16.
53. Doolittle, W. F., and J. R. Brown. 1994. Tempo, mode, the progenote, and
the universal root. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91:6721–6728.
54. Edgell, D. R., and W. F. Doolittle. 1997. Archaea and the origin(s) of DNA
replication proteins. Cell 89:995–998.
55. Eisen, J. A. 1995. The RecA protein as a model molecule for molecular
systematic studies of bacteria: comparison of trees of RecAs and 16S
rRNAs from the same species. J. Mol. Evol. 41:1105–1123.
56. Falah, M., and R. S. Gupta. 1994. Cloning of the hsp70 (dnaK) genes from
Rhizobium meliloti and Pseudomonas cepacia: phylogenetic analyses of mi-
tochondrial origin based on a highly conserved protein sequence. J. Bacte-
riol. 176:7748–7753.
57. Falah, M., and R. S. Gupta. 1997. Phylogenetic analysis of mycoplasmas
based on Hsp70 sequences: cloning of the dnaK (hsp70) gene region of
Mycoplasma capricolum. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol. 47:38–45.
58. Felsenstein, J. 1982. Numerical methods for inferring evolutionary trees. Q.
Rev. Biol. 57:379–404.
59. Felsenstein, J. 1985. Confidence limits in phylogenies: an approach using
the bootstrap. Evolution 39:783–791.
60. Felsenstein, J. 1988. Phylogenies from molecular sequences: inference and
reliability. Ann. Rev. Genet. 22:521–565.
61. Felsenstein, J. 1996. Inferring phylogenies from protein sequences by par-
simony, distance, and likelihood methods. Methods Enzymol. 266:418–427.
62. Felsenstein, J. 1997. Cases in which parsimony and compatibility methods
will be positively misleading. Syst. Zool. 27:401–410.
63. Feng, D. F., G. Cho, and R. F. Doolittle. 1997. Determining divergence
times with a protein clock: update and reevaluation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 94:13028–13033.
64. Fitch, W. M. 1997. Toward defining the course of evolution: minimum
change for a specified tree topology. Syst. Zool. 20:406–416.
65. Fitch, W. M., and E. Margoliash. 1967. Construction of phylogentic trees:
a method based on mutational distances as estimated from cytochrome c
sequences is of general applicability. Science 155:279–284.
65a.Flaherty, K. M., D. B. McKay, W. Kabsch, and K. C. Holmes. 1991. Sim-
ilarity of the three-dimensional structures of actin and the ATPase frag-
ment of a 70-kDa heat shock cognate protein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
88:5041–5045.
66. Fleischmann, R. D., M. D. Adams, O. White, R. A. Clayton, E. F. Kirkness,
A. R. Kerlavage, C. J. Bult, J. F. Tomb, B. A. Dougherty, and J. M. Merrick.
1995. Whole-genome random sequencing and assembly of Haemophilus
influenzae Rd. Science 269:496–512.
67. Forterre, P. 1996. A hot topic: the origin of hyperthermophiles. Cell 85:
789–792.
68. Forterre, P. 1997. Protein versus rRNA: problems in rooting the universal
tree of life. ASM News 63:89–95.
69. Forterre, P. 1997. Archaea: what can we learn from their sequences. Curr.
Opin. Genet. Dev. 7:764–770.
70. Forterre, P., N. Benachenhou-Lahfa, F. Confalonieri, M. Duguet, C. Elie,
and B. Labedan. 1992. The nature of the last universal ancestor and the
root of the tree of life, still open questions. Biosystems 28:15–32.
71. Fox, G. E., E. Stackebrandt, R. B. Hespell, J. Gibson, J. Maniloff, T. A.
Dyer, R. S. Wolfe, W. E. Balch, R. S. Tanner, L. J. Magrum, L. B. Zablen,
R. Blakemore, R. Gupta, L. Bonen, B. J. Lewis, D. A. Stahl, K. R. Luehrsen,
K. N. Chen, and C. R. Woese. 1980. The phylogeny of prokaryotes. Science
209:457–463.
72. Fraser, C. M., S. Casjens, W. M. Huang, G. G. Sutton, R. Clayton, R.
Lathigra, O. White, K. A. Ketchum, R. Dodson, E. K. Hickey, M. Gwinn, B.
Dougherty, J. F. Tomb, R. D. Fleischmann, D. Richardson, J. Peterson,
A. R. Kerlavage, J. Quackenbush, S. Salzberg, M. Hanson, R. Van Vugt, N.
Palmer, M. D. Adams, and J. Gocayne. 1997. Genomic sequence of a Lyme
disease spirochaete, Borrelia burgdorferi. Nature 390:580–586.
73. Fraser, C. M., J. D. Gocayne, O. White, M. D. Adams, R. A. Clayton, R. D.
Fleischmann, C. J. Bult, A. R. Kerlavage, G. Sutton, and J. M. Kelley. 1995.
The minimal gene complement of Mycoplasma genitalium. Science 270:397–
403.
74. Frye, N. 1990. Words with power, p. 129. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, New
York, N.Y.
75. Fuerst, J. A. 1995. The Planctomycetes: emerging models for microbial
ecology, evolution and cell biology. Microbiology 141:1493–1506.
76. Galley, K. A., B. Singh, and R. S. Gupta. 1992. Cloning of HSP70 (dnaK)
gene from Clostridium perfringens using a general polymerase chain reac-
tion based approach. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1130:203–208.
77. Galtier, N., and M. Gouy. 1995. Inferring phylogenies from DNA sequences
of unequal base compositions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92:11317–11321.
78. Germot, A., H. Philippe, and H. Le Guyader. 1996. Presence of a mito-
chondrial-type 70-kDa heat shock protein in Trichomonas vaginalis sug-
gests a very early mitochondrial endosymbiosis in eukaryotes. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 93:14614–14617.
79. Glasby, J. S. 1979. Encyclopedia of antibiotics. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
New York, N.Y.
80. Goffeau, A., B. G. Barrell, H. Bussey, R. W. Davis, B. Dujon, H. Feldmann,
F. Galibert, J. D. Hoheisel, C. Jacq, M. Johnston, E. J. Louis, H. W. Mewes,
Y. Murakami, P. Philippsen, H. Tettelin, and S. G. Oliver. 1996. Life with
6000 genes. Science 274:546, 563–567.
81. Gogarten, J. P., H. Kibak, P. Dittrich, L. Taiz, E. J. Bowman, B. J. Bowman,
M. F. Manolson, R. J. Poole, T. Date, and T. Oshima. 1989. Evolution of the
vacuolar H1-ATPase: implications for the origin of eukaryotes. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 86:6661–6665.
82. Gogarten, J. P., T. Starke, H. Kibak, J. Fishman, and L. Taiz. 1992.
Evolution and isoforms of V-ATPase subunits. J. Exp. Biol. 172:137–147.
83. Gogarten-Boekels, M., E. Hilario, and J. P. Gogarten. 1995. The effects of
heavy meteorite bombardment on the early evolution—the emergence of
the three domains of life. Origins Life Evol. Biosphere 25:251–264.
84. Golding, B. 1996. Evolution: when was life’s first branch point? Curr. Biol.
6:679–682.
85. Golding, G. B., and R. S. Gupta. 1995. Protein-based phylogenies support
a chimeric origin for the eukaryotic genome. Mol. Biol. Evol. 12:1–6.
86. Gouy, M., and W. H. Li. 1989. Phylogenetic analysis based on rRNA
sequences supports the archaebacterial rather than the eocyte tree. Nature
339:145–147.
87. Gouy, M., and W. H. Li. 1989. Molecular phylogeny of the kingdoms
Animalia, Plantae, and Fungi. Mol. Biol. Evol. 6:109–122.
88. Gram, C. 1884. Ueber die isolierte farbung der Schizomyceten in Schnitt
und Trockenpraparaten. Fortschr. Med. 2:185–189.
89. Gray, M. W. 1988. Organelle origins and ribosomal RNA. Biochem. Cell
Biol. 66:325–348.
90. Gray, M. W. 1992. The endosymbiont hypothesis revisited. Int. Rev. Cytol.
141:233–357.
91. Gray, M. W. 1996. The third form of life. Nature 383:299–300.
92. Gray, M. W., and W. F. Doolittle. 1982. Has the endosymbiont hypothesis
been proven? Microbiol. Rev. 46:1–42.
93. Grogan, D. W. 1996. Exchange of genetic information at extremely high
temperatures in the archaeon Sulfolobus acidocaldarius. J. Bacteriol. 178:
3207–3211.
94. Gruber, T. M., and D. A. Bryant. 1997. Molecular systematic studies of
eubacteria, using s70-type sigma factors of group 1 and group 2. J. Bacte-
riol. 179:1734–1747.
95. Gupta, R. S. 1990. Sequence and structural homology between a mouse
T-complex protein TCP-1 and the ‘chaperonin’ family of bacterial (GroEL,
60-65 kDa heat shock antigen) and eukaryotic proteins. Biochem. Int.
20:833–841.
96. Gupta, R. S. 1995. Evolution of the chaperonin families (Hsp60, Hsp10 and
Tcp-1) of proteins and the origin of eukaryotic cells. Mol. Microbiol. 15:
1–11.
97. Gupta, R. S. 1995. Phylogenetic analysis of the 90 kD heat shock family of
protein sequences and an examination of the relationship among animals,
plants, and fungi species. Mol. Biol. Evol. 12:1063–1073.
98. Gupta, R. S. 1996. Evolutionary relationships of chaperonins, p. 27–64. In
R. J. Ellis (ed.), The chaperonins. Academic Press, Inc., New York, N.Y.
99. Gupta, R. S. 1997. Protein phylogenies and signature sequences: evolution-
ary relationships within prokaryotes and between prokaryotes and eu-
karyotes. Antonie Leeuwenhoek 72:49–61.
100. Gupta, R. S. 1998. Life’s third domain (Archaea): an established fact or an
endangered paradigm? A new proposal for classification of organisms
based on protein sequences and cell structure. Theor. Popul. Biol. 54:91–
104.
101. Gupta, R. S. 1998. What are archaebacteria: life’s third domain or mono-
derm prokaryotes related to Gram-positive bacteria? A new proposal for
the classification of prokaryotic organisms. Mol. Microbiol. 29:695–708.
102. Gupta, R. S., K. Aitken, M. Falah, and B. Singh. 1994. Cloning of Giardia
lamblia heat shock protein HSP70 homologs: implications regarding origin
of eukaryotic cells and of endoplasmic reticulum. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 91:2895–2899.
103. Gupta, R. S., K. Bustard, M. Falah, and D. Singh. 1997. Sequencing of heat
shock protein 70 (DnaK) homologs from Deinococcus proteolyticus and
Thermomicrobium roseum and their integration in a protein-based phylog-
eny of prokaryotes. J. Bacteriol. 179:345–357.
104. Gupta, R. S., and G. B. Golding. 1993. Evolution of HSP70 gene and its
implications regarding relationships between archaebacteria, eubacteria,
and eukaryotes. J. Mol. Evol. 37:573–582.
105. Gupta, R. S., and G. B. Golding. 1996. The origin of the eukaryotic cell.
Trends Biochem. Sci. 21:166–171.
106. Gupta, R. S., and V. Johari. 1998. Signature sequences in diverse proteins
1488 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
provide evidence of a close evolutionary relationship between the Deino-
coccus-Thermus group and cyanobacteria. J. Mol. Evol. 46:716–720.
107. Gupta, R. S., and B. Singh. 1992. Cloning of the HSP70 gene from Halobac-
terium marismortui: relatedness of archaebacterial HSP70 to its eubacterial
homologs and a model for the evolution of the HSP70 gene. J. Bacteriol.
174:4594–4605.
108. Gupta, R. S., and B. Singh. 1994. Phylogenetic analysis of 70 kD heat shock
protein sequences suggests a chimeric origin for the eukaryotic cell nucleus.
Curr. Biol. 4:1104–1114.
109. Hartman, H. 1984. The origin of the eukaryotic cell. Speculations Sci.
Technol. 7:77–81.
110. Hasegawa, M., and M. Fujiwara. 1993. Relative efficiencies of the maxi-
mum likelihood, maximum parsimony, and neighbor-joining methods for
estimating protein phylogeny. Mol. Phylogenet. Evol. 2:1–5.
111. Hasegawa, M., and T. Hashimoto. 1993. Ribosomal RNA trees misleading?
Nature 361:23.
112. Hashimoto, T., and M. Hasegawa. 1996. Origin and early evolution of
eukaryotes inferred from the amino acid sequences of translation elonga-
tion factors 1alpha/Tu and 2/G. Adv. Biophys. 32:73–120.
113. Hashimoto, T., Y. Nakamura, F. Nakamura, T. Shirakura, J. Adachi, N.
Goto, K. Okamoto, and M. Hasegawa. 1994. Protein phylogeny gives a
robust estimation for early divergences of eukaryotes: phylogenetic place of
a mitochondria-lacking protozoan, Giardia lamblia. Mol. Biol. Evol. 11:65–
71.
113a.Hashimoto, T., L. B. Sanchez, T. Shirakura, M. Muller, and M. Hasegawa.
1998. Secondary loss of mitochondria in Giardia lamblia and Trichomonas
vaginalis revealed by valyl-tRNA synthetase phylogeny. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 95:6860–6865.
114. Hensel, R., P. Zwicki, S. Fabry, J. Lang, and P. Palm. 1997. Sequence
comparison of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenases from the three
urkingdoms: evolutionary implications. Can. J. Microbiol. 35:81–85.
115. Hensell, R., W. Demharter, O. Kandler, R. M. Kroppenstedt, and E. Stacke
brandt. 1986. Chemotaxonomic and molecular-genetic studies of the genus
Thermus: evidence for a phylogenetic relationship of Thermus aquaticus and
Thermus ruber to the genus Deinococcus. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol. 36:444–453.
116. Henze, K., A. Badr, M. Wettern, R. Cerff, and W. Martin. 1995. A nuclear
gene of eubacterial origin in Euglena gracilis reflects cryptic endosymbioses
during protist evolution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92:9122–9126.
117. Higgins, D. G., and P. M. Sharp. 1988. CLUSTAL: a package for perform-
ing multiple sequence alignments on a microcomputer. Gene 73:237–244.
118. Hilario, E., and J. P. Gogarten. 1993. Horizontal transfer of ATPase
genes—the tree of life becomes a net of life. Biosystems 31:111–119.
119. Himmelreich, R., H. Hilbert, H. Plagens, E. Pirkl, B. C. Li, and R. Herr-
mann. 1996. Complete sequence analysis of the genome of the bacterium
Mycoplasma pneumoniae. Nucleic Acids Res. 24:4420–4449.
120. Hirt, R. P., B. Healy, C. R. Vossbrinck, E. U. Canning, and T. M. Embley.
1997. A mitochondrial Hsp70 orthologue in Vairimorpha necatrix: molecular
evidence that microsporidia once contained mitochondria. Curr. Biol.
7:995–998.
121. Holt, J. G., N. R. Krieg, P. H. A. Sneath, J. T. Staley, and S. T. Williams.
1994. Bergey’s manual of determinative bacteriology, 9th ed. The Williams
& Wilkins Co., Baltimore, Md.
122. Hori, H., and S. Osawa. 1987. Origin and evolution of Organisms as de-
duced from 5S ribosomal RNA sequences. Mol. Biol. Evol. 4:445–472.
123. Horner, D. S., R. P. Hirt, S. Kilvington, D. Lloyd, and T. M. Embley. 1996.
Molecular data suggest an early acquisition of the mitochondrion endosym-
biont. Proc. R. Soc. London Ser. B 263:1053–1059.
124. Inouye, M. 1979. What is the outer membrane? p. 1–12. In M. Inouye (ed.),
Bacterial outer membranes: biogenesis and functions. John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., New York, N.Y.
125. Irwin, D. M. 1994. Molecular evolution. Who are the parents of eu-
karyotes? Curr. Biol. 4:1115–1117.
126. Iwabe, N., K. Kuma, M. Hasegawa, S. Osawa, and T. Miyata. 1989. Evo-
lutionary relationship of archaebacteria, eubacteria, and eukaryotes in-
ferred from phylogenetic trees of duplicated genes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 86:9355–9359.
127. Kandler, O., and H. Konig. 1993. Cell envelopes of archaea: structure and
chemistry, p. 223–259. In M. Kates, D. J. Kushner, and A. T. Matheson
(ed.), The biochemistry of Archaea (Archaebacteria). Elsevier Science Pub-
lishers B.V. New York, N.Y.
128. Kaneko, T., S. Sato, H. Kotani, A. Tanaka, E. Asamizu, Y. Nakamura, N.
Miyajima, M. Hirosawa, M. Sugiura, S. Sasamoto, T. Kimura, T. Hosouchi,
A. Matsuno, A. Muraki, N. Nakazaki, K. Naruo, S. Okumura, S. Shimpo,
C. Takeuchi, T. Wada, A. Watanabe, M. Yamada, M. Yasuda, and S.
Tabata. 1996. Sequence analysis of the genome of the unicellular cyanobac-
terium Synechocystis sp. strain PCC6803. II. Sequence determination of the
entire genome and assignment of potential protein-coding regions. DNA
Res. 3:109–136.
129. Karlin, S., J. Mrazek, and A. M. Campbell. 1997. Compositional biases of
bacterial genomes and evolutionary implications. J. Bacteriol. 179:3899–
3913.
130. Karlin, S., and J. Mra´zek. 1997. Compositional differences within and
between eukaryotic genomes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94:10227–10232.
131. Karlin, S., G. M. Weinstock, and V. Brendel. 1995. Bacterial classifications
derived from RecA protein sequence comparisons. J. Bacteriol. 177:6881–
6893.
132. Kasting, J. F. 1993. Earth’s early atmosphere. Science 259:920–926.
133. Kates, M. 1992. Archaebacterial lipids: structure, biosynthesis and function.
Biochem. Soc. Symp. 58:51–72.
134. Keeling, P. J., and W. F. Doolittle. 1995. Archaea: narrowing the gap
between prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92:5761–
5764.
135. Keeling, P. J., and W. F. Doolittle. 1997. Evidence that eukaryotic triose-
phosphate isomerase is of alpha-proteobacterial origin. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 94:1270–1275.
136. Kimura, M. 1983. The neutral theory of molecular evolution. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, England.
137. Kishino, H., and M. Hasegawa. 1989. Evaluation of the maximum likeli-
hood estimate of the evolutionary tree topologies from DNA sequence
data, and the branching order in hominoidea. J. Mol. Evol. 29:170–179.
138. Klenk, H. P., R. A. Clayton, J. F. Tomb, O. White, K. E. Nelson, K. A.
Ketchum, R. J. Dodson, M. Gwinn, E. K. Hickey, J. D. Peterson, D. L.
Richardson, A. R. Kerlavage, D. E. Graham, N. C. Kyrpides, R. D. Fleisch-
mann, J. Quackenbush, N. H. Lee, G. G. Sutton, S. Gill, E. F. Kirkness,
B. A. Dougherty, K. McKenney, M. D. Adams, and B. Loftus. 1997. The
complete genome sequence of the hyperthermophilic, sulphate-reducing
archaeon Archaeoglobus fulgidus. Nature 390:364–370.
139. Klenk, H. P., and W. Zillig. 1994. DNA-dependent RNA polymerase sub-
unit B as a tool for phylogenetic reconstructions: branching topology of the
archaeal domain. J. Mol. Evol. 38:420–432.
140. Kluyver, A. J., and C. B. van Niel. 1936. Prospects for a natural system of
classification of bacteria. Zentbl. Bakteriol. Parasitenkd. Infektionskr. Hyg.
Abt. II 94:369–403.
141. Knoll, A. H. 1992. The early evolution of eukaryotes: a geological perspec-
tive. Science 256:622–627.
142. Kondratieva, E. N., N. Pfennig, and H. G. Tru¨per. 1992. The Phototrophic
Prokaryotes, p. 312–330. In A. Balows, H. G. Tru¨per, M. Dworkin, W.
Harder, and K. H. Schleifer (ed.), The prokaryotes, 2nd ed. Springer-
Verlag, New York, N.Y.
143. Koonin, E. V., and M. Y. Galperin. 1997. Prokaryotic genomes: the emerg-
ing paradigm of genome-based microbiology. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev.
7:757–763.
144. Koonin, E. V., A. R. Mushegian, M. Y. Galperin, and D. R. Walker. 1997.
Comparison of archaeal and bacterial genomes: computer analysis of pro-
tein sequences predicts novel functions and suggests a chimeric origin for
the archaea. Mol. Microbiol. 25:619–637.
145. Koonin, E. V., A. R. Mushegian, and K. E. Rudd. 1996. Sequencing and
analysis of bacterial genomes. Curr. Biol. 6:404–416.
146. Kristensen, T., R. Lopez, and H. Prydz. 1992. An estimate of the sequenc-
ing error frequency in the DNA sequence databases. DNA Seq. 2:343–346.
(Erratum, 3:337, 1993.)
146a.Kumada, Y., E. Takano, K. Nagaoka, and C. J. Thompson. 1990. Strepto-
myces hygroscopicus has two glutamine synthetase genes. J. Bacteriol. 172:
5343–5351.
147. Kunst, F., N. Ogasawara, I. Moszer, A. M. Albertini, G. Alloni, V. Azevedo,
M. G. Bertero, P. Bessie`res, A. Bolotin, S. Borchert, R. Borriss, L. Boursier,
A. Brans, M. Braun, S. C. Brignell, S. Bron, S. Brouillet, C. V. Bruschi, B.
Caldwell, V. Capuano, N. M. Carter, S. K. Choi, J. J. Codani, and I. F.
Connerton. 1997. The complete genome sequence of the Gram-positive
bacterium Bacillus subtilis. Nature 390:249–256.
148. Lake, J. A. 1985. Evolving ribosome structure: domains in archaebacteria,
eubacteria, eocytes and eukaryotes. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 54:507–530.
149. Lake, J. A. 1988. Origin of the eukaryotic nucleus determined by rate-
invariant analysis of rRNA sequences. Nature 331:184–186.
150. Lake, J. A. 1991. Tracing origins with molecular sequences: metazoan and
eukaryotic beginnings. Trends Biochem. Sci. 16:46–50.
151. Lake, J. A. 1991. The order of sequence alignment can bias the selection of
tree topology. Mol. Biol. Evol. 8:378–385.
152. Lake, J. A. 1994. Reconstructing evolutionary trees from DNA and protein
sequences: paralinear distances. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91:1455–1459.
153. Lake, J. A., M. W. Clark, E. Henderson, S. P. Fay, M. Oakes, A. Scheinman,
J. P. Thornber, and R. A. Mah. 1985. Eubacteria, halobacteria, and the
origin of photosynthesis: the photocytes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 82:
3716–3720.
154. Lake, J. A., E. Henderson, M. W. Clark, and A. T. Matheson. 1982. Map-
ping evolution with ribosome structure: intralineage constancy and inter-
lineage variation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 79:5948–5952.
155. Lake, J. A., E. Henderson, M. Oakes, and M. W. Clark. 1984. Eocytes: a
new ribosome structure indicates a kingdom with a close relationship to
eukaryotes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81:3786–3790.
156. Lake, J. A., and M. C. Rivera. 1994. Was the nucleus the first endosymbi-
ont? Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91:2880–2881.
157. Lancy, P., Jr., and R. G. E. Murray. 1978. The envelope of Micrococcus
radiodurans: isolation, purification and preliminary analysis of the wall
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1489
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
layers. Can. J. Microbiol. 24:162–176.
158. Langer, D., J. Hain, P. Thuriaux, and W. Zillig. 1995. Transcription in
archaea: similarity to that in eucarya. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92:5768–
5772.
159. Margulis, L. 1970. Origin of eukaryotic cells. Yale University Press, New
Haven, Conn.
160. Margulis, L. 1992. Symbiosis theroy: cells as microbial communities, p.
149–172. In L. Margulis and L. Olendzenski (ed.), Environmental evolu-
tion: effects of the origin and evolution of life on planet earth. The MIT
Press, Cambridge, Mass.
161. Margulis, L. 1992. Biodiversity: molecular biological domains, symbiosis
and kingdom origins. Biosystems 27:39–51.
162. Margulis, L. 1993. Symbiosis in cell evolution. W. H. Freeman & Co., New
York, N.Y.
163. Margulis, L. 1996. Archaeal-eubacterial mergers in the origin of Eukarya:
phylogenetic classification of life. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93:1071–1076.
164. Margulis, L., and K. V. Schwartz. 1988. Five kingdoms—an illustrated
guide to the phyla of life on Earth. W. H. Freeman & Co., New York, N.Y.
165. Martin, W., H. Brinkmann, C. Savonna, and R. Cerff. 1993. Evidence for a
chimeric nature of nuclear genomes: eubacterial origin of eukaryotic glyc-
eraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase genes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
90:8692–8696.
166. Martin, W., and M. Muller. 1998. The hydrogenosome hypothesis for the
first eukaryote. Nature 392:37–41.
167. Mayr, E. 1942. Systematics and the origin of species. Columbia University
Press, New York, N.Y.
168. Mayr, E. 1968. The role of systematics in biology. Science 159:595–599.
169. Mayr, E. 1990. A natural system of organisms. Nature 348:491.
170. Meyer, T. E., M. A. Cusanovich, and M. D. Kamen. 1986. Evidence against
use of bacterial amino acid sequence data for construction of all-inclusive
phylogenetic trees. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83:217–220.
170a.Morden, C. W., C. F. Delwiche, M. Kuhsel, and J. D. Palmer. 1992. Gene
phylogenies and the endosymbiotic origin of plastids. Biosystems 28:75–90.
171. Morell, V. 1996. Life’s last domain. Science 273:1043–1045.
172. Muller, M. 1993. The hydrogenosome. J. Gen. Microbiol. 139:2879–2889.
173. Murray, R. G. E. 1968. Microbial structure as an aid to microbial classifi-
cation and taxonomy. Spisy Prirodoved. Fak. Univ. J. E. Purkyne Brne
43:249–252.
174. Murray, R. G. E. 1984. Kingdom Procaryotae, p. 34–36. In N. R. Krieg and
J. G. Holt (ed.), Bergey’s manual of systematic bacteriology, vol. 1. The
Williams & Wilkins Co., Baltimore, Md.
175. Murray, R. G. E. 1984. The higher taxa, or, a place for everything . . .? p.
31–34. In N. R. Krieg and J. G. Holt (ed.), Bergey’s manual of systematic
bacteriology, vol. 1. The Williams & Wilkins Co., Baltimore, Md.
176. Murray, R. G. E. 1986. Family II. Deinococcaceae Brooks and Murray 1981,
356VP, p. 1035–1043. In P. H. A. Sneath, N. S. Mair, M. E. Sharpe, and J. G.
Holt (ed.), Bergey’s manual of systematic bacteriology, vol. 2. The Williams
& Wilkins Co., Baltimore, Md.
177. Murray, R. G. E., D. J. Brenner, R. R. Colwell, P. De Vos, M. Goodfellow,
P. A. D. Grimont, N. Pfennig, E. Stackebrandt, and G. A. Zavarzin. 1990.
Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Approaches to Taxonomy within the
Proteobacteria. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol. 40:213–215.
178. Nei, M. 1991. Relative efficiencies of different tree-making methods for
molecular data, p. 90–128. In M. M. Miyamoto and J. Cracraft (ed.),
Phylogenetic analysis of DNA sequences. Oxford University Press, New
York, N.Y.
179. Neu, H. C. 1992. The crisis in antibiotic resistance. Science 257:1064–1072.
180. Nicholson, R. C., D. B. Williams, and L. A. Moran. 1990. An essential
member of the HSP70 gene family of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is homolo-
gous to immunoglobulin heavy chain binding protein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 87:1159–1163.
180a.Nikaido, H. 1994. Prevention of drug access to bacterial targets: permeabil-
ity barriers and active efflux. Science 264:382–387.
180b.Nikaido, H., S.-H. Kim, and E. Y. Rosenberg. 1993. Physical organization of
lipids in the cell wall of Mycobacterium chelonae. Mol. Microbiol. 8:1025–
1030.
181. Olsen, G. J., and C. R. Woese. 1993. Ribosomal RNA: a key to phylogeny.
FASEB J. 7:113–123.
182. Olsen, G. J., and C. R. Woese. 1996. Lessons from an Archaeal genome:
what are we learning from Methanococcus jannaschii? Trends Genet. 12:
377–379.
183. Olsen, G. J., and C. R. Woese. 1997. Archaeal genomics: an overview. Cell
89:991–994.
184. Olsen, G. J., C. R. Woese, and R. Overbeek. 1994. The winds of (evolution-
ary) change: breathing new life into microbiology. J. Bacteriol. 176:1–6.
185. Opperman, T., and J. P. Richardson. 1994. Phylogenetic analysis of se-
quences from diverse bacteria with homology to the Escherichia coli rho
gene. J. Bacteriol. 176:5033–5043.
186. Pace, N. R. 1991. Origin of life—facing up to the physical setting. Cell
65:531–533.
187. Pace, N. R. 1997. A molecular view of microbial diversity and the biosphere.
Science 276:734–740.
188. Pace, N. R., G. J. Olsen, and C. R. Woese. 1986. Ribosomal RNA phylogeny
and the primary lines of evolutionary descent. Cell 45:325–326.
189. Pace, N. R., D. A. Stahl, D. J. Lane, and G. J. Olsen. 1986. The analysis of
natural microbial populations by ribosomal RNA sequences, p. 1–55. In
K. C. Marshall (ed.), Advances in microbial ecology. Plenum Press, New
York, N.Y.
190. Pelham, H. R. B. 1989. Heat shock and the sorting of luminal ER proteins.
EMBO J. 8:3171–3176.
191. Pennisi, E. 1998. Genome data shake tree of life. Science 280:672–674.
192. Perry, J. J., and J. T. Staley. 1996. Microbiology: dynamics and diversity.
Saunders College Publishing, Philadelphia, Pa.
193. Pratt, W. B. 1993. The role of heat shock proteins in regulating the function,
folding and trafficking of the glucocorticoid receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 268:
21455–21458.
194. Prevot, A. R. 1940. Manuel de classification et de determination des bac-
teres anaerobies. Masson et Cie, Paris, France.
195. Pringsheim, E. G. 1949. The relationship between bacteria and Myxophy-
cae. Bacteriol. Rev. 13:47–98.
196. Puhler, G., H. Leffers, F. Gropp, P. Palm, H. P. Klenk, F. Lottspeich, R. A.
Garrett, and W. Zillig. 1989. Archaebacterial DNA-dependent RNA poly-
merases testify to the evolution of the eukaryotic nuclear genome. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86:4569–4573.
197. Reeve, J. N., K. Sandman, and C. J. Daniels. 1997. Archaeal histones,
nucleosomes, and transcription initiation. Cell 89:999–1002.
197a.Ribeiro, S., and G. B. Golding. 1998. The mosaic nature of the eukaryotic
nucleus. Mol. Biol. Evol. 15:779–788.
198. Rivera, M. C., and J. A. Lake. 1992. Evidence that eukaryotes and eocyte
prokaryotes are immediate relatives. Science 257:74–76.
199. Roger, A. J., C. G. Clark, and W. F. Doolittle. 1996. A possible mitochon-
drial gene in the early-branching amitochondriate protist Trichomonas vagi-
nalis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93:14618–14622.
200. Roger, A. J., S. G. Sva¨rd, J. Tovar, C. G. Clark, M. W. Smith, F. D. Gillin,
and M. L. Sogin. 1998. A mitochondrial-like chaperonin 60 gene in Giardia
lamblia: evidence that diplomonads once harbored an endosymbiont re-
lated to the progenitor of mitochondria. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95:
229–234.
201. Rosenthal, B., Z. Mai, D. Caplivski, S. Ghosh, H. De La Vega, T. Graf, and
J. Samuelson. 1997. Evidence for the bacterial origin of genes encoding
fermentation enzymes of the amitochondriate protozoan parasite Entamoe-
ba histolytica. J. Bacteriol. 179:3736–3745.
202. Rothschild, L. J., M. A. Ragan, A. W. Coleman, P. Heywood, and S. A.
Gerbi. 1986. Are rRNA sequence comparisons the Rosetta stone of phy-
logenetics? Cell 47:640.
203. Rowlands, T., P. Baumann, and S. P. Jackson. 1994. The TATA-binding
protein: a general transcription factor in eukaryotes and archaebacteria.
Science 264:1326–1329.
204. Russell, A. D., and I. Chopra. 1990. Understanding antibacterial action and
resistance. Ellis Horwood, New York, N.Y.
205. Saccone, C., C. Gissi, C. Lanave, and G. Pesole. 1995. Molecular classifi-
cation of living organisms. J. Mol. Evol. 40:273–279.
206. Saier, M. H., Jr. 1979. The role of the cell surface in regulating the internal
environment, p. 167–227. In J. R. Sokatch and L. N. Ornston (ed.), The
bacteria, vol. VII. Academic Press, Inc., New York, N.Y.
207. Saitou, N., and M. Nei. 1987. The neighbor-joining method: a new method
for reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Mol. Biol. Evol. 4:406–425.
208. Schopf, J. W. 1978. The evolution of the earliest cells. Sci. Am. 239:110–120.
209. Schopf, J. W. 1994. Disparate rates, differing fates: tempo and mode of
evolution changed from the Precambrian to the Phanerozoic. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 91:6735–6742.
210. Schubert, I. 1988. Eukaryotic nuclei of endosymbiontic origin? Naturwis-
senschaften 75:89–91.
211. Schwartz, R. M., and M. O. Dayhoff. 1978. Origin of prokaryotes, eu-
karyotes, mitochondria, and chloroplasts. Science 199:395–403.
212. Searcy, D. G. 1982. Thermoplasma: a primordial cell from a refuse pile.
Trends Biochem. Sci. 7:183–185.
213. Shimmin, L. C., C. Ramirez, A. T. Matheson, and P. P. Dennis. 1989.
Sequence alignment and evolutionary comparison of the L10 equivalent
and L12 equivalent ribosomal proteins from archaebacteria, eubacteria,
and eucaryotes. J. Mol. Evol. 29:448–462.
214. Singh, B., B. J. Soltys, Z. C. Wu, H. V. Patel, K. B. Freeman, and R. S.
Gupta. 1997. Cloning and some novel characteristics of mitochondrial
Hsp70 from Chinese hamster cells. Exp. Cell Res. 234:205–216.
215. Smith, D. R., L. A. Doucette-Stamm, C. Deloughery, H. M. Lee, J. Dubois,
T. Aldredge, R. Bashirzadeh, D. Blakely, R. Cook, K. Gilbert, D. Harrison,
L. Hoang, P. Keagle, W. Lumm, B. Pothier, D. Y. Qiu, R. Spadafora, R.
Vicaire, Y. Wang, J. Wierzbowski, R. Gibson, N. Jiwani, A. Caruso, and D.
Bush. 1997. Complete genome sequence of Methanobacterium thermoau-
totrophicum DeltaH: functional analysis and comparative genomics. J. Bac-
teriol. 179:7135–7155.
216. Smith, M. W., D. F. Feng, and R. F. Doolittle. 1992. Evolution by acquisi-
tion: the case for horizontal gene transfers. Trends Biochem. Sci. 17:489–
493.
1490 GUPTA MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
217. Sogin, M. L. 1991. Early evolution and the origin of eukaryotes. Curr. Opin.
Genet. Dev. 1:457–463.
218. Sogin, M. L. 1997. History assignment: when was the mitochondrion found.
Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 7:792–799.
219. Sogin, M. L., J. H. Gunderson, H. J. Elwood, R. A. Alonso, and D. A.
Peattie. 1989. Phylogenetic meaning of the kingdom concept: an unusual
ribosomal RNA from Giardia lamblia. Science 243:75–77.
220. Sokatch, J. R. 1979. Roles of appendages and surface layers in adaptation
of bacteria to their environment, p. 229–289. In L. N. Ornston and J. R.
Sokatch (ed.), The bacteria, vol. VII. Academic Press, Inc., New York, N.Y.
221. Soltys, B. J., M. Falah, and R. S. Gupta. 1996. Identification of endoplasmic
reticulum in the primitive eukaryote Giardia lamblia using cryoelectron
microscopy and antibody to Bip. J. Cell Sci. 109:1909–1917.
222. Soltys, B. J., and R. S. Gupta. 1994. Presence and cellular distribution of a
60-kDa protein related to mitochondrial hsp60 in Giardia lamblia. J. Para-
sitol. 80:580–590.
223. Spratt, B. G. 1994. Resistance to antibiotics mediated by target alterations.
Science 264:388–393.
224. Stackebrandt, E. 1992. Unifying phylogeny and phenotypic diversity, p.
19–47. In A. Balows, H. G. Tru¨per, M. Dworkin, W. Harder, and K. H.
Schleifer (ed.), The prokaryotes, 2nd ed. Springer-Verlag, New York, N.Y.
225. Stackebrandt, E., R. G. E. Murray, and H. G. Tru¨per. 1988. Proteobacteria
classic nov., a name for the phylogenetic taxon that includes the “purple
bacteria and their relatives.” Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol. 38:321–325.
226. Stackebrandt, E., and C. R. Woese. 1984. The phylogeny of prokaryotes.
Microbiol. Sci. 1:117–122.
227. Stanier, R. Y. 1941. The main outlines of bacterial classification. J. Bacte-
riol. 42:437–466.
228. Stanier, R. Y., E. A. Adelberg, and J. L. Ingraham. 1976. The microbial
world. Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
229. Stanier, R. Y., J. L. Ingraham, M. L. Wheelis, and P. R. Painter. 1987.
General microbiology. Macmillan Education Ltd., London, England.
230. Stanier, R. Y., and C. B. van Niel. 1962. The concept of a bacterium. Arch.
Mikrobiol. 42:17–35.
231. Steel, M. A., P. J. Lockhart, and D. Penny. 1993. Confidence in evolutionary
trees from biological sequence data. Nature 364:440–442.
232. Stetter, K. O. 1995. Microbial life in hyperthermal environments. ASM
News 61:285–290.
233. Stewart, C.-B. 1993. The powers and pitfalls of parsimony. Nature 361:603–
607.
234. Stiller, J. W., and B. D. Hall. 1997. The origin of red algae: implications for
plastid evolution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94:4520–4525.
235. Suzuki, K., M. Goodfellow, and A. G. O’Donnell. 1993. Cell envelopes and
classification, p. 195–250. In M. Goodfellow and A. G. O’Donnell (ed.),
Handbook of new bacterial systematics. Academic Press, Inc., New York,
N.Y.
236. Swofford, D. L., and G. L. Olsen. 1990. Phylogeny reconstruction, p. 411–
501. In D. Hillis and C. Moritz (ed.), Molecular systematics. Sinauer As-
sociates, Inc., Sunderland, Mass.
236a.Syvanen, M. 1994. Horizontal gene transfer: evidence and possible conse-
quences. Annu. Rev. Genet. 28:237–261.
237. Szathmary, E., and J. M. Smith. 1995. The major evolutionary transitions.
Nature 374:227–232.
238. Tateno, Y., N. Takezei, and M. Nei. 1994. Relative efficiencies of the max-
imum-likelihood, neighbor-joining, and maximum-parsimony methods
when substitution rate varies with site. Mol. Biol. Evol. 12:261–277.
239. Tiboni, O., P. Cammarano, and A. M. Sanangelantoni. 1993. Cloning and
sequencing of the gene coding glutamine synthetase I from the archaeum
Pyrococcus woesi: anomalous phylogenies inferred from analysis of archael
and bacterial glutamine synthetase I sequence. J. Bacteriol. 175:2961–2969.
240. Tiboni, O., R. Cantoni, R. Creti, P. Cammarano, and A. M. Sanangelan-
toni. 1991. Phylogenetic depth of Thermotoga maritima inferred from anal-
ysis of the fus gene: amino acid sequence of elongation factor G and
organization of the Thermotoga str operon. J. Mol. Evol. 33:142–151.
241. Tipper, D. J., and A. Wright. 1979. The structure and biosynthesis of
bacterial cell walls, p. 291–415. In J. R. Sokatch and L. N. Ornston (ed.),
The bacteria, vol. VII. Academic Press, Inc., New York, N.Y.
242. Tomb, J. F., O. White, A. R. Kerlavage, R. A. Clayton, G. G. Sutton, R. D.
Fleischmann, K. A. Ketchum, H. P. Klenk, S. Gill, B. A. Dougherty, K.
Nelson, J. Quackenbush, L. Zhou, E. F. Kirkness, S. Peterson, B. Loftus, D.
Richardson, R. Dodson, H. G. Khalak, A. Glodek, K. McKenney, L. M.
Fitzegerald, N. Lee, M. D. Adams, J. C. Venter, et al. 1997. The complete
genome sequence of the gastric pathogen Helicobacter pylori. Nature 388:
539–547.
243. Trent, J. D., E. Nimmesgern, J. S. Wall, F. U. Hartl, and A. L. Horwich.
1991. A molecular chaperone from a thermophilic archaebacterium is re-
lated to the eukaryotic protein t-complex polypeptide 1. Nature 354:490–
493.
244. Tru¨per, H. G., and K. H. Schleifer. 1992. Prokaryote characterization and
identification, p. 126–148. In A. Balows, H. G. Tru¨per, M. Dworkin, W.
Harder, and K. H. Schleifer (ed.), The prokaryotes, 2nd ed. Springer-
Verlag, New York, N.Y.
245. van Niel, C. B. 1946. The classification and natural relationships of bacteria.
Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 11:285–301.
246. Viale, A. M., A. K. Arakaki, F. C. Soncini, and R. G. Ferreyra. 1994.
Evolutionary relationships among eubacterial groups as inferred from
GroEL (chaperonin) sequence comparisons. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol. 44:527–
533.
246a.Viale, A. M., and A. K. Arakaki. 1994. The chaperone connection to the
origins of the eukaryotic organelles. FEBS Lett. 341:146–151.
247. Wetmur, J. G., D. M. Wong, B. Ortiz, J. Tong, F. Reichert, and D. H.
Gelfand. 1994. Cloning, sequencing, and expression of RecA proteins from
three distantly related thermophilic eubacteria. J. Biol. Chem. 269:25928–
25935.
248. Whittaker, R. H., and L. Margulis. 1978. Protist classification and the
kingdoms of organisms. Biosystems 10:3–18.
249. Winefield, C. S., K. J. Farnden, P. H. Reynolds, and C. J. Marshall. 1995.
Evolutionary analysis of aspartate aminotransferases. J. Mol. Evol. 40:455–
463.
249a.Woese, C. R. 1981. Archaebacteria. Sci. Am. 244:98–122.
250. Woese, C. R. 1987. Bacterial evolution. Microbiol. Rev. 51:221–271.
251. Woese, C. R. 1991. The use of ribosomal RNA in reconstructing evolution-
ary relationships among bacteria, p. 1–24. In R. K. Selander, A. G. Clark,
and T. S. Whittmay (ed.), Evolution at the molecular level. Sinauer Asso-
ciates, Inc., Sunderland, Mass.
252. Woese, C. R. 1992. Prokaryote systematics: the evolution of a science, p.
3–18. In A. Balows, H. G. Tru¨per, M. Dworkin, W. Harder, and K. H.
Schleifer (ed.), The prokaryotes, 2nd ed. Springer-Verlag, New York, N.Y.
253. Woese, C. R. 1993. The Archaea: their history and significance, p. vii–xxix.
In M. Kates, D. J. Kushner, and A. T. Matheson (ed.), The biochemistry of
Archaea (Archaebacteria). Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., New York,
N.Y.
254. Woese, C. R. 1994. There must be a prokaryote somewhere: microbiology’s
search for itself. Microbiol. Rev. 58:1–9.
255. Woese, C. R. 1998. The universal ancestor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
95:6854–6859.
256. Woese, C. R., and G. E. Fox. 1977. Phylogenetic structure of the prokaryotic
domain: the primary kingdoms. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 74:5088–5090.
257. Woese, C. R., R. Gutell, R. Gupta, and H. F. Noller. 1983. Detailed analysis
of the higher-order structure of 16S-like ribosomal ribonucleic acids. Mi-
crobiol. Rev. 47:621–669.
258. Woese, C. R., O. Kandler, and M. L. Wheelis. 1990. Towards a natural
system of organisms: proposal for the domains Archaea, Bacteria, and
Eucarya. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 87:4576–4579.
259. Woese, C. R., L. J. Magrum, R. Gupta, R. B. Siegel, D. A. Stahl, J. Kop, N.
Crawford, J. Brosius, R. Gutell, J. J. Hogan, and H. F. Noller. 1980.
Secondary structure model for bacterial 16S ribosomal RNA: phylogenetic,
enzymatic and chemical evidence. Nucleic Acids Res. 8:2275–2293.
260. Wright, A., and D. J. Tipper. 1979. The outer membrane of gram-negative
bacteria, p. 427–485. In J. R. Sokatch and L. N. Ornston (ed.), The bacteria,
vol. VII. Academic Press, Inc., New York, N.Y.
261. Yang, D., Y. Oyaizu, H. Oyaizu, G. J. Olsen, and C. R. Woese. 1985.
Mitochondrial origins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 82:4443–4447.
262. Zillig, W. 1991. Comparative biochemistry of Archaea and Bacteria. Curr.
Opin. Genet. Dev. 1:544–551.
263. Zillig, W., R. Schnabel, and K. O. Stetter. 1985. Archaebacteria and the
origin of the eukaryotic cytoplasm. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 114:1–
18.
264. Zuckerkandl, E., and L. Pauling. 1965. Molecules as documents of evolu-
tionary history. J. Theor. Biol. 8:357–366.
VOL. 62, 1998 PHYLOGENY OF PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES 1491
 o
n
 February 21, 2013 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://m
m
br.asm
.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
