Technical Note
Automatic Correction of Echo-Planar Imaging (EPI)
Ghosting Artifacts in Real-Time Interactive Cardiac
MRI Using Sensitivity Encoding
Yoon-Chul Kim, MS,* Jon-Fredrik Nielsen, PhD, and Krishna S. Nayak, PhD
Purpose: To develop a method that automatically corrects
ghosting artifacts due to echo-misalignment in interleaved
gradient-echo echo-planar imaging (EPI) in arbitrary
oblique or double-oblique scan planes.
Materials and Methods: An automatic ghosting correction
technique was developed based on an alternating EPI ac-
quisition and the phased-array ghost elimination (PAGE)
reconstruction method. The direction of k-space traversal
is alternated at every temporal frame, enabling lower tem-
poral-resolution ghost-free coil sensitivity maps to be dy-
namically estimated. The proposed method was compared
with conventional one-dimensional (1D) phase correction
in axial, oblique, and double-oblique scan planes in phan-
tom and cardiac in vivo studies. The proposed method was
also used in conjunction with two-fold acceleration.
Results: The proposed method with nonaccelerated acquisi-
tion provided excellent suppression of ghosting artifacts in all
scan planes, and was substantially more effective than con-
ventional 1D phase correction in oblique and double-oblique
scan planes. The feasibility of real-time reconstruction using
the proposed technique was demonstrated in a scan protocol
with 3.1-mm spatial and 60-msec temporal resolution.
Conclusion: The proposed technique with nonaccelerated
acquisition provides excellent ghost suppression in arbitrary
scan orientations without a calibration scan, and can be use-
ful for real-time interactive imaging, in which scan planes are
frequently changed with arbitrary oblique orientations.
Key Words: echo-planar imaging (EPI); ghosting artifacts;
echo-misalignment; real-time interactive MRI; sensitivity
encoding (SENSE)
J. Magn. Reson. Imaging 2008;27:239–245.
© 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
ECHO-PLANAR IMAGING (EPI) (1) is used in cardiac
MRI because it accelerates image acquisition, while
maintaining image quality comparable to two-dimen-
sional Fourier transform (2DFT). Cardiac EPI often in-
troduces artifacts in reconstructed images, which may
include geometric distortion and ghosting due to a va-
riety of sources including off-resonance, in-plane ﬂow,
cardiac motion, and echo-misalignment. Geometric
distortions due to off-resonance can be mitigated by
reducing the echo spacing in the readout gradient or
acquiring the data using multiple radio frequency (RF)
excitations (i.e., shots), which increases the effective
sampling rate (i.e., increases the acquisition band-
width) along the phase-encode direction. Ghosting due
to in-plane ﬂow and cardiac motion can be mitigated by
making the acquisition faster or restricting data acqui-
sition to a relatively stationary cardiac phase.
Ghosting artifacts caused by echo-misalignment are
a systemic problem, and are a function of induced eddy
currents and system timing errors, which are associ-
ated with the scanner hardware (e.g., eddy currents
from the cryostat and relative delays of the physical x, y,
and z gradients). These issues are further complicated
in oblique scan planes, which are routinely used in
real-time imaging (e.g., cardiac short-axis and long-axis
views).
The conventional method for correcting echo-mis-
alignment involves performing a calibration scan to de-
termine the on-axis gradient/data acquisition (DAQ)
time delays, and using small gradient “blips” to align
echoes. These blips are scan-plane–dependent (2,3),
and should be redesigned upon each scan-plane
change. Flyback readouts (4), which involve acquiring
data only on the positive polarity of the readout gradi-
ent, can be used to avoid echo-misalignment artifacts
without a calibration scan, but have the disadvantage
of reduced scan time efﬁciency. Image-based correction
(5), which takes into account one-dimensional (1D)
phase errors from reduced ﬁeld of view (FOV) images
reconstructed separately from odd and even echoes, is
effective at reducing ghosting artifacts in on-axis scan
planes, but its effectiveness may be degraded in oblique
(and double-oblique) scan planes. Full 2D correction is
possible using fully phase-encoded reference scans for
each scan plane (6), but it may be impractical to acquire
such reference scans in dynamic and/or real-time im-
aging applications. Furthermore, use of such 2D phase-
error maps may be problematic when imaging rapidly
Magnetic Resonance Engineering Laboratory, Ming Hsieh Department
of Electrical Engineering, University of Southern California, Los Ange-
les, California, USA.
Contract grant sponsor: James H. Zumberge Foundation; Contract grant
sponsor: GE Healthcare; Contract grant sponsor: National Institutes of
Health; Contract grant number: R01-HL074332; Contract grant sponsor:
American Heart Association; Contract grant number: 0435249N.
The supplementary material referred to in this article can be accessed
at http://www.interscience.wiley.com/jpages/1053-1807/suppmat/
index.html.
*Address reprint requests to: Y.-C.K., 3710 McClintock Ave, RTH 317,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089-2564.
E-mail: yoonckim@usc.edu
Received March 13, 2007; Accepted September 7, 2007.
DOI 10.1002/jmri.21214
Published online 29 November 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.
interscience.wiley.com).
JOURNAL OF MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING 27:239–245 (2008)
© 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc. 239
moving structures such as the heart, in which the es-
timated phase-error between odd and even echoes will
be biased by phase-accrual due to ﬂow and motion.
Another alternative is to separate data from left-to-
right and right-to-left traversals in k-space (which each
have half the desired FOV), and to reconstruct ghost-
free full-FOV images using parallel imaging (7–10). This
approach is attractive for real-time imaging because it
does not require additional calibration scans or any
modiﬁcation of the pulse sequences at the time of scan
plane change. The phased-array ghost elimination
(PAGE) method (9) has provided a generalized frame-
work for canceling ghosting artifacts due to sources
including off-resonance and echo-misalignment using
the information of local coil sensitivity proﬁles from
multiple coils. Herzka et al (8) demonstrated gated car-
diac imaging with a sequential noninterleaved EPI ac-
quisition scheme, in which the echo-train-length (ETL)
was equal to the sensitivity encoding (SENSE) reduc-
tion factor (e.g., 2 or 3).
In this work, we propose an “interleaved” gradient-
echo EPI acquisition scheme and associated recon-
struction method. Compared to the original PAGE
method, this acquisition uses a large ETL ranging from
15 to 50 and a small number of shots to achieve sufﬁ-
cient temporal resolution in free-breathing real-time
cardiac EPI imaging. Using shot-to-shot interleaving of
the phase-encode lines and a “double-alternating” k-
space data acquisition scheme, the proposed method
achieves ghost suppression using a SENSE reduction
factor of 2, regardless of the ETL. The proposed tech-
nique is compared with the conventional 1D phase cor-
rection method (5) in oblique and double-oblique scan
planes. Two-fold accelerated EPI imaging is also dem-
onstrated in conjunction with the proposed automatic
ghosting correction technique. Finally, the feasibility of
real-time reconstruction is demonstrated using a cus-
tom real-time imaging platform (11).
MATERIALS AND METHODS
When performing EPI at oblique or double-oblique scan
planes, two or all three physical gradients will oscillate
during each readout. An important consideration is
that physical gradients in x, y, and z may have unequal
delays (2). For an oblique scan plane with unequal gra-
dient delays, the k-space lines with different traversal
directions in the logical coordinate frame will sample
positions in k-space that are shifted in opposite direc-
tions along the physical coordinate axes. Combined
data are not uniformly spaced, which causes artifacts
in reconstructed images. Within the set of lines having
the same traversal direction, uniform spacing is main-
tained.
The proposed acquisition scheme involves acquiring
k-space data with alternating polarity of the readout
gradient. Figure 1a illustrates the proposed reconstruc-
tion method. Coil sensitivity maps are reconstructed
separately from the left-to-right (L-R) and right-to-left
(R-L) lines, which are acquired from the twomost recent
time frames, N and N–1 (12). The L-R and R-L lines each
preserve uniform spacing between phase encode lines
and prevent artifacts due to echo-misalignment (8). In
time frame N, SENSE (13) reconstruction with a reduc-
tion factor of 2 is applied separately to the L-R and R-L
lines. The resulting two full-FOV images differ not in
magnitude but in phase, and taking a root sum-of-
squares combination eliminates distortions in phase
and recovers signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). This nonaccel-
erated double-alternating scheme can be applied to any
number of interleaves as long as L-R and R-L lines are
alternating along the phase encode. An even number of
interleaves would require that the phase-encode blips
alternate in size.
Figure 1b illustrates that automatic EPI ghosting cor-
rection and two-fold acceleration can be achieved si-
multaneously by controlling interleaf order as shown.
In this case, full-FOV coil sensitivity maps are esti-
mated on the ﬂy based on four adjacent time frames.
After separating L-R and R-L data, a reduction factor of
4 can be used to perform SENSE unaliasing operations.
In general, to perform accelerated imaging with the pro-
posed method and an acceleration factor of A  2, the
SENSE reconstruction will require a reduction factor of
2A, which must not exceed the total number of coils,
and the most recent 2A time frames will be used for
forming coil-sensitivity maps. The accelerated method
can be applied to double-alternating EPI with oA inter-
leaves for any odd integer o using phase-encode blips
with constant size, and with eA interleaves for any even
integer e using phase-encode blips with alternating
size.
1D phase correction (5) is used for comparison in the
phantom and in vivo studies because it also does not
rely on any calibration, and is compatible with real-time
imaging. For each coil, a 1D phase map representing
constant and linear phase errors is computed using
phase differences between the L-R and R-L images. 1D
phase correction is performed using Eq. [12] from Ref.
5. A root-sum-of-squares operation is performed to pro-
duce the ﬁnal corrected image, with the images from all
coils considered for reconstruction.
Experiments were performed on a Signa Excite 3 T
scanner (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI, USA) with gra-
dients capable of 40 mT/m amplitudes and 150 mT/
m/msec slew rates. The receiver bandwidth was set to
125 kHz, i.e., 4 sec sampling time. The body coil,
capable of peak B1 of 16 T, was used for RF transmis-
sion and an eight-channel cardiac array coil was used
for signal reception.
Circular EPI (CEPI) trajectories (14), which have a
circular k-space footprint, were designed in MATLAB
(The Mathworks, South Natick, MA, USA). CEPI trajec-
tories used in the experiments produced a 10% to 15%
reduction in readout duration compared to conven-
tional rectangular EPI trajectories. A bipolar pulse was
added to the phase encode gradient waveform prior to
data acquisition to null the ﬁrst moment in the y direc-
tion at ky 0. Alternating interleaved EPI readouts with
an odd number of interleaves were used (15,16), and
this k-space traversal pattern was ﬂipped in the read-
out direction at every time frame. Echo-time shifting
(17) was used to mitigate off-resonance effects.
Real-time interactive cardiac scanning was performed
using the RTHawk real-time imaging platform (11). Scan
planes were changed interactively by the operator to test
240 Kim et al.
the performance of the proposed method at all angles. A
spectral-spatial RF pulse was used to excite water spins,
with a 5.2-mm slice thickness, and 440-Hz bandwidth
(18). Flip angles of 15–25° were used. The proposed re-
construction was performed both off-line and on-line, and
videos were produced off-line. Raw data from all four an-
terior receiver channels were used to perform SENSE re-
construction in the nonaccelerated acquisition, and raw
data from all eight elements were used to perform SENSE
reconstruction in the accelerated case. The noise correla-
tion matrix used in SENSE reconstruction was computed
using the formula presented in the Appendix section of
Ref. 13 from raw data obtained with the RF excitation
turned off.
Phantom experiments were conducted to quantitatively
evaluate the level of ghost suppression. A cylindrical
phantom was imaged with axial, oblique, and double-
oblique scan orientations. The proposed method was
compared with conventional 1D phase correction (5). The
effectiveness of ghost suppression was evaluated by com-
paring ghost-to-signal ratios (GSR) within the same man-
ually-selected region of interest (ROI).
Cardiac in vivo experiments were performed on three
healthy volunteers without gating or breathholding,
and were evaluated qualitatively. Each subject was
screened and provided informed consent in accordance
with institutional policy.
The nonaccelerated automatic ghosting correction
method was implemented in C, within the RTHawk
real-time reconstruction software (11). The LAPACK lin-
ear algebra package was used for the matrix inversion
operations required during SENSE reconstruction. A
Linux personal computer (Compaq R3000) with a single
3.2-GHz Intel central processing unit (CPU) and
896-MB random access memory (RAM) was used for
real-time reconstruction. Data were sent from the host
computer to the reconstruction computer via Ethernet
after each TR (11). Reconstruction time was measured
separately using the built-in C “gettimeofday” func-
tion for the following four reconstruction steps: 1) coil
sensitivity map estimation, 2) aliased image recon-
struction, 3) SENSE matrix inversion, and 4) image
display.
RESULTS
In all ﬁgures, the readout and phase encode directions
correspond to the horizontal and vertical axes, respec-
Inv. FT
L-R
Sensitivity map
Inv. FT
R-L
Sensitivity map
Inv. FT
L-R
Half FOV image
SENSE recon. SENSE recon.
L-R Full FOV image R-L Full FOV image
Root Sum-of-Squares
Final image
Inv. FT
R-L
Half FOV image
ky
i2+
ky
Time frame 
n-1
Time frame
n
i1-
i3-
i1+
i2-
i3+
Inv. FT
L-R
Sensitivity map
Inv. FT
R-L
Sensitivity map
Inv. FT
L-R
FOV/4 image
SENSE recon. SENSE recon.
L-R Full FOV image R-L Full FOV image
Root Sum-of-Squares
Final image
Inv. FT
R-L
FOV/4 image
Time frame 
n-3
i1+
ky
Time frame 
n-2
i1-
ky
i2-
ky
i2+
ky
Time frame 
n-1
Time frame
n
a b
Figure 1. Reconstruction ﬂowchart for the proposed ghosting correction method for (a) nonaccelerated and (b) two-fold–
accelerated EPI with automatic ghosting correction. a: The acquisition and reconstruction as a function of time is shown for
three-interleaves, and can be applied to any odd number of interleaves with constant phase-encode blip size, or to any even
number of interleaves with an alternating phase-encode blip size. At time frame N–1, a full k-space dataset is acquired with the
interleaf ordering: i1–, i2, i3–. At time frame N, another full dataset is acquired with ordering: i1, i2–, i3. These two sets are
repeated continuously. Note that “–” indicates that the readout gradient is ﬂipped. To reconstruct a ghost-free image for time
frame N, L-R data lines and R-L data lines are separated. The most recent two temporal frames are used to form coil sensitivity
maps separately from L-R and R-L full-FOV data (middle row). SENSE reconstruction is used to form full-FOV L-R and R-L
images for the current time frame, which are then combined using root-sum-of-squares, to produce a ﬁnal image representing
time frame N. b: When accelerating data acquisition time by a factor of 2, a SENSE reduction factor of four is needed. The most
recent four temporal frames are used to form coil sensitivity maps. In general, if a reduction factor of R can be achieved for a
particular coil geometry and scan planes, it can be combined with the proposed EPI strategy with an acceleration factor of R/2
since one-half of the reduction factor is used for separating L-R and R-L lines during reconstruction and the remainder can still
be used for acceleration.
EPI Artifact Correction for Real-Time MRI 241
tively. The uncorrected images in Figs. 2 and 3 were
reconstructed by performing an inverse Fourier trans-
form of the raw data without separating the L-R and R-L
acquisitions, and without applying any postprocessing
method for EPI ghosting correction.
Figure 2 contains phantom images reconstructed
from data acquired in axial, oblique, and double-ob-
lique scan planes. Both 1D phase correction and the
proposed method produce visually comparable ghost-
free images in the axial scan plane. However, in oblique
and double-oblique scan planes, ghosting artifacts are
prominent when using conventional 1D phase correc-
tion but are signiﬁcantly reduced when using the pro-
posed method. GSR values are listed in Table 1 and
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.
The GSRs for oblique and double-oblique scan planes
for the proposed method were 3.40% and 2.03%, re-
spectively, whereas those for 1D phase correction were
8.76% and 6.18%, respectively. Themean and standard
deviation (SD) of g-factor values for the proposed
method are also listed in Table 1. The average g-factor
values ranged from 1.2 to 1.3 in all three scan planes
considered.
Figure 3 contains in vivo cardiac images for four stan-
dard cardiac views in one representative volunteer. Un-
corrected images are shown alongside images recon-
structed using 1D phase correction and the proposed
method. Uncorrected images exhibit ghosting artifacts
in all four cardiac views, and are most severe in the
two-chamber and four-chamber views. Both 1D phase
correction and the proposed method produce apprecia-
ble suppression of ghost artifacts in all views. The pro-
posed method produces better image quality and im-
proved ghost suppression compared to 1D phase
correction (indicated by white arrows in Fig. 3). How-
ever, the proposed method experiences noise ampliﬁca-
tion due to the use of parallel imaging with a reduction
factor of 2. The mean and SD of g-factor values were
1.45 0.50, 1.75 0.94, 1.34 0.33, and 1.34 0.28,
for the axial, two-chamber, four-chamber, and short-
axis views, respectively.
Figure 4 illustrates a double-oblique short-axis view
during rapid scan-plane rotation. The scan plane was
Figure 3. In vivo real-time cardiac images reconstructed with
nonaccelerated EPI data. Data from four anterior receiver coils
in the eight-channel cardiac array coil were used for recon-
struction. Uncorrected (left column), 1D phase corrected (mid-
dle column), and corrected images with the proposed correc-
tion scheme (right column) are shown for four standard views:
axial, two-chamber, four-chamber, and short-axis. Ghosting
artifacts are substantially reduced in all four corrected images
with the proposed method. The white arrows indicate that
residual ghosting artifacts are clearly visible in images recon-
structed with the 1D phase correction method, but they are
not observed in images reconstructed with the proposed
method. See also Movie 1 of the supplementary material avail-
able online at http://www.interscience.wiley.com/jpage/
1053-1807/suppmat/index.html. Scan parameters: double-
alternating CEPI with three interleaves, ETL 27, FOV 25
25 cm2, spatial resolution  3.1  3.1 mm2, TR  20 msec,
and time-per-image  60 msec.
Figure 2. Real-time cylindrical phantom images recon-
structed with nonaccelerated EPI data. Data from four receiver
coils (two from anterior and the other two from posterior re-
ceiver coils) in the eight-channel cardiac array coil were used
for reconstruction. Reconstruction results for axial (top row),
oblique (middle row), and double-oblique (bottom row) scan
planes are shown using no correction, 1D phase correction,
and the proposed correction method. The blue and red con-
tours, superimposed on uncorrected images, represent ROIs
for signal and ghost, respectively. The pixel values in the ROIs
were used to compute GSRs. Images reconstructed with the
proposed method are ghost-free even in oblique and double-
oblique scan planes. Scan parameters: double-alternating
CEPI with ﬁve interleaves, ETL  19, FOV  21  21 cm2,
spatial resolution  2.2  2.2 mm2, TR  39 msec, and time-
per-image  195 msec.
242 Kim et al.
rotated in increments of 10° continuously throughout
the acquisition. Ghosting artifacts are suppressed even
during rapid changes in scan orientation. Note that
images at 0.9, 1.2, and 3.3 seconds appear blurred
because they occur during scan plane changes.
Figure 5 compares two-fold acceleration with no ac-
celeration and also illustrates the effect of motion on
low temporal resolution coil sensitivity maps. Coil sen-
sitivity maps were reconstructed using either: data
temporally adjacent to the target data (scheme I), or
data obtained from a stable diastolic phase (scheme II).
An FOV of 33 cm (rather than 25 cm) was used to
mitigate the g-factor increase when using a reduction
factor of 4 with our eight-element cardiac array. Two-
fold accelerated images (Fig. 5c and h) exhibit much
lower SNR than nonaccelerated images (Fig. 5b and g)
because of the reduced acquisition time and the highly
elevated g-factor. In some areas the g-factor reached 10
(Fig. 5e). Coil sensitivity maps obtained using calibra-
tion scheme I exhibit motion induced ghosting artifacts
(Fig. 5a, solid arrow), while those obtained using cali-
bration scheme II exhibit substantially reduced motion
Table 1
GSR from the Phantom Study (See Fig. 2) for 1D Phase Correction and the Proposed Method*
Scan plane
1D phase correction Proposed method
GSR (%) GSR (%) g-Factor (mean  SD)
Axial 3.94 4.24 1.26  0.25
Oblique 8.76 3.40 1.28  0.28
Double oblique 6.18 2.03 1.27  0.26
*Mean  SD of g-factor values for the proposed method are also reported.
Figure 4. Automatic correction during continuous scan plane rotation. Scan parameters were identical to those described in
Fig. 3. Reconstructed images using the proposed method are shown with respect to time. Numbers in the lower right corners in
the images denote time in seconds. The interval between images is 300 msec, which corresponds to a spacing of ﬁve time frames.
Note the decrease in contrast between myocardium and blood during the systolic phase in the cardiac cycle (see images at 3.6
and 4.5 seconds). See also Movie 2 of the supplementary material available online at http://www.interscience.wiley.com/
jpages/1053-1807/suppmat/index.html.
EPI Artifact Correction for Real-Time MRI 243
artifacts (Fig. 5f, solid arrow). Ghosting artifacts in the
coil sensitivity maps lead to residual ghosting in the
ﬁnal images (Fig. 5b and c, compared to Fig. 5g and h).
The mean and SD of g-factor values were 1.25  0.37
and 2.05  0.90 for the nonaccelerated and two-fold
accelerated cases, respectively, using calibration
scheme I, and were 1.16  0.25 and 1.79  0.58 for the
nonaccelerated and two-fold accelerated cases, respec-
tively, using calibration scheme II. Two-fold accelerated
images exhibit less temporal blurring of structures be-
cause of the reduced acquisition time (e.g., descending
aorta indicated by dashed arrows).
Reconstruction time for the nonaccelerated method
was measured for the real-time reconstruction algo-
rithm. Average run time measurements for the different
reconstruction steps were: 45.04 msec for the compu-
tation of coil sensitivity maps, 41.45 msec for the com-
putation of aliased images, 57.44 msec for SENSE ma-
trix inversion operations, and 0.84 msec for image
display. The total reconstruction time was approxi-
mately 144 msec per frame, while the acquisition time
per image was 60 msec. This indicates that pipelining
this computation across three processors will be sufﬁ-
cient for real-time reconstruction using commercially
available personal computer hardware.
DISCUSSION
The proposed method effectively eliminated ghosting
artifacts due to EPI echo-misalignment in arbitrary
double-oblique scan planes. When applied to real-time
interactive imaging, it automatically corrected ghosting
Figure 5. Automatic ghosting correction using no acceleration (b, g) and two-fold acceleration (c, h) and their corresponding
g-factor maps (d, i, e, j) reconstructed using two coil calibration schemes, I and II. Full FOV images (a) with low temporal
resolution are used for coil calibrations. The target data are from a systolic cardiac phase in which cardiac motion is substantial.
g-Factor maps are shown using a scale from 1 to 10. Note that g-factor values from calibration scheme II (i, j) are signiﬁcantly
lower than those from calibration scheme I (d, e), especially for the two-fold accelerated case. Motion artifacts are noticeably
reduced for the two-fold accelerated case when using calibration scheme II (solid arrows). Two-fold accelerated images have lower
SNR because of reduced acquisition time and the elevated g-factor, but show less temporal blurring in the descending aorta
(dashed arrows) compared to nonaccelerated images. See also Movie 3 of the supplementary material available online at
http://www.interscience.wiley.com/jpages/1053-1807/suppmat/index.html. Scan parameters: double-alternating CEPI with
two interleaves, ETL  50, FOV  33  33 cm2, spatial resolution  3.3  3.3 mm2, TR  34 msec, and time-per-image  136
msec (full FOV low temporal resolution for coil calibration), 68 msec (nonaccelerated), and 34 msec (two-fold accelerated).
244 Kim et al.
artifacts without a calibration scan whenever a scan
plane change occurred. This automatic capability is
attributed to the fact that ghost-free coil sensitivity
maps are updated with a few recent time frames, e.g.,
two time frames for the nonaccelerated acquisition and
four time frames for the two-fold accelerated acquisi-
tion. In this method, a factor of 2 in SENSE reduction is
used solely for correcting EPI ghosting artifacts, and not
for accelerating data acquisition. In the nonaccelerated
acquisition, in which a SENSE reduction factor of two is
used, noise ampliﬁcation due to the SENSE matrix in-
version was relatively insigniﬁcant. However, in the
two-fold accelerated acquisition, in which a SENSE re-
duction factor of four is used, the SENSE noise ampli-
ﬁcation was severe. This can be mitigated by using
16-channel, 32-channel, or larger receiver coil arrays
for which rate-4 parallel imaging has been demon-
strated with reasonable g-factors (19).
A drawback of the proposed method is that lower
temporal resolution coil sensitivity maps suffer from
motion induced ghosting artifacts when cardiac motion
occurs during coil calibration. Coil sensitivity maps
corrupted with motion artifacts produce residual arti-
facts in ﬁnal corrected images. A simple way of allevi-
ating this effect is to use the data from a relatively
stationary diastolic cardiac phase to construct coil sen-
sitivity maps that are free from motion induced ghost-
ing. In our experiments, the use of stationary frames for
coil calibration substantially reduced ghosting artifacts
in ﬁnal corrected images. Alternatively, the use of tem-
poral low-pass ﬁltering in coil calibration may also mit-
igate ghosting artifacts in coil sensitivity maps (12).
When the nonaccelerated correction method was ap-
plied to real-time cardiac imaging at 3T, overall recon-
structed images demonstrated high temporal resolu-
tion, excellent suppression of ghosting artifacts, and
high blood–myocardium contrast. In systolic cardiac
phases, subtle but noticeable FOV/2 ghosting was ob-
served due to rapid cardiac motion. In end-diastolic
cardiac phases, almost no ghosting was observed.
While three-interleaf gradient-echo EPI was primarily
used, we also experimented with other odd numbers of
interleaves. Single-shot EPI was considered as a way to
further accelerate acquisition, but signal loss and blur-
ring due to T2* relaxation proved to be limiting, given
the same spatial resolution as the imaging protocol
used in Fig. 3. The use of ﬁve or more interleaves in-
creased the prevalence of artifacts due to cardiac mo-
tion and the lowered temporal resolution.
In conclusion, an interleaved gradient-echo EPI ac-
quisition strategy, and PAGE-based reconstruction
technique have been presented as a means for auto-
matically correcting EPI ghosting artifacts due to echo-
misalignment. The method was applied successfully to
real-time interactive cardiac imaging at 3T, with supe-
rior performance compared to conventional 1D correc-
tion. Ghosting artifacts were automatically corrected at
arbitrary oblique scan planes, and high-quality ghost-
free images were obtained with 3.1-mm spatial resolu-
tion and 60-msec temporal resolution. The automatic
EPI ghosting correction method utilizes parallel imag-
ing with a reduction factor of 2, and may also be com-
patible with further acceleration using higher reduction
factors when 16, 32, or higher channel receiver coil
arrays are used. The feasibility of real-time reconstruc-
tion using commercially available workstations was
demonstrated.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank John Pauly and Peter Kellman for valuable
comments, and Adam Kerr for echo-planar trajectory
design code.
REFERENCES
1. Mansﬁeld P. Multi-planar image formation using NMR spin echoes.
J Phys C 1977;10:L55–L58.
2. Reeder SB, Atalar E, Faranesh AZ, McVeigh ER. Referenceless in-
terleaved echo-planar imaging. Magn Reson Med 1999;41:87–94.
3. Zhou X, Epstein FH, Maier JK. Reduction of a new Nyquist ghost in
oblique echo planar imaging. In: Proceedings of the 4th Annual
Meeting of ISMRM, New York, NY, USA, 1996 (Abstract 1477).
4. Feinberg DA, Turner R, Jakab PD, Kienlin MV. Echo-planar imag-
ing with asymmetric gradient modulation and inner-volume exci-
tation. Magn Reson Med 1990;13:162–169.
5. Buonocore MH, Gao L. Ghost artifact reduction for echo-planar
imaging using image phase correction. Magn Reson Med 1997;38:
89–100.
6. Chen N-K, Wyrwicz AM. Removal of EPI Nyquist ghost artifacts with
two-dimensional phase correction. Magn Reson Med 2004;51:1247–
1253.
7. Kuhara S, Kassai Y, Ishihara Y, Yui M, Hamamura Y, Sugimoto H.
A novel EPI reconstruction technique using multiple RF coil sensi-
tivity maps. In: Proceedings of the 8th Annual Meeting of ISMRM,
Denver, CO, USA, 2000 (Abstract 154).
8. Herzka DA, Kellman P, Aletras AH, Guttman MA. Multishot EPI-
SSFP in the heart. Magn Reson Med 2002;47:655–664.
9. Kellman P, McVeigh ER. Phased array ghost elimination. NMR
Biomed 2006;19:352–361.
10. Griswold MA, Jakob PM, Edelman RR, Sodickson DK. Alternative
EPI acquisition strategies using SMASH. In: Proceedings of the 6th
Annual Meeting of ISMRM, Sydney, Australia, 1998 (Abstract 423).
11. Santos JM, Wright GA, Pauly JM. Flexible real-time magnetic res-
onance imaging framework. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc
2004;2:1048–1051.
12. Kellman P, Epstein FH, McVeigh ER. Adaptive sensitivity encoding
incorporating temporal ﬁltering (TSENSE). Magn Reson Med 2001;
45:846–852.
13. Pruessmann KP, Weiger M, Scheidegger MB, Boesiger P. SENSE:
sensitivity encoding for fast MRI. Magn Reson Med 1999;42:952–
962.
14. Pauly JM, Butts RK, Luk Pat GT, Macovski A. A circular echo
planar pulse sequence. Proceedings of the 3rd Annual Meeting of
SMR, Nice, France 1995:106.
15. Buonocore MH, Zhu DC. High spatial resolution EPI using an odd
number of interleaves. Magn Reson Med 1999;41:1199–1205.
16. Hennel F. Image-based reduction of artifacts in multishot echo-
planar imaging. J Magn Reson 1998;134:206–213.
17. Feinberg DA, Oshio K. Gradient-echo shifting in fast MRI tech-
niques for correction of ﬁeld inhomogeneity errors and chemical
shift. J Magn Reson 1992;97:177–183.
18. Nayak KS, Cunningham CH, Santos JM, Pauly JM. Real-time car-
diac MRI at 3 Tesla. Magn Reson Med 2004;51:655–660.
19. Hardy CJ, Harvey EC, Giaquinto RO, Niendorf T, Grant AK, Sod-
ickson DK. 32-element receiver-coil array for cardiac imaging.
Magn Reson Med 2006;55:1142–1149.
EPI Artifact Correction for Real-Time MRI 245
