J. Great Lakes Res. 33 (Special Issue 2):70–86
Internat. Assoc. Great Lakes Res., 2007
70
Research to Guide Use of Pheromones
to Control Sea Lamprey        
Weiming Li1,*, Michael Twohey2, Michael Jones1, and Michael Wagner1
1Michigan State University
Department of Fisheries and Wildlife
13 Natural Resources Building
East Lansing, Michigan 48824
2U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Marquette Biological Station
3090 Wright St.
Marquette, Michigan 49855
ABSTRACT. The Great Lakes Fishery Commission (GLFC) considers the application of sea lamprey
pheromones a promising alternative-control method for its sea lamprey management program. Several
components of two pheromones that regulate migration and reproduction, respectively, have been identi-
fied and synthesized. Potential utility of these pheromone compounds in lamprey management have been
demonstrated in a series of field experiments. These discoveries have laid a solid foundation for develop-
ment of pheromone-based management. In order to identify potential strategies that will be practical,
effective, and economical, we propose a hypothesis driven approach that integrates concepts and experi-
mental methods from several disciplines of biological science, such as neurobiology, biochemistry, and
behavioral ecology to illustrate the exact function of identified compounds. In the interim, we identify the
necessary steps, or issues critical to eventual implementation, to charter a pathway that leads from labo-
ratory research to effective deployment of pheromones. Finally, we highlight a strategy that fosters col-
laboration among scientists across disciplines, as well as among research institutes and lamprey control
agencies, to accomplish this research agenda.
INDEX WORDS: Pheromone, sea lamprey, Petromyzon, reproduction, migration, control.
*Corresponding author. E-mail: liweim@msu.edu
INTRODUCTION
Controlling the sea lamprey (Petromyzon mari-
nus), an introduced parasitic predator of commer-
cially and ecologically important fishes, is essential
to maintaining a healthy and sustainable ecosystem
in the Great Lakes. The Great Lakes Fishery Com-
mission (GLFC), in partnership with Fisheries and
Oceans Canada (DFO) and the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service (USFWS), carries out an integrated
pest management program to control sea lampreys in
the Great Lakes. The main elements of this program
are stock assessments, lampricide application to kill
larvae, maintaining barriers to migration, trapping
of adults, and controlled release of sterilized males.
The future of sea lamprey management lies in the
pursuit of new and effective control tactics, includ-
ing alternatives to lampricide applications. 
The GLFC (2001) identified field deployment of
one new alternative-control method by 2010 as an
important milestone for its sea lamprey manage-
ment program. They also identified the most
promising method for future implementation: the
application of recently identified pheromones that
regulate migratory and reproductive behaviors of
the sea lamprey. We prepared this review to con-
struct a visible, transparent, and robust framework
for research that supports and catalyzes the devel-
opment and field deployment of pheromone-based
applications. Our primary objective is to discuss
the essential research issues through an analysis of
current understanding of sea lamprey chemical
communication and the information needs. We also
seek to develop new research strategies that foster
Sea Lamprey Pheromone Research 71
collaboration among scientists across disciplines,
as well as among research institutes and lamprey
control agencies, to accomplish these objectives.
This review contains three primary sections. The
first establishes a basic understanding of
pheromone communication, much of which derived
in the laboratory and from numerous disciplines,
ranging from molecular biology to behavioral biol-
ogy and ecology. It describes both our current un-
derstanding and remaining basic research needs.
The next section of the paper identifies critical
questions and research needs necessary to move
pheromone research “from the laboratory to a tool
for control”—that is, from basic knowledge to prac-
tical implementation as a management tool. Here,
we consider some broad questions that relate to the
ecological context for the use of pheromones in
control, and we present a set of research questions
organized around three broad pathways by which
pheromones might be used to the greatest effect.
The final section lays out the research strategy we
envision for realizing all the promises held by lam-
prey pheromones into an integrated pest manage-
ment strategy for the Great Lakes. 
FUNDAMENTAL UNDERSTANDING
OF SEA LAMPREY PHEROMONES
Sea Lamprey Olfactory Biology
Biologically relevant odorants are critical for the
sea lamprey to complete its complex life history.
Each developmental stage—larvae, parasite, and
spawning adult (Applegate 1950, Hardisty and Pot-
ter 1971)—is regulated to some extent by odors.
Sedentary larval sea lampreys (ammocoetes) have
sensitive and mature receptor neurons (VanDen-
Bossche et al. 1995). A study on Pacific lampreys
(Lampetra tridentate) implicated odorants in regu-
lation of growth (Mallatt 1983). During the radical
transformation from larvae to parasite, the olfactory
system undergoes marked elaboration (VanDen-
Bossche et al. 1997) where the sensory epithelium
becomes enlarged and integrated into an olfactory
apparatus that is highly sensitive to a unique reper-
toire of compounds (Kleerekoper 1972, Li et al.
1995, Li et al. 2002, Li and Sorensen 1997, Siefkes
and Li 2004, Fine et al. 2004, Moore and Schleen
1980, Teeter 1980, Vrieze and Sorensen 2001).
Among chordates, sea lamprey olfactory bulbs are
exceptionally large relative to the brain (Stoddart
1990). Olfaction is believed to be the key modality
that regulates and motivates basic behaviors in
post-larval sea lampreys (Kleerekoper 1972), in-
cluding migration (Bjerselius et al. 2000, Sorensen
et al. 2005), mating behavior (Li et al. 2002, 2003a,
b; Siefkes et al. 2003a, b; Teeter 1980), and sexual
maturation (Li et al. unpublished data). Clearly, the
sea lamprey’s complex life history and reliance on
identifiable odorants offer ample targets for devel-
opment of control strategies that exploit a multitude
of odor-induced reactions. These strategies, once
developed, are likely to be effective, efficient and
environmentally benign. 
The natural odorants that hold the foremost
promise for application in lamprey management are
pheromones, or “substances that are excreted to the
outside by an individual and received by a second
individual of the same species in which they release
a specific reaction, for example a definite behavior
or developmental process” (Karlson and Luscher
1959). According to their primary function,
pheromones are either considered releasers, which
elicit immediate behavioral changes, or primers,
which induce changes in development and physiol-
ogy (Wilson and Bossert 1963). Many pheromones
have both releasing and priming functions, and the
actions of primers often predispose those of re-
leasers. In principle, both types of pheromones have
several features favorable for exploitation in popu-
lation management. Because responses to phero-
mones are often instinctual, they can be expected
from all conspecific individuals at the proper devel-
opmental stage (Li et al. 2003b). Overall, we may
expect these responses to be specific and robust,
rendering target animals vulnerable to manipulation
with minute amounts of pheromones (cf. Siefkes et
al. 2005, Wagner et al. 2006). 
The driving force for research into lamprey olfac-
tion is the development of new control methods.
However, the research findings also reveal the sea
lamprey’s utility as an animal model for the eluci-
dation of fundamental principles of pheromone
communication and olfactory transduction in verte-
brates. Its male releasing pheromone (a mating
pheromone) is the only one identified among fishes
(Li et al. 2002, Yun et al. 2002), and the first found
to have a large active space (Li et al. 2003b,
Siefkes et al. 2005). Lamprey male pheromone
function differs from the “chemical spying” of most
previously identified fish pheromones (Sorensen
and Stacey 1999). In addition, sea lamprey is the
only species with a larval migratory pheromone
identified (Bjerselius et al. 2000, Fine et al. 2004,
Moore and Schleen 1980, Teeter 1980, Vrieze and
Sorensen 2001, Sorensen et al. 2005). Sea lamprey
and their close relatives typically have large sen-
72 Li et al.
sory neurons (Thornhill 1967) and a limited number
of odorant receptors (Dryer 2000) that respond to a
small set of specific compounds (Li 1994). This
arrangement renders matching receptors to odorants
somewhat easier, and should facilitate experimental
inquiry into olfactory transduction mechanisms at
cellular and molecular levels. 
Research into pheromone communication con-
tributes to our understanding of many other aspects
of lamprey biology. The complexity of the lamprey
chemical communication, encompassing several
possible pheromones and feeding cues, has spurred
comparative work in biochemistry and electrophys-
iology throughout its life history (cf. Li et al. 1995,
Polkinghorne et al. 2001, VanDenBossche et al.
1995, Zielinski et al. 1995), and of other lamprey
species (cf. Fine et al. 2004, Yun et al. 2003a, b).
The multidimensional nature of each pheromone
system has further stimulated integrative ap-
proaches that integrate different disciplines of sci-
ence (cf. Li et al. 2002) such as reproductive
endocrinology and cell and molecular biology (cf.
Sower and Kawauchi 2001). These studies, in turn,
provide information for understanding of
pheromone function in the context of sea lamprey
life history and ecology. 
Information Needs for Developing
Pheromone Applications
One direct and rational way to identify critical in-
formation needs is to identify issues directly perti-
nent to the control application. However, leading
candidate applications are only beginning to emerge
from the long list of potential strategies proposed
over the last two decades (Li et al. 2003a, Sorensen
and Vrieze 2003, Teeter 1980, Twohey et al.
2003a). As our understanding of the mechanisms
that mediate lamprey pheromone communication
progresses, we need to simultaneously develop
cost-effective approaches to producing pheromones
at a large scale. 
First, we believe we should generate the basic
biological information essential to elucidate the
lamprey pheromone system. Each of the strategies
proposed so far relies on the premise that the
biosynthesis, release, and reaction to pheromones
can be mimicked, altered, or disrupted. Thus, any
application that exploits a pheromone will only be
as good as our knowledge of the mechanisms that
regulate that particular function. In the long term,
the most efficient and practical control strategies
will emerge from a thorough understanding of all
facets of lamprey pheromones. Herein, we focus on
those aspects of the sea lamprey pheromone system
that determine the specificity and robustness of be-
havior, and that predict the potential utilities and
constraints on candidate application approaches. 
Studies of animal behavior often address four
basic questions, respectively related to ultimate
function (“why”), proximate causation (“how”),
phylogeny (lineage), and ontogeny (development).
Although variations on this theme are common, the
general utility of this approach is well established.
These questions constitute a framework that en-
ables a logical, inclusive, and structured approach
to identifying critical information needs. The
“why” question is often addressed in the context of
life history and ecology; its answers shed light on
the most probable applications and the potential
constraints confronting each. The “how” question
is most often addressed at the organism, cellular,
and molecular scales. It requires an integration of
methods from numerous disciplines, ranging from
molecular biology to chemistry to behavioral biol-
ogy. Knowing “how” provides insight into which
control tactics are likely to be useful. Lineage
questions address the species-specificity of the
pheromone system, and potentially inform the opti-
mization of pheromone component blends in recip-
ient streams with differing lamprey assemblages. It
also provides information useful for registration by
predicting unintended impacts to native species.
Finally, the ontogeny question provides informa-
tion on the timing and versatility of application
methods. 
A comprehensive answer to each question can
only be attained by understanding how a pheromone
message flows from the emitter through signal mole-
cules to the receiver. Typically, internal and external
stimuli act upon emitter animals (or tissues) to trans-
mit a signal in coded form through water to a re-
ceiver. The receiver registers the message via the
olfactory organ, interprets it according to the context,
and provides a particular “meaning” which provokes
a physiological or behavioral response. 
Emitters
Because most pest-control applications employ
man-made copies of the pheromone to induce or dis-
rupt behaviors, emitters often receive less attention
than the two subsequent components. However, un-
derstanding this component contributes to an overall
Sea Lamprey Pheromone Research 73
understanding of ultimate function, conceivably
leading to novel strategies to eliminate or strengthen
message flow in the communication channel. The
exact developmental stage and/or physiological state
during which the sea lamprey actively synthesizes
and releases each pheromone need to be identified.
Mechanistic studies should focus on the biochemical
pathways of biosynthesis, the cellular and molecular
mechanisms facilitating pheromone release, and the
regulation thereof, in particular by endocrine fac-
tors. Potential contextual stimuli that initiate and
maintain the pheromone synthesis and release
should be screened extensively. 
Message Molecules
The identification of message molecules often
predisposes intensive and efficient studies on the
reactions of the receiver. Hence, it is central to un-
derstanding the mechanistic processes of any partic-
ular pheromone system and usually the initial focus
of research on newly discovered pheromones. De-
sirable information includes the chemical structures
of all components, the optimal and working range
of ratios among all mixture components, mecha-
nisms that govern the rate, timing, and duration of
release, and the range of concentrations in nature.
The stability of each component molecule should
also be examined. If one component is more sus-
ceptible to chemical, physical or enzymatic modifi-
cations in water, then the ratio of the components,
and thus the message, may change substantially
over time and distance. 
Pheromone molecules carry a message through a
“noisy” channel, a multitude of chemicals which at
times can vary substantially across habitats. How
do sea lampreys optimize the “signal-to-noise” ratio
to ensure their pheromones carry unequivocal mes-
sages? Most animals maximize the signal-to-noise
ratios through efficient biosyntheses, unique molec-
ular structures, and co-evolution of a physiological
filter in the receiver organ. According to informa-
tion theory, “redundancy” is the predominant means
by which error-free information can be transmitted
in a noisy channel. In pheromones, this could be
achieved by multiple components if each of them is
detected by a separate receptor. Actual examples for
the second strategy are limited but do exist. Know-
ing which mechanism(s) evolved in the sea lamprey
to ensure efficient signal reception, and whether it
is possible and practical to exploit these mecha-
nisms for control, is essential.
Receivers
Receivers are typically the ultimate target of
pheromone-based pest management. Their reactions
to a pheromone signal are mediated through a com-
plex cascade of sensory input, signal processing in
the central nervous system, motor or endocrine out-
put (or both), and associated changes in gene ex-
pression. The cascade is augmented and modified
by an extensive array of internal and external fac-
tors, an understanding of which leads to predicting
the versatility, utility, constraints, and probable
strategies for management. 
Virtually every element of this communication
system given its relevant contextual stimuli offers a
potential target for control. Specifically,
• the exact developmental stage and physio-
logical state at which the receiver lampreys
detect and respond to a pheromone must be
determined in order to choose proper targets
for subsequent study and control; 
• physiological and environmental factors that
augment the specific reactions must be iden-
tified and fully characterized; 
• neurobiology of the olfactory organ needs
to be examined to determine the detection
limit for specific pheromones, response dy-
namics, habituations, specificity to each
pheromone component and typical noisy
chemicals, possible physiological filters for
noise, overall mechanisms for optimizing
the detection of conspecific pheromones,
and the environmental, physiological and
developmental factors that modulate its re-
sponsiveness;
• how each pheromone component is pro-
cessed should be determined, including pre-
sentation and integration in the olfactory
bulbs, the subsequent pathways for olfactory
information processing and modification,
mechanisms causing motor output or en-
docrine changes, and central discrimination
of the pheromone signal; 
• plasticity in reactions due to learning and ha-
bituation, and its impact on effectiveness of
control methods, should be determined;
• at the organismal level, the behavioral or
physiological reactions (or both) to each
component and their mixtures should be
fully characterized. 
74 Li et al.
Current Understanding of Sea Lamprey
Pheromone Communication
Our current understanding of pheromone commu-
nication in the sea lamprey has accrued principally
through research supported by the Great Lakes
Fishery Commission. Following, we highlight the
results and conclusions about the two pheromones
that have received intensive studies: the larval mi-
gratory pheromone and the male pheromone. 
Migratory Pheromone
The migratory pheromone and its potential ap-
plications in lamprey management have been re-
viewed recently (Sorensen et al. 2003, Sorensen
and Vrieze 2003). Migratory adult sea lampreys
rely on odorants released by the larvae to locate
spawning streams. Across the Great Lakes basin,
these adults do not select their natal streams for re-
production (Bergstedt and Seelye 1995), but do
prefer streams that contain higher densities of lar-
val lampreys (Moore and Schleen 1980). In the
laboratory, migratory adults placed in mazes are at-
tracted to the odor of larvae (Bjerselius et al. 2000,
Teeter 1980), and to water collected from streams
that possess larvae (Vrieze and Sorensen 2001).
Further, the attractiveness of the water collected
from streams without larvae can be enhanced by
the addition of larval washings (Vrieze and
Sorensen 2001). 
Several lines of evidence indicate that petromy-
zonol sulfate (PS; Fig. 1; Haselwood and Tokes
1969) is only one component of the migratory
pheromone. This molecule stimulates the olfactory
epithelium of migratory adults (Li et al. 1995, Li
and Sorensen 1997), attracts adults in a laboratory
maze (Bjerselius et al. 2000), and is released in suf-
ficient quantities to function as a component of the
migratory pheromone (Polkinghorne et al. 2001).
PS was less attractive than the entire signal released
by larvae suggesting there were more components
to the migratory pheromone (Sorensen et al. 2003).
Recently, two novel compounds have been discov-
ered as additional components of the sea lamprey
migratory pheromone (Sorensen et al. 2005).
Petromyzonamine disulfate (PADS; Fig. 1) is the
major component of the migratory pheromone
being biologically more active than PS and attracts
sea lampreys at a concentration of 10–13M
(Sorensen et al. 2005). Petromyzosterol disulfate
(PSDS; Fig. 1) was discovered as a minor compo-
nent of the migratory pheromone being attractive at
concentrations of 10–11M (Sorensen et al. 2005).
The behavioral effect of another larval lamprey bile
acid, allocholic acid (ACA; Haslewood and Tokes
1969), has not been observed. Fine et al. (2004)
discovered that lampreys of the family Petromyzon-
tidae may produce a common migratory
pheromone. If so, the distribution of native lam-
preys may bear greatly on the development of an
effective migratory pheromone-based application
and needs to be examined. 
FIG. 1. The chemical structures of three compo-
nents of the migratory pheromone as identified by
Sorensen et al. (2005).
Sea Lamprey Pheromone Research 75
Male Pheromone
In a two-choice maze mature females tend to stay
longer in the arm conditioned with mature males
(Teeter 1980). In fact, it is the ovulated females,
and not the males or pre-ovulatory females, that
prefer water conditioned with spermiating males (Li
et al 2002, Siefkes et al. 2003b). During these trials
ovulated females also exhibited dramatic increases
in search behavior. At a natural spawning site (Oc-
queoc River, MI), ovulated females tagged with
radio transmitters swam upstream for 65 m to reach
the exact site where spermiating males were held
(Li et al. 2002). It appears likely this pheromone
guides ovulated females to nests and stimulates
their participation in further nest construction and
spawning. Traps baited with spermiating males
(Johnson et al. 2005) or washings from spermiating
males (Johnson et al. 2006) capture a large propor-
tion of ovulated females whereas unbaited traps do
not capture females. Further, traps baited with mul-
tiple males are more attractive than traps baited
with single males (Wagner et al. 2006).
The structures of two potential components of the
male pheromone have been identified as 3-keto
petromyzonol sulfate (3KPZS; Fig. 2; Li et al.
2002) and 3-keto allocholic acid (3KACA; Fig. 2;
Yun et al. 2002). 3KPZS differs from PS by its 3-
keto, as apposed to a 3α-hydroxy, group (Hasle-
wood and Tokes et al. 1969, Li et al. 2002). These
two bile acids are highly stimulatory for the female
olfactory organs (Siefkes and Li 2004). 3kPZS in-
duces preference and search behaviors in ovulatory
females in laboratory mazes (Li et al. 2002, Siefkes
et al. 2003a), and is released in large quantities
(Yun et al. 2002) through specialized cells in the
gills (Siefkes et al. 2003a, b). In a natural stream, a
synthetic copy of 3kPZS at 10–12 molar guided ovu-
lated females to the exact location where 3kPZS
was introduced (Siefkes et al. 2005). 3kPZS ap-
pears to be the main component of the male
pheromone; the potential effects of 3kACA on fe-
male behavior have not been quantified. Whether
these two compounds are released by any native
fishes of the Great Lakes has also not been deter-
mined.
The migratory and male pheromones play differ-
ent but sequential roles in an exquisite signaling
system that guides lacustrine adults into suitable
spawning streams, and then mature females to ma-
ture males to complete the act of spawning. Clearly,
requirements for timing and precision are different
in these two systems. The migratory pheromone
needs to last through the season when adults enter
the spawning ground and move upstream. The male
pheromone, in contrast, needs to guide ovulating fe-
males to the exact nest where males are spermiat-
ing, which is particularly important to sea lampreys
as they die soon after completing sexual matura-
tion. 
The biosynthesis and release of each pheromone
appears to be well suited for their respective func-
tions. A component of the migratory pheromone,
petromyzonol sulfate (PS), is released by all larvae
throughout the year (Polkinghorne et al. 2001).
Rate of release is enhanced by feeding activity
which peaks in the spring as adults enter spawning
streams. In contrast, the male pheromone is not re-
leased until the male becomes reproductively avail-
able for spawning (i.e., at spermiation) (Siefkes et
al. 2003a, b). The physiological and environmental
FIG. 2. The chemical structures of two compo-
nents of the male pheromone as identified by Li et
al. 2002 and Yun et al. 2002b.
76 Li et al.
factors controlling the onset and intensity of its re-
lease have not been clearly defined. Nevertheless,
the precise synchronization of its release with the
onset of spermiation suggests each is regulated by a
common mechanism. Spermiation is closely regu-
lated by the hypothalamus-pituitary gland-gonad
axis (reviewed by Sower 1998), and pheromone re-
lease may be similarly regulated. The identity of the
hormone (or hormones) that regulates biosynthesis
of the male pheromone is not known.
One potential additional pheromone, although
less intensively studied, also holds promise for de-
veloping into control methods.  A female
pheromone has been implicated in two-choice
mazes where spermiating males (but not pre-sper-
miating males or females) spent more time in the
compartment conditioned with ovulating females,
but not in that conditioned with immature females
(Li et al. 2002, Siefkes et al. 2005, Teeter 1980).
Unlike the male pheromone, the proposed female
pheromone does not induce an increase in search
behavior of its receiver in either the laboratory or
field (Li et al. 2002, Siefkes et al. 2005). Notably,
male lampreys typically precede females and initi-
ate nest construction (Applegate 1950, Manion and
Hanson 1980). Therefore, spermiating males could
benefit from a pheromone that stimulates the fe-
males to search for males (Li et al. 2002), whereas
females may benefit from a pheromone that pro-
motes forming and maintaining of spawning pairs
(Teeter 1980). 
Finally, pheromones may play a role in regulating
larval distribution and the onset of metamorphosis.
Larval sea lampreys have mature olfactory receptor
neurons (VanDenBossche et al. 1995) that respond
at least to some of the same odorants as adults
(Zielinski et al. 1995, Li unpublished). Although
the role of odors in the lives of larval sea lampreys
is not known, excreted metabolites may be involved
in inhibiting growth of other larvae (Mallatt 1983,
Rodrigeuz-Munoz et al. 2003) and could also play a
role in triggering metamorphosis. 
Research Needs for the Biology and Chemistry
of Lamprey Pheromones 
Although our understanding of lamprey
pheromones has progressed along several fronts,
the unknown still exceeds the known. For the mi-
gratory and the male pheromone, we have an under-
standing of the complexity of their signal
molecules, their potency and specificity for the ol-
factory epithelium, and the basic characteristics of
induced behaviors. The regulation of behavioral re-
sponses, the neurobiological mechanisms that gen-
erate motor output in response to sensory input of
pheromones, and regulation and biochemical path-
ways for pheromone synthesis remain elusive.
Here, we highlight critical research needs empha-
sizing knowledge gaps that prevent timely develop-
ment of control methods, hinder insight into the full
application potential of these pheromones, and im-
pede an initial assessment of other demonstrated
pheromones. 
1. Identify and characterize the variables that
regulate biosynthesis of pheromones, in
particular the hormones that augment the
synthetic pathways of 3KPZS and 3KACA.
The anticipated information will be useful
for alteration of pheromone release.
2. Develop inexpensive chemical syntheses of,
or other means to produce, pheromones
identified in the sea lamprey at large scales
and sufficient levels of purity. Synthesized
compounds enable 1) direct examination of
the role of each component in natural habi-
tats, and 2) the large scale field experiments
necessary to develop effective implementa-
tion protocols.
3. Elucidate the function of each identified
pheromone component as well as how mix-
tures within the range of ratios expressed in
natural pheromones operate. Results from
laboratory experiments should be validated
in field trials; these data will be useful in
developing end-use products for eventual
EPA registration.
4. Develop accurate, sensitive, and timely
methods for measuring concentrations of
mating and migratory pheromone compo-
nents from field samples.  In order to
achieve effective pheromone applications,
we will  need to know how much
pheromone to add, and for how long to add
it. Competing natural sources of phero-
mone will be a significant impediment to
successful implementation. With these
methods we may 1) estimate the concentra-
tion and variation of pheromone compo-
nents in lamprey habitat, 2) characterize
their dispersal and fate under different en-
vironmental conditions, and 3) relate these
findings to the local density of larvae and
spawners.
Sea Lamprey Pheromone Research 77
5. Determine the physiological factors and
contextual stimuli that modify lamprey re-
sponses to pheromones. This task is daunt-
ing but the resultant information will
contribute to optimizing the design of appli-
cation protocols. 
6. Determine the impacts of physiological
adaptation and habituation on the plasticity
of lamprey responses to pheromones.
Whether applications that require prolonged 
introduction of pheromones will be effec-
tive is largely determined by the plasticity
of individual responses. 
7. Characterize the central nervous system
pathways, signal processing apparatus, and
motor or endocrine outputs in response to
pheromones. Determine if sex and develop-
ment stage-specific regions in the brain
govern where pheromone constituents con-
verge. Identify hormones and neuromodula-
tors that augment the neural pathway for
pheromone sensory input and output during
spawning and migration, and the suppres-
sion thereof. These data will 1) complement
the currently available results on neurobio-
logical responses of the peripheral sensory
organs, and 2) illustrate the mechanisms
mediating impacts of contextual factors on
the strength of pheromone responses. 
8. Determine the fitness “value” of individual
pheromones in the sea lamprey. In this con-
text, the value is difficult to define but
could be roughly estimated by determining
the impact on reproduction if a particular
pheromone system is impeded. Nonethe-
less, the information, be it vague, could
potentially indicate the long-term effective-
ness and full potential of pheromone based
controls. 
MOVING FROM THE LABORATORY TO A
TOOL FOR CONTROL
Background
For pheromones to become a practical tool for
sea lamprey control, fundamental research aimed at
elucidating the nature and functions of lamprey
pheromones must be complemented by research
that evaluates potential control tactics. Here, we ad-
dress critical questions and research needs to move
pheromone research “from the laboratory to the
field”—that is, from basic knowledge to practical
implementation. We first consider some broad ques-
tions that relate to this topic—the ecological con-
text for use of pheromones in control. Then, we
present a set of research questions organized around
three broad pathways by which pheromones might
be used to effect control. The questions are summa-
rized in Table 1.
Field trials to assess the efficacy of using phero-
mones to control lampreys will require access to
large quantities of either naturally produced or syn-
thesized pheromones. Logistical constraints are
likely to severely limit the supply of naturally pro-
duced pheromone, especially for program-scale im-
plementation of a strategy. This reveals the critical
importance of research on the characterization and
synthesis of sea lamprey pheromones, a topic al-
ready addressed in the laboratory section of this
paper. For pheromones to become a practical tool
for sea lamprey control, the structure of key
pheromone components must be identified, and
economically viable methods of synthesis need to
be developed. Finally, pheromone products must be
approved by regulatory agencies in the U.S. and
Canada before their application. Regulatory issues
are not a subject of this review.
Recruitment Dynamics
The pheromone strategies currently envisioned
are aimed at reducing sea lamprey reproductive
success (Twohey et al. 2003a). The effectiveness of
actions that reduce reproductive success will de-
pend on sea lamprey recruitment dynamics, because
the recruitment that results from the sea lamprey
that are able to spawn will determine the effect of
the action on production of parasitic lamprey. Both
density-dependent (compensatory) changes in
hatching, growth, and mortality of larvae and den-
sity-independent recruitment variation (Jones et al.
2003) can lead to greater than desirable recruitment
despite efforts to reduce reproductive success.
Thus, an integrated pest management strategy for
sea lamprey must effectively reduce reproduction to
levels where density-dependent and density-inde-
pendent compensatory effects are negligible. Effec-
tive integrated pest management typically relies on
a variety of highly effective tools that multiple vul-
nerabilities in the life history of the pest (Knipling
1979, Sawyer 1980). This implies an aggressive
strategy, integrating pheromone use with other ac-
tions that also aim to reduce reproduction. 
Four outcomes that were developed to guide im-
plementation and evaluation of the sterile-male-
78 Li et al.
TABLE 1. Summary of research needs for sea lamprey pheromones.
Biology and Chemistry of Lamprey Pheromones 
1. What variables regulate biosynthesis of pheromones?
2. What are the most efficient and inexpensive procedures to synthesize or produce sea lamprey pheromones at large
scales and sufficient levels of purity?
3. What is the function of each identified pheromone component and the effects of their mixtures in eliciting behav-
ioral responses?
4. What is an accurate, sensitive, and convenient method for measuring pheromone components for determination of
purity and rapid field assessment of concentration in streams?
5. What are the physiological factors and contextual stimuli that augment and modify responsiveness of lamprey to
pheromones? 
6. What are the effects of physiological adaptation and habituation elements in plasticity of lamprey responses to
pheromones?
7. What is the pathway in the central nervous system for sensory input of pheromones, subsequent signal processing,
and motor or endocrine output?
8. Are there hormones and neuromodulators that augment the neural pathway for pheromone sensory input and output
during spawning and migration, and the suppression thereof?
Redistribution Strategy
9. How do sea lampreys search for pheromone sources in lake and streams?  
10. How does the lamprey’s physiological condition affect the lamprey’s response to pheromones?
11. How well can sea lamprey distinguish gradients/different sources?
12. How does the attractiveness of sea lamprey pheromones compare to other odorants?
13. How can we alter the distribution of lamprey during their spawning migration?
15. How do environmental variables affect exposure to the animal, dose to the animal, and the proportion of animals
exposed; and the effect of pheromones on redistribution?
16. Once lampreys have been successfully redistributed in a watershed, how can this redistribution be maintained?
17. Can male and female lamprey be differentially redistributed with pheromones?
18. Are there environmentally benign compounds that repel lampreys from a stream or tributary?
Trapping Strategy 
19. How does exposure to pheromones affect lamprey behavior?
20. What proportion of sea lampreys that encounter a detectable level of pheromone will search for its source (a trap)?
21. What trap designs are most effective in combination with pheromone baits?
22. Do native species of larval lampreys produce pheromones that are equally attractive as those produced by sea lam-
prey larvae?
23. How does the natural background concentration of pheromones affect attractiveness of introduced pheromones?
24. Can lamprey be attracted into traps or tributaries in the presence of pheromones from natural sources?
25. What concentrations of pheromone are effective in attracting sea lampreys to traps?
26. What environmental cues might enhance or reduce pheromonally mediated attraction behaviors?
Mating Disruption Strategy
27. Do sea lamprey behavioral responses to mating pheromones become less robust after prolonged exposure?
28. Can a synthetic or natural antagonist to sea lamprey pheromones be produced?
29. How is lamprey behavior affected by high concentrations of pheromone?
30. How do different components of each pheromone affect lamprey, and how do they interact?
31. Can pheromones be used to alter the natural timing of maturation?
32. What level of disruption is needed for the technique to effectively reduce sea lamprey populations?
33. Can male pheromone production be up-regulated or enhanced in individual animals to achieve a control strategy?
Sea Lamprey Pheromone Research 79
release technique (from Twohey et al. 2003b),
apply equally well to pheromone use:
1. The abundance of burrowed larvae in each
year class (after leaving the nest) is reduced
in individual streams.
2. Reductions in abundance of larvae persist
through the larval life stage and result in re-
ductions in the number of metamorphosing
sea lampreys in individual streams.
3. The number of parasitic-phase sea lampreys
in the lake is reduced.
4. Damage to fish in the lake is reduced.
Each of these outcomes is subject to the phenom-
enon of compensation discussed above. Research to
increase our understanding of the population dy-
namics of larval and juvenile sea lamprey, particu-
larly as it relates to compensatory mechanisms, is
key to understanding the potential of pheromone-
based control. However, the remainder of this
discussion will focus on the specific use of
pheromones to disrupt reproduction in sea lampreys.
Pathways to Control Strategies
The current understanding of pheromone commu-
nication suggests that a research focus on reducing
the effective number of mature reproducing sea
lampreys and enhancing existing control efforts
(e.g., trapping and the release of sterilized males)
(Twohey et al. 2003b) may very well lead to new
management measures. Several pheromone-based
tactics have been proposed for further investigation
(Li et al. 2003a, Sorensen et al. 2003, Twohey et al.
2003a). A conceptual framework for using
pheromones to reduce the number of reproducing
lampreys is presented in Figure 3. 
Three pathways to control are envisioned: 1) Re-
distribution—lure mature sea lampreys to habitats
where they can not reproduce or where they can be
effectively removed or killed. 2) Trap—lure sea
lampreys into traps baited with pheromone. 3) Mat-
ing disruption—strategies to confuse and confound
the reproductive cues that lampreys rely upon.
Whereas these categories are useful to organize our
thinking about key research questions, we note that
FIG. 3. Conceptual framework of pheromone control strategies based on redistribution.
80 Li et al.
many of the proposed questions will apply to more
than one category.
Research Needs for Control
Redistribution Strategy
Pheromones have the potential to draw sea lam-
preys into streams or parts of streams advantageous
for control (Sorensen et al. 2003, Twohey et al.
2003a, Wagner et al. 2006). Lampreys could be at-
tracted into a tributary 1) with poor attributes for
egg or larval survival, 2) that is scheduled for a
lampricide treatment, or 3) where effective traps
can be located. Reproduction might also be reduced
in adjacent tributaries, delaying the need for future
lampricide treatments. This approach could be en-
hanced by eliminating sources of migratory
pheromone or by the application of a repellent. Cur-
rently, no environmentally benign repellents are
known. Additionally, it might be possible to lure
male and female sea lampreys to separate streams
or areas of a stream, thereby preventing mating.
Important research questions related to the poten-
tial for redistribution are:
• How do sea lampreys find and subsequently
behave in detection of pheromones in lakes
and streams? 
a. How do sea lampreys find and select
streams?
b. When during their life history do they re-
spond to pheromones?
c. When during the spawning migration do
sea lampreys cease to follow pheromone
plumes, and how does their physiological
condition affect this response? 
d. What cues other than pheromones guide
them to their spawning destination? 
e. What behaviors do sea lamprey exhibit
when searching for pheromones in lakes
and rivers?
• How does the attractiveness of sea lamprey
pheromone compare to other sources?
a. What is the threshold concentration that
attracts sea lampreys into a stream?
b. What is the effect of background, or com-
peting sources of pheromone?
c. What is the dose-response relationship to
pheromones?
d. What other variables affect the attractive-
ness of pheromones? 
e. What distance of stream or lake can be ef-
fectively activated by pheromones? 
• How can we alter the distribution of lamprey
during their spawning migration?
a. Within a watershed (among tributaries)?
b. Among tributaries to the Great Lakes?
c. What proportion of the population is af-
fected, or what proportion of activated an-
imals can be lured? 
d. Can recruitment of sea lampreys be re-
duced or eliminated by eliminating all lar-
vae from a stream, including native
species?
• How do environmental variables affect lam-
prey responses to pheromones?
a. How do flow/current, temperature, shore-
line configuration, and turbulence influ-
ence the amount and area of exposure to
the pheromone?
b. How do proximity of stream mouths,
number and distribution of spawning areas
and rearing areas, and lamprey distribu-
tion in lake affect movement of lampreys?
• Once lampreys have been successfully redis-
tributed in a watershed, how can this redis-
tribution be maintained?
a. Through prolonged exposure to the
pheromone stimuli?
b. Will redistribution be maintained after the
stimuli are no longer present?
• Can male and female lampreys be differen-
tially attracted with pheromones?
• Are there environmentally benign com-
pounds that will repel lampreys from a
stream or tributary? 
Trapping Strategy
Trapping with pheromones or other attractants
has been used to combat insect pests dating back
perhaps to ancient Rome (Lanier 1990). More re-
cent successes include the spruce bark beetle (Ips
typographus L.), fruit flies (Tephritidae sp.), cotton
boll weevil (Anthonomus grandis), ambrosia beetles
(Gnathotrichus sulcatus, G. retusus and Trypoden-
dron lineatum), the European elm bark beetle
(Scolytus multistriatus), and several species of Lep-
idoptera. The five operating principles for the at-
traction-annihilation strategy in insects (Lanier
1990) are, 1) optimal synthetic lures are usually
identical to the natural lure, 2) effectiveness is in-
creased as the lure is increased relative to the size
of the population, 3) the reduction in damage is
proportional to the reduction of the population that
is in the noxious life stage, but is less than that if
Sea Lamprey Pheromone Research 81
the life stage removed is not that which causes in-
jury, 4) among polygamous species, lures that at-
tract females will  have greater impact on
reproduction than attractants that affect only males,
and 5) increasing release rate of the lure will attract
a larger proportion of the population over a wider
area, but the proportion of the population in the af-
fected area that will be trapped will decrease. At-
traction to traps has proven most effective when the
area treated is small and the population density of
insects is low. This is largely true when the goal is
to suppress populations within a limited space (e.g.,
a corn field) to reduce damage rates. Population
suppression on a wider-scale is more problematic.
Control agents in the U.S. and Canada currently
operate a network of lamprey traps in about 60
Great Lakes tributaries to assess the adult popula-
tion (Mullett et al. 2003). About 20 of these sites
are used to harvest males for the sterile-male-re-
lease technique (Twohey et al. 2003b). Current
trapping technology is not considered sufficiently
effective to be used independently for control. Its
use is currently limited to an integrated approach in
the St. Marys River where a low density of spawn-
ing sea lampreys, release of sterile males, and peri-
odic spot treatments with lampricide are used to
control the population (Schleen et al. 2003, Twohey
et al. 2003b). Conventional sea lamprey traps are
located at barriers to upstream migration and are
most effective with a water flow that attracts lam-
preys into them (Schuldt and Heinrich 1982).
Though trapping is difficult or ineffective at sites
without these characteristics, it could be improved
with pheromones. 
Lampreys are captured on their spawning migra-
tions prior to full sexual maturity, ostensibly at-
tracted to streams by the migratory pheromone and
other environmental cues such as temperature and
stream discharge. Once lampreys mature and
spawning commences, few lampreys are captured in
conventional traps. Recently, however, Johnson et
al. (2005) and Wagner et al. (2006) demonstrated
that ovulating females could be lured into non-con-
ventional trapping locations using spermiated males
as bait. 
The migratory and male releasing pheromones
have great potential to increase capture of lampreys
by increasing effectiveness of traps at existing loca-
tions, making new sites practical for trapping, and
extending the period during which trapping is effec-
tive (by making animals of differing maturity vul-
nerable). In addition to the direct reduction of
reproductive success that would result, other poten-
tial benefits could include increased supply of
males for SMRT and improved assessment of adult
populations. 
Important research questions related to luring sea
lampreys into traps are:
• How does exposure to pheromones affect
lamprey behavior?
a. At different times during migration and
spawning
b. In ways that influence their vulnerability
to traps
c. With regard to locating a “point source” of
pheromone?
d. In response to the size or the area of a
stream or lake that can be activated by
pheromone?
e. During approach to a source of male
pheromone or migratory pheromone? 
f. With regard to the likelihood a lamprey
that encounters a detectable pheromone
plume will follow it to the source and
enter a trap? 
• What trap designs are most effective when
combined with pheromone baits? 
a. Can pheromones be used with conven-
tional traps to increase rates of capture of
lamprey? 
b. Can migrating sea lampreys be captured in
traps independent of barriers?
c. What are the movement tendencies be-
tween river entry and encounter with a
barrier? 
d. Are there alternative trapping methods
that are better suited for use with
pheromones? 
• Do native species of larval lampreys produce
pheromones that are equally attractive as
those produced by sea lamprey larvae? 
• Does the natural background concentration
of pheromone affect attractiveness of intro-
duced pheromones?
• What concentrations of pheromone are most
effective at attracting sea lampreys into
traps?
• What environmental cues might enhance or
reduce pheromonally-mediated attraction be-
haviors?
Mating Disruption Strategy
Just as pheromones provide cues to assist sea
lampreys in successful reproduction, these cues
82 Li et al.
could be used to confuse and confound mating
communication. Several tactics for using phero-
mones to disrupt insect mating have been pro-
posed, tested, and implemented with some success
(Carde 1990, Carde and Minks 1995). These ap-
proaches are based on generating sensory adapta-
tion or habituation, promoting competit ion
between the natural pheromone and a synthesized
disruptor,  camouflaging natural  pheromone
plumes, creating an imbalance in sensory inputs, or
by releasing antagonists (Carde 1990). Each of
these tactics has the potential to be applied in sea
lamprey management and could reduce reproduc-
tion in treated rivers, particularly if integrated with
other control activities. Experimentally, female sea
lampreys retain full responsiveness to male wash-
ings up to 90 minutes following exposure (Li et al.
2003a, b; J. Teeter, personal communication, Mon-
ell Chemical Sciences Center, Philadelphia, PA).
This should enhance the effectiveness of
pheromones in trapping, but also could mean that
sensory adaptation or habituation may be unlikely.
Disrupting maturation may be possible through use
of mating pheromones. Recent evidence suggests
that the male pheromone play a role in stimulating
maturity in conspecifics (M. Siefkes, personal
communication, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Marquette Biological Station). 
Pheromones have also been proposed by several
investigators as a means to enhance effectiveness
of sterile-male releases. Knipling (1979) theorized
that release of sterile insects with “super” attrac-
tion will reduce mate finding in low density popu-
lations.  He examined the effectiveness of
pheromone-enhanced males and females with mod-
els, and suggested that the benefits of using both
sexes together might exceed model predictions.
Kaspi and Yuval (2000) found that the male
Mediterranean fruit fly, Ceratitis capitata, when
fed protein and sugar was significantly more likely
to emit pheromone, and more likely to copulate
than males fed only sugar. McCoy and Wright
(1990) used selective breeding to increase the total
pheromone produced by individual male boll wee-
vils (Anthonomus grandis), rendering sterilized
males more attractive than wild males. Others have
proposed or discussed methods to enhance the at-
tractiveness of steri le sea lampreys with
pheromones. Li et al. (2003a, b) reported investi-
gating the feasibility of inducing sterilized males to
synthesize and release the male releasing
pheromone at higher concentrations, for longer pe-
riods of time, or both. This technology also could
enhance the attractiveness of male lampreys used
as bait in traps. In another approach, Klassen et al.
(2005) attached synthetic male mating pheromone
emitters to sterilized males and enhanced their
mating competitiveness; the attachment of male
mating pheromone emitters to sterilized females
also was effective in disrupting mate finding by
wild females.
Important research questions relating to mating
disruption are:
• Do sea lamprey behavioral responses to mat-
ing pheromones become less sensitive after
prolonged exposure? And for how long?
• Can a synthetic or natural antagonist to sea
lamprey pheromones be produced?
• How is lamprey behavior affected by high
concentrations of pheromone? 
a. Will high concentrations of pheromone
suppress behavioral responses? 
b. How much pheromone would be needed
to maintain levels high enough and for a
sufficiently long period to achieve goals? 
c. How do differing pheromone background
concentrations affect this response?
• How do different components of each
pheromone affect lamprey, and how do they
interact?
• Can pheromones be used to alter the natural
timing of maturation? 
• What level of disruption is needed for the
technique to effectively reduce sea lamprey
populations?
• Can the male pheromone production be up-
regulated or enhanced in individual animals
to achieve a control strategy?
a. Will males that release more male
pheromone have greater success in finding
mates and mate with more females than
wild males? 
b. What is the optimum release rate of
pheromone from a single male to enhance
mating success?
c. How does density of spawning males and
background of male pheromone affect
competitiveness of males with enhanced
pheromone production?
d. Is there a formulation of pheromone that
could be attached to an adult sea lamprey
and be dispensed at an effective concen-
tration over time?
Sea Lamprey Pheromone Research 83
RESEARCH STRATEGY
The GLFC seeks to deploy a pheromone-based
control method by 2010. This vision has placed us
at the forefront of developing pheromone-based
controls for a vertebrate pest. Our pheromone re-
search promises not only to revolutionize the inte-
grated management of sea lampreys, but also may
set a precedent in the application of bio-pesticides
to control aquatic nuisance species. This
pheromone-based method aims at suppressing the
reproduction of sea lampreys in a stream or streams
so as to improve the effectiveness of the overall
program. That is, the application of pheromones
will reduce the amount of lampricides required, the
frequency of stream treatments, and/or suppress sea
lampreys to lower levels in one or more of the
Great Lakes. Meeting this management objective
will require a concerted and collaborative effort
from all sectors of lamprey research and manage-
ment community. Consequently, the role of research
must be explicitly identified. Application driven re-
search was central to the discovery of two
pheromones that are potent modifiers of lamprey
behaviors, and will drive them to the threshold of
field application by 2010. Over the long term, the
GLFC recognizes that research is the essential first
step to realizing all the promises held by lamprey
pheromones in integrated sea lamprey management. 
The challenges are clear. First, pheromone re-
search is inherently interdisciplinary. As multi-
faceted communication systems, pheromones
function in the context of an extensive array of en-
vironmental and physiological factors. To effec-
tively explore the many facets of lamprey
pheromone communication, our research must be
holistic and integrated. The exchange of ideas, in-
formation, and techniques among researchers will
be promoted through intensive workshops and the
development of teams of scientists with comple-
mentary backgrounds. A second challenge is that
sea lamprey adults are readily available for only 2
months each year, constraining our progress toward
the 2010 milestone. Clearly, we need to pursue our
research goal on several fronts simultaneously. Fi-
nally, given our short-term and long-term research
needs, and the limited resources available, we must
make the correct investment choices. The male re-
leasing pheromone and the migratory pheromone
remain the most promising candidates for develop-
ment. However, we need to exploit olfaction-medi-
ated reactions to the fullest potential, a goal that
requires knowledge of all channels of lamprey
pheromone communication. Eventually, the most
effective strategy may be one that integrates appli-
cations of several pheromones to target all possible
behaviors or physiology throughout the lamprey’s
life history. 
A hallmark of the GLFC sea lamprey research
program has been the integration of control agen-
cies in evaluating research ideas, providing logisti-
cal support, and often participating directly in
research projects. By fostering a synergy among re-
searchers and control agencies, novel ideas and in-
novative approaches often come to light. The large
scale of field studies to investigate the effectiveness
of application strategies will require the involve-
ment of the assessment and control staffs of the
U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service and the Canadian De-
partment of Fisheries and Oceans. Through this in-
tegrative approach, we hope to ensure continuity in
important lines of research, mediate collaborative
links between control agencies and research insti-
tutes, and when needed initiate field oriented re-
search projects. 
The GLFC has spearheaded the concept and re-
search for pheromone application in control of sea
lamprey, a vertebrate pest. The sea lamprey is be-
coming a model for pheromone communication and
biomedical research. Outreach to, and coordination
with, the scientific community is critical to the de-
velopment of pheromones as an alternative control
method. This paper provides the key questions and
processes that potential researchers can use to de-
velop relevant proposals, and will be used as a
guiding document in GLFC-sponsored task forces,
workshops, and workgroups. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors received funding from the Great
Lakes Fishery Commission for their research in sea
lamprey pheromone communication. WL also re-
ceived funding from the National Science Founda-
tion (IOB #0517491) for his research in lamprey
pheromones. 
REFERENCES
Applegate, V.C. 1950. Natural history of the sea lam-
prey (Petromyzon marinus) in Michigan. Special Sci-
entific Report Fisheries 61, U. S. Fish and Wildlife
Service.
Bergstedt, R., and Seelye, J. 1995. Evidence for lack of
homing by sea lampreys. Trans. Am. Fish. Soc.
124:235–239. 
Bjerselius, R., Li, W., Teeter, J.H., Seelye, J.G., Johnsen,
84 Li et al.
P.B., Maniak, P.J., Grant, G.C., Polkinghorne, C.N.,
and Sorenson, P.W. 2000. Direct behavioural evi-
dence that unique bile acids released by larval sea
lamprey (Petromyzon marinus) function as a migra-
tory pheromone. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci.  57:
557–569.
Carde, R.T. 1990. Principles of mating disruption. In
Behavior-modifying chemicals for pest management:
applications of pheromones and other attractants.
R.L. Ridgway, R.M. Silverstein, and M.N. Inscoe,
eds., New York: Marcel Dekker.
———
, and Minks, A.K. 1995. Control of moth pests
by mating disruption: successes and constraints.
Annu. Rev. Entomol. 40:559–585. 
Dryer, L. 2000. Evolution of odorant receptors. Bioes-
says 22:803–810.
Fine, J.M., Vrieze, L.A., and Sorensen, P.W. 2004. Evi-
dence that petromyzontid lampreys employ a common
migratory pheromone that is partially comprised of
bile acids. J. Chem. Eco. 30:2091–2110.
Great Lakes Fishery Commission. 2001. Strategic Vision
of the Great Lakes Fishery Commission for the First
Decade of the New Millennium. Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
Hardisty, M.W., and Potter, I.C. 1971. The Biology of
Lampreys. New York: Academic Press. 
Haslewood, G.A., and Tokes, L. 1969. Comparative
studies of bile salts—bile salts of lamprey Petromyzon
marinus L. Biochem. J. 114:179. 
Johnson, N.S., Siefkes, M.J., and Li, W. 2005. Capture
of ovulating female sea lampreys in traps baited with
spermiating male sea lampreys. N. Am. J. Fish. Man-
aeg. 25:67–72.
———
, Luehring, M.A., Siefkes, M.J., and Li, W. 2006.
Mating pheromone reception nand induced behavior
in ovulating female sea lampreys. N. Am. J. Fish.
Manage. 26:88–96. 
Jones, M.L., Bergstedt, R.A., Twohey, M.B., Fodale,
M.F., Cuddy, D.W., and Slade, J.W. 2003. Compen-
satory mechanisms in Great Lakes sea lamprey popu-
lations. J. Great Lakes Res. 29 (Suppl. 1):113–129.
Karlson, P., and Luscher, M. 1959. “Pheromones”: a new
term for a class of biologically active substances.
Nature 183:55–56.
Kaspi, R., and Yuval, B. 2000. Post-teneral protein
feeding improves sexual competitiveness but reduces
longevity of mass-reared sterile male mediterranean
fruit flies (Diptera: Tephritidae). Ann. Entomol. Soc.
Am. 4:949–955.
Klassen, W., Adams, J.V., and Twohey, M.B. 2005.
Modeling the suppression of sea lamprey populations
by use of the male sex pheromone. J. Great Lakes
Res. 31:166–173.
Kleerekoper, H. 1972. The sense organs. In The Biology
of Lampreys, vol. 2, M.W. Hardisty and I.C. Potter,
eds. New York: Academic Press.
Knipling, E.F. 1979. The basic principles of insect popu-
lation suppression and management. U.S. Dep. Agric.
ESA Agriculture Handbook No. 512.
Lanier, G.N. 1990. Principles of attraction annihilation:
mass trapping and other means. In Behavior modify-
ing chemicals for insect pest management: applica-
tions of pheromones and other attractants. R.L. Ridg-
way, R.M. Silverstein, and M.N. Inscoe, eds., pp
25–45. New York: Marcel Dekker. 
Li., W. 1994. The olfactory biology of adult sea lamprey
(Petromyzon marinus). Ph.D. thesis, University of
Minnesota, St. Paul. MN.
———
, and Sorensen, P.W. 1997. Highly independent
olfactory receptor sites for naturally occurring bile
acids in the sea lamprey, Petromyzon marinus. J.
Comp. Physiol. A, 180:429–438. 
———
, Sorensen, P.W., and Gallaher, D.D. 1995. The
olfactory system of migratory adult sea lamprey
(Petromyzon marinus) is specifically and acutely sen-
sitive to unique bile acids released by conspecific lar-
vae. J. Gen. Physiol. 105:569–587.
———
, Scott, A.P., Siefkes, M.J., Yan, H.G., Liu, Q.,
Yun, S.S., and Gage, D.A. 2002. Bile acid secreted by
mate sea lamprey that acts as a sex pheromone. Sci-
ence 296:138–141.
———
, Scott, A.P., Siefkes, M.J., Yun, S.S., and Zielin-
ski, B. 2003a. A male pheromone in the sea lamprey
(Petromyzon marinus): an overview. Fish Physiol.
Biochem. 28:259–262.
———
, Scott, A.P., Siefkes, M.J., and Teeter J.H.
2003b. Sex pheromone communication in the sea lam-
prey: Implications for integrated management. J.
Great Lakes Res. 29:85–94.
Mallatt, J. 1983. Laboratory growth of larval lampreys
(Lampetra (Entosphenus) tridentata Richardson) at
different food concentrations and animal densities. J.
Fish Biol. 22:293–301. 
Manion, P.J., and Hanson, L.H. 1980. Spawning behav-
ior and fecundity of lampreys from the upper three
Great Lakes. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 37:1635–1640.
McCoy, J.R., and Wright, J.E. 1990. Selective breeding
for increased pheromone production in the boll weevil
(Coleoptera: Curculionidae). J. Econ. Entomol.
83:610–613. 
Moore, H.H., and Schleen, I.P. 1980. Changes in spawn-
ing runs of sea lamprey (Petromyzon marinus) in
selected streams of lake superior after chemical con-
trol. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 37:1851–1960. 
Mullett, K.M., Heinrich, J.W., Young, R.J., Henson,
M.P., McDonald, R.B., and Fodale, M.F. 2003. Dis-
charge regression model to estimate abundance of
spawning-phase sea lampreys (Petromyzon marinus)
in the Great Lakes. J. Great Lakes Res. 29 (Suppl.
1):240–252.
Polkinghorne, C.N., Olson, J.M., Gallaher, D.G., and
Sorensen, P.W. 2001. Larval sea lamprey release two
unique bile acids to the water at a rate sufficient to
Sea Lamprey Pheromone Research 85
produce detectable riverine pheromone plumes. Fish
Physiol. Biochem. 24:15–30.
Rodriguez-Munoz, R., Nicieza, A.G., and Brana, F.
2003. Density-dependent growth of sea lamprey lar-
vae: evidence for chemical interference. Funct. Ecol.
17:403–408.
Sawyer, A.J. 1980. Prospects for integrated pest manage-
ment of the sea lamprey (Petromyzon marinus). Can.
J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 37:2081–2092.
Schleen, L.P., Christie, G.C., Heinrich, J.W., Bergstedt,
R.A., Young, R.J., Morse, T.J, Lavis, D.S., Bills,
T.D., Johnson, J., and Ebner, M.P. 2003. Control of
sea lampreys in the St. Marys River: A case study in
integrated and coordinated fisheries management. J.
Great Lakes Res. 29 (Suppl. 1):677–693.
Schuldt, R.J., and Heinrich, J. W. 1982. Portable trap for
collecting adult sea lampreys. Prog. Fish-Cult.
44:220–221. 
Siefkes, M.J., and Li, W. 2004. Electrophysiological evi-
dence for detection and discrimination of pheromonal
bile acids by the olfactory epithelium of female sea
lampreys (Petromyzon marinus). J. Comp. Physiol. A
190:193–199.
———
, Winterstein, S.,  and Li,  W. 2005. 3-keto
petromyzonol sulfate specifically attracts ovulating
female sea lamprey (Petromyzon marinus). Anim.
Behav. 70:1037–1045.
———
, Bergstedt, R.A., Twohey, M.B., and Li, W.
2003a. Chemosterilization of male sea lampreys
(Petromyzon marinus) does not affect sex pheromone
release. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 60:23–31.
———
, Scott, A.P., Zielinski, B., Yun, S.S., and Li, W.
2003b. Male sea lampreys, Petromyzon marinus L.,
excrete a sex pheromone from gill epithelia. Biol.
Reprod. 69:125–132.
Sorensen, P.W., and Stacey, N.E. 1999. Evolution and
specialization of fish hormonal pheromones. In
Advances in Chemical Signals in Vertebrates, R.E.
Johnston, D. Muller-Schwarze, and P.W. Sorensen,
eds. New York: Kluwer Academic, Plenum Publish-
ers.
———
, and Vrieze, L.A. 2003. Recent progress under-
standing the chemical ecology and potential applica-
tion of the sea lamprey migratory pheromone. J.
Great Lakes Res. 29 (Suppl. 1):66–84.
———
, Vrieze, L.A., and Fine, J.M. 2003. A multicom-
ponent migratory pheromone in the sea lamprey. Fish
Physiol. Biochem. 28:253–257.
———
, Fine, J.M., Dvornikoves, V., Jeffrey, C.S., Shao,
F., Wang, J., Vrieze, L.A., Anderson, K.R., and Hoye,
T.R. 2005. Mixture of new sulfated steroids function
as a migratory pheromone in the sea lamprey. Nature
Chem. Biol. 1:324–328. 
Sower, S.A. 1998. Brain and pituitary hormones of lam-
preys, recent findings and their evolutionary signifi-
cance. Am. Zool. 38:15–38. 
———
, and Kawauchi, H. 2001. Update: brain and pitu-
itary hormones of lampreys. Comp. Biochem. Physiol.
B Biochem. Mol. Biol. 129:291–302.
Stoddart, D.M. 1990. The scented ape: the biology and
culture human odor. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press. 
Teeter, J. 1980. Pheromone communication in sea lam-
preys (Petromyzon marinus): implications for popula-
tion management. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 37:
2123–2132.
Thornhill, R.A. 1967. The ultrastructure of the olfactory
epithelium of the lamprey Lampetra fluviatilis. J. Cell
Sci. 2:591–602. 
Twohey, M.B., Sorensen, P.W., and Li, W. 2003a. Possi-
ble applications of pheromones in an integrated pro-
gram of sea lamprey management. J. Great Lakes Res.
29 (Suppl. 1):794–800.
———
, Heinrich, J.W., Seelye, J.G., Bergstedt, R.A.,
Fredricks, K.T., Kaye, C.A., Scholefield, R.J.,
McDonald, R.B., and Christie, G.C. 2003b. The ster-
ile male release technique in Great Lakes sea lamprey
management. J. Great Lakes Res. 29 (Suppl.
1):410–423.
VanDenBossche, J., Seelye, J.G., and Zielinski, B.S.
1995. The morphology of the olfactory epithelium in
larval, juvenile and upstream migrant stages of the sea
lamprey, Petromyzon marinus. Brain Behav. Evol.
45:19–24. 
———
, Youson, J.H., Pohlman, D., Wong, E., and
Zielinski, B.S. 1997. Metamorphosis of the olfactory
organ of the sea lamprey (Petromyzon marinus L):
morphological changes and morphometric analysis. J.
Morphol. 231:41–52. 
Vrieze, L.A., and Sorensen P.W. 2001. Laboratory
assessment of the role of a larval pheromone and nat-
ural stream odor in spawning stream localization by
migratory sea lamprey (Petromyzon marinus). Can. J.
Fish. Aquat. Sci. 58:2374–2385.
Wagner, C.M., Jones, M.L.,  Twohey, M.B., and
Sorensen, P.W. 2006. A field test verifies that
pheromones can be useful in sea lamprey (Petromyzon
marinus) control in the Great Lakes. Can. J. Fish.
Aquat. Sci. 63:475–479.
Wilson, E.O., and Bossert, W.H. 1963. Chemical com-
munication among animals. Recent Prog. Horm. Res.
19:673–716.
Yun, S.S., Scott, A.P., Siefkes, M.J., and Li, W. 2002.
Development and application of an ELISA for a sex
pheromone released by the male sea lamprey
(Petromyzon marinus L.). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol.
129:163–170.
———
, Scott, A.P., Bayer, J.M., Seelye, J.G., Close,
D.A., and Li, W. 2003a. HPLC and ELISA analyses
of larval bile acids from Pacific and western brook
lampreys. Steroids 68:515–523.
———
, Scott, A.P., and Li, W. 2003b. Pheromones of
86 Li et al.
the male sea lamprey, Petromyzon marinus L.: struc-
tural studies on a new compound, 3-keto allocholic
acid, and 3-keto petromyzonol sulfate. Steroids
68:297–304.
Zielinski, B.S., Israel, S., and Mastellotto, M. 1995.
Behavioural responses of prolarval and larval sea lam-
prey (Petromyzon marinus) to L-arginine. Chemical
Senses 20(6):343–343.
Submitted: 22 November 2006
Accepted: 10 April 2007
Editorial handling: J. Ellen Marsden
