Plenary paper, 5th International Conference on Multiphase Flow, ICMF’04 
Yokohama, Japan, May 30–June 4, 2004 
Paper No. PL5 
 
 
Two-Phase Flow in Microchannels with Surface Modifications 
 
 
Thomas Cubaud, Umberto Ulmanella, Chih-Ming Ho 
 
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, USA, 
chihming@seas.ucla.edu 
 
Abstract  Two-phase flow in microchannels with surface modifications is experimentally investigated. We 
study the shape of static and moving bubbles in microchannels with square cross-sections for different 
contact angles. Water and air are mixed on-chip in a cross-shaped mixing chamber. This mixing process 
produces an array of monodisperse bubbles the size of which is determined by the flow rates. We have 
studied mixtures of pure water and air, and foam solutions of water with surfactant and air in both 
hydrophilic and hydrophobic channels. Additional investigations of polymer solutions have shown specific 
transient rheological behavior when the length of the polymers is approximately the same as the height of the 
channel. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
 Multiphase flows are encountered in a wide range of industrial applications. They are prevalent 
in processes as diverse as oil recovery, food manufacturing, cosmetic production, nuclear power 
plant cooling, and fire-fighting. Miniaturization of fluidic devices has made it possible to precisely 
control bubble or droplet size (Thorsen et al., 2001; Link et al., 2004). Manipulating multiphase 
flows at the microscale may allow development of portable power generation devices such as micro 
Direct Methanol Fuel Cells (Yen et al., 2003) and will contribute to the understanding of critical 
biophysical processes such as air embolism (Suzuki and Eckmann, 2003). 
 As the dimension shrinks to micrometric scale, the relative importance of surface to volume 
forces increases, and capillary forces become predominant. Capillary forces are particularly 
sensitive to geometrical and interfacial properties. The modification of the interfacial properties 
yields new insights into the interplay between phases and solid surfaces during the multiphase flow 
in microchannels.  
This paper is composed of two parts. First, we present a comprehensive but not exhaustive 
overview of liquid/gas flows in square cross-section microchannels with surface modifications. 
Water and air are mixed on-chip in a cross-shaped mixing chamber. This mixing process produces 
an array of monodisperse bubbles the size of which is determined by the flow rates. We have 
studied mixtures of pure water and air, and foam solutions of water, surfactant and air in both 
hydrophilic and hydrophobic channels. The surfaces of microchannels can be treated by flowing 
functional macromolecules through the channel. It is possible to convert the channel from 
hydrophilic to hydrophobic and vice versa with this technique (Deval et al., 2004). When the 
characteristic cross-sectional length of the channel is of the same order as the diameter of the 
macromolecules, the behavior of the liquid solution departs from the one observed in larger 
channels. Instead, it can be viewed as a two-phase flow of elastic solid particles in a liquid medium. 
In the second part of this paper, we present the transient response of a polyacrylamide (PAAm) 
solution flowing in a channel of micron size. 
 
2. Liquid/gas flow in square microchannels 
 
The phenomenology of two-phase flows in microchannels is dramatically diversified by 
- 1 - 
Plenary paper, 5th International Conference on Multiphase Flow, ICMF’04 
Yokohama, Japan, May 30–June 4, 2004 
Paper No. PL5 
modifying interfacial properties. We investigated the impact of wettability on the flow of a mixture 
composed of pure water and air as well as a mixture composed of water with surfactant (SDS) and 
air. As surfactant is absorbed at the interfaces, it lowers the interfacial energies, stabilizes the flow 
against coalescence and leads to specific flow structures. 
  The shape of a static elongated bubble in a N-sided regular polygonal capillary depends on N 
and the contact angle θ (Concus and Finn, 1974). When θ < π/N, liquid fills the channel wedges, 
and when θ > π/N, gas fills the entire channel cross-section. Figure 1 displays experimental pictures 
of a static elongated gas bubble in a square capillary. The black color represents a large liquid/gas 
curvature. The contact angle θ is the boundary condition that sets the shape of the liquid/gas 
interface. In the transition from partially non-wetting surfaces (θ > π/2) to partially wetting surface 
(θ < π/2), there is an inversion of the sign of the liquid/gas curvature (Figure 1, a and b). When 0 < 
θ < π/4, the bubble does not fill the wedges of the channel (Fig. 1. c). The system lowers its energy 
by creating a triple line (liquid/solid/gas); and gas directly contacts the center of the channel walls 
where small liquid droplets may be present. For a completely wetted system (θ = 0), the gas bubble 
is lubricated by a liquid film (see Fig. 1. d). 
 
 
Fig. 1. Shapes of static bubble in square microchannel for different contact angles. (a) hydrophobic plug bubble, 
(b) hydrophilic plug bubble, (c) wedging bubble with contact line, (d) lubricated bubble. 
 
When motion is induced, contact angle hysteresis increases the complexity of the system. 
Velocity increases the advancing contact angle and decreases the receding contact angle, causing 
the bubble to lose symmetry with respect to the direction of the flow. Since contact angles are 
influenced by roughness and heterogeneities of the solid surface (Cubaud and Fermigier, 2004), 
moving bubbles may lose their symmetry with respect to the center axis of the channel. We 
experimentally investigated flow patterns when liquid and gas are flowing into square cross-
sectional microchannels. 
 
 
2.1. Experimental set-up 
 
Figure 2 presents the schematics of the devices used to study liquid/gas flow in microchannels. 
Channels are made with glass and silicon using microfabrication techniques. Silicon is selectively 
etched to different depths using Deep Reactive Ion Etching (DRIE). Pyrex glass pieces are 
anodically bonded to the top and bottom of the silicon to provide optical access to the flow. Static 
contact angles were measured for pure water and air on silicon (θsil ≈ 90) and glass (θglass ≈ 250). 
Fluids are supplied to the device with flexible tubes from pressurized reservoirs that have miniature 
regulator to adjust pressure. Flow rates are measured at the channel entrances. A high-speed camera 
(Redlake, Motionpro, 10,000 fps) is used with a fiber light to analyze the flow patterns. The camera 
is either mounted on a microscope or on a 60 mm lens with an extension tube. 
- 2 - 
Plenary paper, 5th International Conference on Multiphase Flow, ICMF’04 
Yokohama, Japan, May 30–June 4, 2004 
Paper No. PL5 
The channel module is composed of two parts: a small mixing section (50- µm square channels), 
used to produce the homogeneous liquid/gas flows and a test section (200- or 525- µm square 
channels), where the flow is investigated. 
 
 
Fig. 2. Liquid/gas flow microchannel module. 
 
2.2 Mixing section 
 
The method of producing two-phase flows determines the flow patterns. Figure 3 shows the 
small liquid/gas mixing section where bubbles are produced with liquid cross flow. Liquid is 
introduced from the two sides of the central gas channel in order to pinch the gas flow and form 
bubbles. Well defined bubbles in a wide range of sizes can be produced as a function of liquid and 
gas flow rates. The relative proportion of liquid and gas in the channel can be characterized with the 
homogeneous void fraction αG = QG / (QG + QL) where QG and QL are respectively the gas and 
liquid flow rates. As can be seen in figure 3, as αG increases, the size of the bubbles produced 
increases.  
 
 
Fig. 3. On-chip mixing section. (a) αG ≈ 0.22 , (b) αG ≈ 0.53 , (c) αG ≈ 0.82. 
 
2.3 Pure water/air flow patterns 
 
Two-phase flows are distributed into flow patterns depending on the liquid and gas flow rates, 
fluid and channels properties. 
 
2.3.1. Hydrophilic flows 
Between low and high void fractions, five main flow regimes were observed in partially wetting 
square microchannels: bubbly, wedging, slug, annular and dry flows. These can be seen in Fig. 4: 
(a) The bubbly flow is composed of discrete spherical gas bubbles distributed in the liquid. The 
length of the bubble d is smaller than the channel width h. As bubbles collide and coalesce to form 
larger bubbles, polydispersity is observed. This motion is influenced by gravity. 
(b) The wedging flow is made of elongated bubbles. Bubbles are equally spaced and 
monodisperse. Depending on the bubble size and velocity, gas may dry out the center of the channel 
creating contact lines. Dry patches grow from the film instability. Liquid droplets may be present on 
the walls inside moving gas bubbles. 
- 3 - 
Plenary paper, 5th International Conference on Multiphase Flow, ICMF’04 
Yokohama, Japan, May 30–June 4, 2004 
Paper No. PL5 
(c) The slug flow consists of long elongated bubbles lubricated by a liquid film between the gas 
and the walls. The nose of bubbles has a characteristic bullet-shape. Kolb and Cerro (1993) studied 
the transition from a non-axisymmetric to an axisymmetric bubble nose profile as a function of the 
capillary number. 
(d) The flow becomes annular when the bubble length is equal to the channel length. Gas 
continually flows in the center of the channel while liquid experiences wall shear. Instable liquid 
rings grow and vanish around the central bubble due to the large slip between the two phases. 
(e) When the void fraction is close to unity, liquid is confined to flow in the channel wedges. The 
gas dries the center of the channel wall. The volume of liquid in the wedges decreases until the flow 
becomes a single gas phase. 
Characterizing liquid/gas flows in hydrophilic channels is of prime importance in understanding 
the energy requirements for flowing bubbles in microfluidic devices such as micro Direct Methanol 
Fuel Cells (Yen et al., 2003). In a previous investigation (Cubaud and Ho, 2004), we reported the 
dependency of the pressure drop on the flow characteristics. 
 
 
Fig. 4. Pure water/air flow patterns in hydrophilic channels. From low to high void fractions. 
(a) bubbly flow, (b) wedging flow, (c) slug flow, (d) annular flow, (e) dry flow. 
 
2.3.2. Hydrophobic flows 
Channels were coated with Teflon® producing a static contact angle θ ≈ 1200 for pure water and 
air. Liquid/gas flows in hydrophobic channels are very different than the ones observed in 
hydrophilic channels. In hydrophobic channels, bubbles are not lubricated and their motion is 
subject to contact line friction at the channel walls. Contact angle hysteresis can be seen in Fig. 5 (a) 
and (b). In these figures, the advancing contact angle θadv > π/2, the receding contact angle θrec < 
π/2, and the interface curvature follows the flow direction. Small bubbles are trapped in the sharp 
channel corners. Although the hydrophobic flow is quite unsteady, three distinct flow patterns were 
identified for different void fractions as shown in Fig. 5:  
(a) Isolated asymmetric bubble flow is observed in the case of low void fractions, since the 
surface energy is low, small bubbles adhere to the channel walls. After many bubbles merge 
together, a large gas plug occupying the entire channel cross-section is formed and is pushed by the 
liquid flow. 
(b) For intermediate void fractions, the flow is composed of liquid and gas plugs. Bubbles and 
droplets are not symmetric in the direction of the flow. Interface instabilities cause asymmetry with 
respect to the channel axis. A corner can block a bubble until another bubble joins it and forms a 
bigger one, as shown on the lower channel in Fig. 5.b. 
(c) For high void fractions, the flow consists of small liquid droplets adhering to the channel 
wall, while gas is flowing in the center of the channel. Droplets move randomly. When droplets 
merge to form a droplet larger than the channel size, the resulting liquid plug is advected by gas 
flow. This liquid plug collects small liquid droplets on its path. 
 
- 4 - 
Plenary paper, 5th International Conference on Multiphase Flow, ICMF’04 
Yokohama, Japan, May 30–June 4, 2004 
Paper No. PL5 
 
Fig. 5. Pure water/air flow patterns in hydrophobic channels. From low to high void fractions. 
(a) isolated asymmetric bubble flow, (c) wavy bubble flow, (c) scattered droplet flow. 
 
 
2.4 Foam flow patterns 
 
When a gas is mixed with a liquid containing one or more surface active agents, a foam is 
formed. Foams show complex fluid properties depending on their void fraction, bubble size 
distribution, and chemical composition. Surprisingly, foam may exhibit the behavior of a solid, 
despite being composed of liquid and gas. Common foam production techniques (Briceño and 
Joseph, 2003) lead to polydisperse foams. The on-chip mixing section used in our experiments 
allows the production of monodisperse foams composed of bubbles, of adjustable size. 
Monodisperse foams confined in channels display ordered structures that depend on the ratio of the 
bubble size to the channel width (Drenckhan et al., 2003). Because the aging of foams is caused by 
the coalescence of small bubbles into large bubbles, mondisperse foams show better stability 
compared to polydisperse foams. 
 
2.4.1. Hydrophilic flows 
An aqueous solution of sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) at a concentration of 4.5x10-3 Mol/l was 
mixed with air. Foams are classified into two principal categories (Deshpande and Barigou, 2000; 
Briceño and Joseph, 2003): “dry foams”, (see Fig. 6. a to f) which have high void fractions, and 
“wet foams”, (see Fig. 6. g to i) which have lower void fractions. 
 
 
Fig. 6. Water with surfactant/air flow patterns in hydrophilic channels. From high to low void fractions. 
(a) to (f) wet foam, (g) to (i) dry foam. 
 
Dry foams move as a rigid body. Their bubbles are closely packed and do not move relative to 
one another. All bubbles move at the same velocity in the microchannel. In this case, the foam 
flows as a solid core lubricated by water on the walls. For a very high void fraction, the liquid/gas 
mixer produces long bubbles traveling as a train (Fig. 6. a). As a function of the ratio of bubble size 
to channel width, ordered (Fig. 6. a, b, c, and f) and disordered (Fig. 6. d and e) flow structures are 
formed. Among the ordered flows, staircase flow (Fig. 6. b) and hexagonal-packed flow are 
- 5 - 
Plenary paper, 5th International Conference on Multiphase Flow, ICMF’04 
Yokohama, Japan, May 30–June 4, 2004 
Paper No. PL5 
observed (Fig. 6. f). In the case of a disordered structure (Fig. 6. d and e), bubbles form 
polydisperse polyhedral cells. The foam ages faster in this situation due to the capillary pressure 
difference between small and large bubbles. As a general trend, when the bubble size decreases, the 
number of neighboring bubbles increases, as does the number of facets of each bubble. 
As the void fraction decreases, the rheological behavior of the foam changes from a solid to a 
fluid flow. At intermediate void fractions, the flow is stratified (Fig. 6. g and h). Wet foams are 
characterized by spherical bubbles that move in relation to one another. For very low void fractions, 
the flow becomes bubbly, as in the case of pure water (Fig. 6. i). 
 
2.4.2 Hydrophobic flows 
For the case of liquid/gas flows with surfactant in hydrophobic channels, we have identified two 
principal flow regimes that are a combination of previously described flow patterns: bubbly-droplet 
flow for high void fractions (Fig. 7. a), and bubbly-plug flow for low void fractions (Fig. 7. b): 
(a) For the bubbly-droplet flow, moving liquid droplets are stuffed with small gas bubbles. 
Changing the liquid and gas flow rates induces a change in size and distance between droplets. 
These droplets are created by collecting multiple droplets where small gas bubbles were trapped. 
(b) The bubbly-plug flow is a combination of bubbly and plug flows. The gas plug is moving at 
the same velocity as the liquid. Consequently, the gas plug pushes small bubbles downstream. As 
for the bubbly-droplet flow, size and distance between plugs is adjustable by changing the liquid 
and gas flow rates. For very low void fractions, the flow is bubbly and is frequently perturbed by 
large plugs pushing all the small bubbles downstream. 
 
 
 
Fig. 7. Water with surfactant/air flow patterns in hydrophobic channels. From high to low void fractions. 
(a) bubbly-droplet flow, (b) bubbly-plug flow. 
 
Liquid/gas in square microchannels presents a large variety of flow patterns that are strongly 
correlated to specific channel geometries and properties of the liquid/gas, liquid/solid, and solid/gas 
interfaces. A wide range of industrial and scientific applications can benefit from precise control of 
interfacial properties. Flowing the appropriate solvent through the channel can be used to control 
the solid wall properties. Meanwhile, when channel dimensions shrink to the characteristic size of 
the solvent molecules, unexpected two-phase flow occurs.  
 
3. Flows of polymer solutions in micro geometries 
 
Surface treatments of fluidic passages are routinely performed inside biochips to optimize 
several processes. The different flow patterns, which depend on either hydrophilic or hydrophobic 
surfaces, have been observed and reported in previous sections. Another example of the importance 
of surface modifications is when surfaces treated with polyethylene glycol (Deval, 2002) become 
inert to some biological species, such as proteins. Proteins would otherwise precipitate, foul the 
walls of the biochip, and therefore deplete the solution and potentially clog the device. Other times, 
surface treatments are performed to obtain the opposite result, namely, capturing specific types of 
molecules on a substrate. Gau et al. (2001) showed that rRNA molecules, used for the detection of 
DNA molecules, bind to a gold electrode through a monolayer of Streptavidin molecules grown on 
a self-assembled monolayer (SAM) of a biotin-based compound.  
- 6 - 
Plenary paper, 5th International Conference on Multiphase Flow, ICMF’04 
Yokohama, Japan, May 30–June 4, 2004 
Paper No. PL5 
Such treatments are normally performed by flowing a solution through the biochip, usually by 
injecting the solution into the biochip with a syringe. These solutions contain molecules that will 
achieve surface modification at the molecular level after precipitation. 
In general, the molecules of both the solvent and the solute are much smaller than the 
characteristic dimension of the fluidic passages, which are on the order of 100 microns. These 
solutions can be described as a continuum with a change in the apparent viscosity. However, as the 
size of the fluidic passages is reduced and becomes comparable to the size of molecules suspended 
in the solvent, the homogeneous continuum assumption breaks down. As an extreme case, the 
entropic trapping of DNA molecules forced through much smaller passages has been reported (Han 
et al., 1999).  
It is worth noting that a large difference in size usually exists between the molecules of the liquid 
(water, ethanol, etc.) and the molecules suspended or dissolved in it (DNA strands, proteins, etc.). 
When the dimensions of the solute molecules approach the cross-sectional dimensions of the 
channel, the solvent retains its continuum characteristics. In this scenario, there is a two-phase flow 
since large individual molecules in a liquid medium are transported individually through small 
passages. 
 
3.1 Experiments 
 
In our work, we have studied the rheology of a 1% aqueous solution of 5M mw Polyacrylamide 
(PAAm) injected through a micron size capillary, as shown in figure 8. The size of the PAAm 
molecules in their coiled configuration is estimated to be around 0.5 microns.  
Two different types of extruded silica capillaries were used as test sections. One was 101.5 
microns in diameter and 120 mm long, and the other was 10 microns in diameter and 5mm long. 
Each capillary was connected to a 10 ml glass syringe placed on a syringe pump. The liquid flowing 
through the capillary was collected on a vial placed on an analytical balance where the flow rate 
was determined by time differentiation of the measured weight of collected fluid. The pressure of 
the liquid was measured upstream and downstream of the capillary. In order to mitigate thermal 
effects, the syringe and the syringe pump were placed inside an environmental chamber where the 
temperature was held constant within 0.1 °C. The test section was placed in a thermostatic bath 
where the temperature was controlled within 0.02 °C. 
 
 
Fig. 8. Experimental set-up. 
 
 
3.2 Rheological phenomena observed in microflow configurations. 
 
- 7 - 
Plenary paper, 5th International Conference on Multiphase Flow, ICMF’04 
Yokohama, Japan, May 30–June 4, 2004 
Paper No. PL5 
Starting from the condition where the syringe pump is off and where the pressure drop across the 
capillary is zero, flow through the test section is initiated by starting the syringe pump at a given 
constant flow rate Q. Figure 9 shows the time response recorded for 5 different values of imposed 
flow rates, ranging from 0.5 µl/min to 0.9 µl/min, for the smaller capillary, when the size of the 
polymer is only 20 times smaller than the diameter of the cross-section. The syringe pump was 
switched off at the point labeled “a” either because a maximum threshold pressure was exceeded, or 
because the fluctuations in the pressure drop had decreased to a certain value. The recorded 
transients show a peculiar behavior consisting of the presence of two overshoots, one at the end of 
the initial rise, between 2 and 3 hours after the pump is started, and the second between 6 and 9 
hours after the flow is initiated. Eventually, the pressure proceeds to a steady state with minor 
oscillations. The response resembles an under-dampened second-order system, with an anomalous 
second peak larger than the first one. The fall in pressure drop after the syringe is switched off does 
not show any peaks or oscillations. 
 
 
 
Fig. 9. Recorded time transients for the pressure drop at different values of the imposed flow rate. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 10. Time transients of pressure drop (black), mass flow rate (red), and calculated viscosity (blue) at Q =0.9 µl/min. 
The syringe pump is started at  t = 0 and stopped at “e”. 
- 8 - 
Plenary paper, 5th International Conference on Multiphase Flow, ICMF’04 
Yokohama, Japan, May 30–June 4, 2004 
Paper No. PL5 
The transient of the larger capillary is almost instantaneous, as it takes only a few seconds to 
reach a true steady state. For the 10 micron ID capillary, the transient is on the order of 10-12 hours, 
and residual oscillations prohibit a true steady state within the time of our measurements. This time 
scale can have important implications for practical applications. 
For the flow in the small capillary, the rheological behavior of the solution is as unexpected as 
the time transient. For example, figure 10 shows the measured pressure drop (black curve), the 
measured mass flow rate actually flowing through the capillary (red curve), and the calculated 
viscosity of the solution (blue curve), as a function of time, for Q = 0.9 µl/min and similar test 
conditions as above. Plots are also obtained for the other values of flow rates. 
Several anomalies can be noticed in the plot. First, between “a” and “b”, the measured mass flow 
rate remains constant while the pressure drop continues to increase, leading to a dramatic increase 
in viscosity. Second, between “c” and “e”, the pressure drop decreases while the mass flow rate 
increases. At “d”, the viscosity drops almost to the same value as that at t = 0. Also, the actual flow 
rate occurs to be up to 10% larger than the flow rate dispensed by the syringe pump. Third, after the 
syringe pump is stopped at “e”, there is a discontinuity in the mass flow rate during the pressure 
decay transient at “g”. At this moment, the sudden increase in the mass flow rate causes a drop in 
the viscosity, which reaches approximately the same value as that at t = 0.  
 
 
Fig. 11. Pressure drop versus mass flow rate. 
 
As illustrated in figure 11, these anomalies reflect an unexplained hysteretic behavior and a non-
linear relationship between pressure drop and flow rate between points “a” and “g”.  
The dramatic impact of the flow length scale on the PAAm solution is clearly visible in figure 
12. The experimental master curve (apparent viscosity vs. shear rate) for the flow in the 10 micron 
capillary (red curve) is compared to the classical behavior (dotted line) of  the same type of 
solution (Kulicke et al., 1982) at T = 25 ºC. In general, when the cross-sectional dimension of the 
flow is much larger than the polymer molecules suspended in the solution, the value of the viscosity 
coefficient of the diluted polymer solution is constant below a critical shear rate. Above the critical 
shear rate, the solution shows a “shear thinning” behavior, i.e. a decrease in viscosity with the shear 
rate, due to the unfolding of the coiled polymer molecules by internal shear stresses. For a PAAm 
solution like the one used in present experiment, the shear thinning starts at approximately 
1≈γ& sec-1. In our experiment, the viscosity is several times larger than the expected value, and does 
not show the traditional shear thinning behavior. Instead, the viscosity exhibits a quick increase 
between “a” and “b”, followed by a drop between “b” and “d”. 
- 9 - 
Plenary paper, 5th International Conference on Multiphase Flow, ICMF’04 
Yokohama, Japan, May 30–June 4, 2004 
Paper No. PL5 
 
 
Fig. 12. Master curve for the polymer solution obtained from the transient response. The dotted line represents the 
expected behavior. 
 
 
4. Conclusion 
 
This paper presents an overview of multiphase flow in microchannel geometries. We 
investigated the shape of static elongated bubbles in square channels for different contact angles. 
When liquid and gas are flowing in microchannels, dynamic contact angles play an important role 
in the selection of the flow regime. We described liquid/gas flow patterns obtained with an on-chip 
liquid/gas mixer in square microchannels with surface modifications (hydrophobic/ hydrophilic). 
Pure water and air, as well as aqueous foam flow patterns were investigated and showed a rich 
variety of regimes. Then, we investigated large macromolecules (0.5 microns in diameter) flowing 
through micron-sized channels. Under such conditions, the transient behavior of a PAAm solution 
displays anomalous features. The unexpected behavior suggests an unsteady response of the 
macromolecules. A parametric investigation of the dependence of the time response on the channel 
size and molecular weight of the polymer may help us to understand these phenomena. 
 
 
5. Acknowledgements 
 
This work was supported by DARPA/MTO, “Micro Power Generation” program, the NSF NIRT 
program and the CMISE Institute (a NASA URETI). 
 
References 
 
Briceño, M.I., Joseph, D.D., 2003. Self-lubricated transport of aqueous foams in horizontal conduits. Int. J. 
Multiphase Flow 29, 1817-1831. 
Concus, P., Finn, R., 1974. On capillary free surfaces in absence of gravity. Acta Math. 132, 177. 
Cubaud, T., Fermigier, M., 2004. Advancing contact lines on chemically heterogeneous surfaces. J. of Colloid and 
Interface Sci. 269, 171-177. 
Cubaud, T., Ho, C-M., 2004. Transport of bubbles in square microchannels. Phys. of Fluids Submitted. 
Deshpande, N.S., Barigou, M., 2001. The flow of gas-liquid foams through pipe fittings. Int. J. of Heat and Fluid 
Flow 22, 94-101. 
- 10 - 
Plenary paper, 5th International Conference on Multiphase Flow, ICMF’04 
Yokohama, Japan, May 30–June 4, 2004 
Paper No. PL5 
- 11 - 
Deval, J., 2002. Electrokinetic Sub-Micron Particle Manipulation for Micromixing in Bioreactors. Ph.D. thesis, 
University of California, Los Angeles.  
Deval, J., Ulmali, T.A., Lan, E.H., Dunn, B., Ho, C-M., 2004. Reconfigurable hydrophilic/hydrophobic surfaces in 
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). J. Micromech. Microeng. 14, 91-95. 
Drenckhan, W., Elias, F., Hutzler, S., Weaire, D., Janiaud, E., Bacri, J-C., 2003. Bubble size control and 
measurement in the generation of ferrofluid foams. J. of Appl. Phys. 93, 12, 10078-10083. 
Gau, J.J., Lan, E.H., Dunn, B., Ho, C-M., Woo, J.C.S., 2001. A MEMS based amperometric detector for E-Coli 
bacteria using self-assembled monolayers. Biosensors & Bioelectronics 16, 9-12, 745-755.  
Han, J., Turner, S.W., Craighead, H.G., 1999. Entropic trapping and escape of long DNA molecules at submicron 
size constriction. Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 8, 1688-1691. 
Kolb, W.B., Cerro, R.L., 1993. The motion of long bubbles in tubes of square cross section. Phys. Fluid A 5, 7, 
1549. 
Kulicke, W-M., Kniewske, R., Klein, J., 1982. Preparation, characterization, solution properties and rheological 
behaviour of polyacrylamide. Progress in Polymer Sci. 8, 373-468. 
Link, D.R., Anna, S.L., Weitz, D.A., Stone, H.A., 2004. Geometrically mediated breakup of drops in microfluidic 
devices. Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 5, 54503. 
Suzuki, A., Eckmann, D.M., 2003. Embolism bubble adhesion force in excised perfused microvessels. 
Anesthesiology 99, 2, 400-408. 
Thorsen, T., Roberts, R.W., Arnold, F.H., Quake, S.R., 2001. Dynamic pattern formation in a vesicle-generating 
microfluidic device. Phys. Rev. Lett., 86, 18, 4163. 
Yen, T. J., Zhang, X., Lu, G.Q., Wang ,Y., 2003. A micro methanol fuel cell operating at near room temperature. 
Appl. Phys. Lett.  83, 19, 4056. 
