Energy sources of field-aligned currents: Auroral
electron energization
Andrew N. Wright
Mathematical Institute, University of St. Andrews, St. Andrews, Fife, UK
Received 3 June 2004; revised 27 October 2004; accepted 5 November 2004; published 11 August 2005.
[1] The electron acceleration region in field-aligned currents is considered not as an
isolated system but as being embedded in a global circuit. Such a view permits clear
identification of the ‘‘generator region’’ and the energy source driving the currents. The
global perspective permits a critical appraisal of the appropriateness of using an electric
potential to describe the electron acceleration and of criticisms of steady potential
acceleration models. We find that ion energy is the source of electron acceleration and that
in practice, an electric potential can be useful and appropriate for some circuits.
Citation: Wright, A. N. (2005), Energy sources of field-aligned currents: Auroral electron energization, J. Geophys. Res., 110,
A10S08, doi:10.1029/2004JA010609.
1. Introduction
[2] The details of electron acceleration in auroral currents
is still a matter of debate. Whether the acceleration
is achieved by quasi-steady fields or as inherently time-
dependent is still unclear, although the fact that magneto-
spheric electrons do acquire an energy of several keV above
the ionosphere is evident in observations [e.g., Ergun et al.,
1998].
[3] Fundamental physics dictates that electron energiza-
tion must be mediated through the electric field. There is no
consensus as to whether this process can be considered as
steady (perhaps involving double layers) and an electric
potential (as has been used to good effect by Ergun et al.
[2002a]) or whether equally fundamental physics means no
steady energization can be achieved by such a state [Bryant
et al., 1992; Bryant, 1999, 2002]. That both analyses have
some merits is recognized by recent attempts to integrate
both aspects in a unified model involving time-dependent
stochastic acceleration in addition to a potential electric
field. Janhunen and Olsson [2000] use stochastic acceler-
ation to drive electrons up the potential hill, whereas Bryant
[2002] suggests the stochastic acceleration site is at higher
altitudes and lies above an isolated potential well. These
studies, like most which are motivated by in situ observa-
tions, often focus on a segment of the auroral flux tubes and
impose a current or voltage generator at the boundaries of
the section considered. This does not facilitate a critical
appraisal of the issues.
[4] A more suitable framework for an assessment of such
questions as (1) why do electrons need to be accelerated,
(2) what is the source of the energy that is transferred to the
electrons, and (3) is the acceleration process steady is to
adopt a global picture of the system in which the acceler-
ation region is embedded. Thus we circumvent the necessity
to prescribe an external generator and start from a point of
view where clear answers to the above questions may be
found.
[5] In this paper the emphasis is on returning to the
governing equations and looking at their basic properties.
In that sense we do not say anything fundamentally new in
this article. The novel aspect comes from interpreting these
properties for three simple models (which approximate ULF
Alfve´n currents, Region 1 currents, and Region 2 currents)
and developing some physical understanding of how energy
is transferred to the electrons and where the energy is drawn
from.
[6] It should be noted that our analysis employs the two-
fluid approximation. Thus it will provide the most insight
for situations where there is a bulk shift of the entire
electron population. In those situations where wave-particle
interactions produce detailed features in the distribution
function it would be desirable to use a more refined
description of the electron dynamics, however, this would
make the global nature of our modeling impractical. Mozer
and Hull [2001] identify three processes that may generate
Ek on auroral field lines, namely, high-altitude electron
acceleration, a low-altitude sheath, and midaltitude quasi-
neutrality maintenance. The approximations we use here are
most suitable for studying the midaltitude and high-altitude
processes.
2. Spatial and Temporal Scales
[7] A lot of potential confusion comes from misconcep-
tions over what the appropriate spatial and temporal scales
are. For example, it is possible to have a local region in
which @/@t = 0 (and so E = rf), but outside this region,
@/@t 6¼ 0 and the use of an electric potential is not
appropriate. Is such a field steady? The answer must be
qualified. It takes a keVenergy electron about 1 s to traverse
the acceleration region. If the fields vary on a timescale of
tens of minutes, although they are not steady, they do not
change much on the electron transit time and a ‘‘potential’’
may be very useful. It is analogous to considering someone
JOURNAL OF GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH, VOL. 110, A10S08, doi:10.1029/2004JA010609, 2005
Copyright 2005 by the American Geophysical Union.
0148-0227/05/2004JA010609$09.00
A10S08 1 of 9
skiing down the Himalayas while ignoring the tectonic
change in height on the run down.
[8] Although the plasma is quasi-neutral, there is a small
but nonzero net charge density (rc) that is associated with
the electric field via Poisson’s equation, r  E = rc/e0. In
Figure 1a, rc is confined within a spatial scale of L, and so
the far field solution for the potential must decrease at least
as rapidly as f  L/r (r being the distance from the charge
density region). The criticism advanced in the works of
Bryant [1999] and Bryant [2002] is that an electron passing
through such a potential can gain no net energy if it starts
and finishes sufficiently far away from the center of the
potential pattern. Although the electron may gain energy
leaving this region, it will have had to expend an equal
amount of energy to climb the potential hill to begin with.
This is true, but we need to be careful when defining the
scale length (L) of rc.
[9] The need for caution regarding L is evident when
considering a one-dimensional (1-D) double layer [e.g.,
Stern, 1981, and references therein]. For variations only
with the z-coordinate, such a double layer has an extent (Dz)
that is typically 20 Debye lengths [Borovsky, 1993], and the
scale length of rc in a 1-D mathematical model is L  Dz.
However, consideration of the physical system this repre-
sents, having @/@x = @/@y = 0, means the charge density
extends off to infinity in the (x, y) plane. Thus the physical
system has a charge distribution with a scale length L!1,
and in such a system the electron can never approach from
sufficiently far away (several L) for Bryant’s criticism to be
applied. If the electron is a finite distance from such an
idealized double layer, it is effectively starting at the top of
the potential hill and so can be energized.
[10] The structure of the double layer is often thought to
produce U-shaped contours when sketched in 2-D as shown
in Figure 1b [e.g., Borovsky, 1993]. The contours may
extend along the entire field line until the ‘‘generator
region’’ is approached. It is clear that the electrons to be
accelerated are enveloped within the potential structure and
are certainly not several L away, since L corresponds to the
length of the field line and not the thickness of the layer. For
such contours it is visibly evident that the electrons are
starting at the top of the potential hill and so may be
energized. Although this semiglobal contour sketch gives
considerable insight, it does not include the generator
region, and so questions of how the electrons are supplied
at the top of the hill cannot be addressed. Below, we give
some global examples which do not suffer from this
problem. For the moment, however, we shall consider the
three timescales that are crucial in deciding whether it is
appropriate to call a potential state like that in Figure 1b
‘‘steady.’’
[11] Here, te is the electron transit time across the double
layer, tn is the depletion time of electrons from the (finite)
reservoir at the top of the hill, and tE is the timescale that
the electric fields grow and decay over. If te  tE, the
electric fields are quasi-steady during an electron transit and
the use of a potential is helpful. The removal and acceler-
ation of electrons from the reservoir will deplete it, but if
tE  tn, the depletion is not significant and may be
treated as steady [Wright et al., 2002].
[12] There is mounting observational evidence of upward
moving ions [Ergun et al., 2002a] and electrons [Carlson et
al., 1998] whose energy is consistent with the potential
calculated from
R
E  ds along the spacecraft trajectory. The
importance of this has been recognized in the model of
Janhunen and Olsson [2000], who use closed potential
contours (which can provide no net steady energization)
and wave particle interactions at higher altitudes to energize
the electrons so they may climb the potential hill.
3. Global Models
[13] Global models of magnetospheric currents often
employ the single-fluid MHD (magnetohydrodynamic)
approximation and have the great advantage that the global
picture includes the generator region. However, they have
the disadvantage that the electron mass is neglected in
this approximation, meaning the electrons have vanishing
kinetic energy and rendering a discussion of electron
Figure 1. The auroral acceleration region. The hatched
region denotes nonzero charge density. (a) The charge is
localized and energization may require wave-particle
interations. (b) The charge extends over the length of the
field line.
A10S08 WRIGHT: ELECTRON ACCELERATION IN A GLOBAL CONTEXT
2 of 9
A10S08
energization meaningless. Wright et al. [2002] showed how
two-fluid MHD (employing an electron fluid and a separate
ion fluid) retains a finite electron mass and can be viewed as
a correction to the leading-order single-fluid MHD solution
and allows us to consider electron energetics. This is the
approach we adopt here.
3.1. Generation of jk
[14] We begin with a consideration of how field-
aligned currents arise from the single-fluid MHD momen-
tum equation
r
dv
dt
¼ j Brpþ F: ð1Þ
The symbols have their usual meanings. When considering
a localized region, F could represent some driving force on
the boundary associated with the generator region. In a
global model we do not need F. Equation (1) may be used to
define j?
j? ¼  r
dv
dt
þrp F
 
 B=B2: ð2Þ
Wright et al. [2002] stress that the net charge density (rc)
evolves according to @rc/@t + r  j = 0. To understand how
jk is generated, consider a situation in which jk is initially
zero. Equation (2) gives j?, and in general r  j? 6¼ 0, so
there will be a build up of net charge density initially. From
r  E = rc/e0, we find that the electric field associated with
rc will have a component parallel to B which causes
electrons to flow (vek 6¼ 0) and carry a field-aligned current
( jk 6¼ 0) such that r  j  0 and the build up of rc is
reduced to small (quasi-neutral) values.
3.2. Generation of Ek
[15] Although a global single-fluid MHD description
can identify the source of jk generation and location of
electron acceleration, we need to adopt a two-fluid model
(i.e., finite me) to describe electron energization.
[16] For simplicity we consider a cold electron fluid
governed by
me
@ve
@t
þ ve  rð Þve
 
¼ e Eþ ve  Bð Þ: ð3Þ
The parallel component of (3) in the auroral acceleration
region is [Wright et al., 2002]
Ek  me
e
@vek
@t
þ vekrk
 
vek
 
; ð4Þ
and for typical ULF parameters (vekrk)vek  @vek/@t,
indicating the importance of treating electron dynamics
nonlinearly [Ro¨nnmark, 1999].
3.3. Energy Considerations
[17] The retention of finite me in the two-fluid approxi-
mation allows an examination of electron energization
within a global view and identification of the energy source.
Taking the scalar product of ve and equation (3) gives, after
some manipulation,
@
@t
1
2
nmev
2
e
 
þr  1
2
nmev
2
eve
 
¼ neve  E: ð5Þ
[18] A similar equation may be derived for the ion fluid,
except that we allow for it to be a warm adiabatic fluid of
pressure pi, as ion pressure can be significant in some
situations;
@
@t
1
2
nmiv
2
i þ
pi
g 1
 
þr  1
2
nmiv
2
i vi þ
gpi
g 1 vi
 
¼ nevi  E: ð6Þ
The final energy equation we need follows from the scalar
product of B with the induction equation
@
@t
B2
2m0
 
þr  E B=m0ð Þ ¼ j  E: ð7Þ
The left-hand sides of equations (5), (6), and (7) represent
continuity of electron, ion, and magnetic energies, respec-
tively. The right-hand sides represent sources of these
different energy densities. Noting that j = ne(vi  ve), we
see the sum of (5), (6), and (7) has a right-hand side that
vanishes, while the left-hand side expresses conservation of
total energy. From each of the individual energy equations
(5), (6), and (7) it is evident that the electric field is
responsible for the exchange of energy between electrons,
ions, and magnetic field. In the following global current
systems we shall use this approach to see how electrons are
energized at the expense of ion and magnetic energies.
4. ULF Alfve´n Wave
[19] Figure 2 shows a snapshot of a meridional slice of
an axisymmetric fundamental standing Alfve´n wave. The
single-fluid model has worked well for calculating the
gross features of these waves. With the present interest in
electron acceleration, Wright et al. [2002] have added
Figure 2. A snapshot of the current system for the
fundamental standing Alfve´n mode and the particles
responsible for carrying the currents. Half a cycle later,
the currents and velocities will have switched sign.
A10S08 WRIGHT: ELECTRON ACCELERATION IN A GLOBAL CONTEXT
3 of 9
A10S08
finite me corrections to the single-fluid model. Their
analysis showed how (for a cold ion fluid, pi = 0) the
inertial (rdv/dt) term in (2) is associated with the polari-
zation current. It maximizes in the equatorial region and is
carried by ions, whose perpendicular velocity is
v?i ¼ E B
B2
þ j?
ne
: ð8Þ
The latter term (the polarization drift) is smaller than the
E  B drift by w/wci  103 for typical parameters, so
the ions essentially E  B drift in the azimuthal direction.
The smaller polarization drift of the ions at the equator is
indicated in Figure 2 and begins to produce a net charge
density. The Ek associated with this charge accelerates
electrons along B to maintain quasi-neutrality. So where
does the energy to accelerate the electrons come from?
We begin by considering the solution in the equatorial
plane, where on a given L shell, E = Err^ and we may
choose Er = E0 sin (wAt), wA being the Alfve´n wave
frequency. From (8) the leading ion drift is E  B/B2 =
(Er/B0)F^, i.e., vif = (E0/B0) sin (wAt) in the equatorial
plane. This is identical, to leading order, to the single fluid
vf and may be used with (2) to find the polarization
current and hence the polarization drift (8)
vir ¼ r
neB2
d
dt
E B
B2
 
 B  r^  wA
wci
 E0
B0
cos wAtð Þ: ð9Þ
[20] Figure 3 shows the variation of Er and vir over one
wave cycle, and the bottom part displays vi  E which
represents the addition or removal of energy from the ions.
(See the right-hand side of equation (6).) Evidently, from
the vir and vif components, the ion fluid elements follow
elliptical orbits in the equatorial plane (see Figure 4).
During the first quarter of a cycle (0 < t < T/4), Er and vir are
positive so the ions gain energy, reaching their maximum
speed at t = T/4. During T/4 < t < T/2, vir is negative so
energy is extracted from the ions and their kinetic energy is
minimized at t = T/2. For the second half of the cycle, Er is
negative, so the ions’ kinetic energy increases until t = 3T/4,
at which time vir switches sign and the ions lose energy by
slowing down until t = T.
[21] If me is neglected, (5) indicates that ve  E = 0, so
energy is just exchanged between the ion kinetic energy
(centered on the equatorial section) and magnetic energy
(concentrated toward the ionosphere) [e.g., Wright et al.,
2003]. This is the situation described by single-fluid
MHD in which the work done on the ion fluid (nevi 
E) may be reexpressed as the work done on a neutral
single-fluid (v  j  B). The equivalence follows from the
single-fluid Ohm’s Law E + v  B = 0 and (8), and
the two descriptions are just different interpretations in the
single- and two-fluid MHD models.
[22] In an Alfve´n normal mode with me = 0 there is no
electron energization (ve  E = 0) and energy is simply
exchanged between ion kinetic and magnetic energies with
the Poynting vector transporting energy along the field line.
There is no causality in such an energy cycle and neither
energy is more fundamental than the other, although we can
say that according to (2) the ion inertia leads to the
generation of the field-aligned current. When me is finite
there is a relatively small electron energy density, so we
would not regard the electrons as driving the mode. Rather,
the ion and magnetic energies are the main energy reser-
voirs, but their exchange (when me is finite) requires an E
that energizes the electrons [Wright et al., 2003]. Thus it
seems appropriate to say that the electrons are energized at
the expense of the ion and magnetic energies. In fact, if we
view the system starting at the time when there is no energy
in the electrons (i.e., j = 0), then all the energy is in the form
of ion kinetic energy. This is subsequently largely given up
to the magnetic field energy, with a small fraction going into
the electron energy. Thus it is most accurate to say the
electrons are energized at the expense of the ion energy.
Indeed, Wright et al. [2003] have shown that this can
represent a significant dissipation mechanism for the ULF
Alfve´n waves.
Figure 3. The variation of Er, the ion polarization drift vir,
and the ion energy source term nevi  E over one cycle in the
equatorial plane.
Figure 4. A view in the equatorial plane of an ion fluid
element’s elliptical trajectory and electric field it experi-
ences over one wave cycle.
A10S08 WRIGHT: ELECTRON ACCELERATION IN A GLOBAL CONTEXT
4 of 9
A10S08
[23] Regarding the question of whether an electric poten-
tial is useful for describing electron energization, the elec-
tron transit time (1 s) is much less than the wave period
(100 s) so the fields are effectively stationary. Also, the
large volume of the flux tube means the electron content is
not depleted significantly over a cycle [Wright et al., 2002].
The electrons are effectively described as being released
from a large reservoir at the top of a potential hill.
5. Region 1 Currents
[24] The differing behavior of field lines across the open/
closed field line boundary gives rises to magnetic shear
associated with part of the region 1 current system. In this
section we shall consider the acceleration of electrons in
these currents, and the applicability of the notions of
‘‘steady state’’ and the use of an electric potential.
[25] A simple one-dimensional model for the evolution of
recently opened field lines was given by Wright [1996] and
is summarized in Figure 5. At t = 0 the field line is straight
(B0 z^) and has a magnetosheath section (z > L) moving
with the sheath flow speed (V0x^), while the magneto-
spheric section is at rest. At z = 0 there is an ionospheric
boundary characterized by a height-integral Pedersen con-
ductivity (Sp). The density is uniform as is the equilibrium
Alfve´n speed (VA). The single-fluid MHD model shows this
initial condition launches Alfve´n waves which are subse-
quently located at z0 = VAt and z1 = VAt + L. The speeds of
the different sections are shown in Figure 5b.
[26] Note the perpendicular currents that are responsible
for slowing the sheath flow as they propagate out and for
heating the ionosphere. In the single-fluid description the
kinetic energy of the sheath flow is stored as magnetic
energy (in the tilted field section) and dissipated through
ionospheric heating. In the previous section there was no
causality implicit in the single fluid normal mode. This is
not true of the Alfve´n wave in Figure 5, where it is evident
that the energy is initially in the form of kinetic energy and
converted to magnetic energy and ionospheric heating.
[27] The two kinks in the left-hand magnetic field line in
Figure 5b are a result of our initial condition, and other
models of magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling have com-
bined these into a single kink [e.g., Southwood and Hughes,
1983]. This limit may be obtained by letting L ! 0, so
z1 ! z0. The result is shown as the right-hand field line in
Figure 5b and for simplicity will be adopted from now on.
Figure 5. A simple model for the one-dimensional evolution of an open field line from (a) the initial
state. At (b) later times, two wave fronts propagate away from the Earth at z0 = VAt and z1 = VAt + L,
where perpendicular currents flow. For 0 < z < z0 the plasma moves with vx = V0/(1 + m0SpVA) and an
ionospheric Pedersen current flows at z = 0. The right-hand field line in Figure 5b is a simplified model
for which the wave front currents have been combined in a single location (z1 ! z0).
A10S08 WRIGHT: ELECTRON ACCELERATION IN A GLOBAL CONTEXT
5 of 9
A10S08
[28] In Figure 6 a two-dimension model of the current
circuit associated with the right-hand field line of Figure 5b
is illustrated. The perpendicular current at z0 is diverted into
field-aligned current at the hatched regions A1 and A2 where
electrons are accelerated to meet current continuity. The top
section may be viewed from a frame moving with the
wavefront in which the fields are (locally) stationary. The
electric field in this frame (Ew) will be different from that in
the Earth’s frame.
[29] Figure 5 represents a one-dimensional system and so
only has j?. To investigate the full current circuit, we need
to account for the fact that the polar cap has a finite width
and may be allowed for by simply letting Sp be localized in
y according to the envelope f(y) shown in Figure 6. The
current now flows in a circuit with field-aligned (Birkeland)
currents connecting the ionosphere and outward propagat-
ing wavefront. Behind the wavefront the solution is steady,
so a potential is useful here. Indeed, if a realistic converging
field geometry was employed above the ionosphere,
electron acceleration would be required here (as in the
previous section); however, unlike that example, the present
system is locally exactly steady. Of course the whole system
(including the wavefront) in Figure 6 is not steady, and it is
the propagation of the wavefront along an infinite open flux
tube that allows access to an infinite reservoir of electrons to
feed the upward current. The downward current must be fed
by accelerating ionospheric electrons upward, which may in
principle ultimately deplete the ionosphere unless there is
sufficient photoionization of neutrals.
[30] Damiano and Wright [2005] have studied electron
acceleration in a propagating Alfve´n current loop whose
front half resembles the wavefront in Figure 6. Allowing the
currents to be distributed over a width ‘? (in y) and ‘k (in z),
they show how there is an Ek at the region marked A1 and
A2 where the electrons are accelerated to carry the required
jk. This type of calculation, and the discussion below,
provides much insight into the ideas first advanced by
Goertz and Boswell [1979], who first suggested that
electron inertia could be important in Alfve´nic models of
ionosphere-magnetosphere coupling.
5.1. Field Lines With jk = 0
[31] A detailed analysis of the energy balance around z =
z0 is facilitated by considering field lines on which jk = 0
(i.e., they do not intersect A1 or A2). In the plasma frame the
ion energy density source term (right-hand side of (6)) is
nevi  E = neviyEy < 0 (viy is the polarization drift of the
ions jy/ne < 0 and Ey = vxBz  0). The electron source
term is neve  E = neveyEy < 0. (The vey is the much
smaller polarization drift of the electrons vey  (me/mi)viy
and is positive.) The magnetic energy source term j  E =
jyEy  ne(viy  vey)Ey > 0. Thus both electrons and ions
lose kinetic energy, while the magnetic energy increases.
[32] Transforming to the frame of reference of the wave-
front gives a single-fluid solution for which @/@t = 0 locally.
The electric field in the wavefront frame is Ew = v  B0 
VA  b = V0B0y^, where we have used the relation for an
Alfve´n wave propagating antiparallel to B0 for illustrative
purposes:
Dvx ¼  Dbxﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃm0rp ð10Þ
and vx = V0 + Dvx represents the x component of the
plasma velocity in the Earth’s rest frame. Since Ey
w > 0 and
the polarization drifts viy and vey are unchanged by the
transformation, we find a similar interpretation to that of
the plasma frame. The magnetic field energy increases at
the expense of the electron and ion energies.
5.2. Field Lines With jk 6¼6666 6 6 0
[33] Field lines for which jk 6¼ 0 will have additional
energy considerations as electrons and ions have a nonzero
field-aligned acceleration. Remaining in the wavefront
frame for the moment, the electron and ion velocities are
vwe ¼ VAz^þ ve; vwi ¼ VAz^þ vi: ð11Þ
In the single-fluid (me/mi ! 0) limit Ew = V0B0y^, and for
finite me there will be a small correction. The leading-order
E?w is unchanged, but Ek  Ekw now becomes nonzero. Note
from (11) that vey
w and viy
w are the same as in the previous
section. However, field lines passing through A2 have
electrons approaching from z = 1 with vekw = VA and being
speeded up on exiting A2. Similarly, ions approach with
vik
w = VA and are slowed down slightly on leaving.
[34] For simplicity we shall assume that the change in
electron speed is small compared with the Alfve´n speed,
Figure 6. A two-dimensional model of the current circuit
in Figure 5. The perpendicular current at z0 is diverted into
field-aligned current at the hatched regions A1 and A2,
where electrons are accelerated to meet current continuity.
The top section may be viewed from a frame moving with
the wavefront in which the fields are (locally) stationary.
A10S08 WRIGHT: ELECTRON ACCELERATION IN A GLOBAL CONTEXT
6 of 9
A10S08
which is likely to be the case for the magnetosphere. This
assumption places a constraint upon the amplitude of the
Alfve´n wave (taken as V0). Noting that jvekj = jk/ne, j jkj =
bx/m0‘?, jbxj = V0B0/VA, gives
vek
VA
¼ V0
VA

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
mi
me
r
 le
‘?
 1; ð12Þ
where le is the electron inertial length (le
2 = me/m0ne
2).
[35] Taking the solution to be steady in the neighborhood
of z0, we can write E
w = rf. The leading behavior of E?w
is described by a potential V0B0y, while there is an
additional (smaller) contribution associated with Ek. The
latter can be derived from energy conservation of an
electron fluid element moving along a field line (i.e., y =
constant) from z = +1 where its total energy density is W
W ¼ 1
2
nme VA þ vek y; zð Þ
 2nef y; zð Þ  1
2
nmeV
2
A : ð13Þ
For vek/VA  1 and noting jk = nevek, (13) gives the total
potential as
f ¼ V0B0yþ me
e
VAvek ¼ V0B0y me
ne2
VAjk; ð14Þ
which contains the leading-order term associated with the
background flow and a correction for finite me.
[36] Figure 7 shows potential contours. For clarity we
chose (le/‘?)
2 = 0.2, although it is likely to be much smaller
than this in practice. The dashed region outlines the
acceleration region A2, and the form of the contours is
similar to that of the weak double layer shown in Figure 3d
of Eriksson and Bostro¨m [1993]. As electrons traverse the
box in Figure 7, they do so along a field line (y = constant)
and so slip down a potential slope, thus being accelerated.
In contrast, ions are decelerated. The potential in (14)
reduces to that employed by Damiano and Wright [2005] in
the limit V0 = 0. They showed excellent agreement between
the Ek predicted by (14) with that from their simulation.
[37] The consideration of the energy sources in equations
(5), (6), and (7) is similar to the previous subsection for
terms involving E?w. We need only study the additional
terms involving Ek
w here. (Note Ek
w  Ek.) At A2 there is an
additional electron energy source term of nevekw Ek 
neVAEk > 0 (note Ek = E  B0/B0 < 0 and we have assumed
vek/VA  1), so electrons gain energy. The additional ion
energy source is nevik
wEk  neVAEk < 0, so ions lose energy
at precisely the rate electrons gain it based upon field-
aligned motion. There is an additional magnetic energy
source term much smaller than these of jkEk, however
jkEk/j?E?
w  le2/‘?2  1, so the leading behavior of the
magnetic field energy is unchanged. This relation may be
shown by noting j jkj/‘k  jj?j/‘? and
Ek
Ew?
 Df
‘k
 1
V0B0
 l
2
e
‘k‘?
; ð15Þ
the latter equality following from (14), jjkj  bx/m0‘?, and
(10) with Dvx  V0.
[38] The details of energy balance are frame-dependent,
and in the wave frame the region A2 is where electrons are
energized at the expense of ion energy. In contrast, in the
region A1 ions are energized at the expense of electron
energy. In this frame the use of a local potential is useful.
[39] We now consider energy balance on jk 6¼ 0 field lines
in the vicinity of the wavefront but in the terrestrial frame of
reference (i.e., the wavefront is at z1 = VAt and propagates
away from the Earth). The analysis of jk = 0 field lines
shows how the kinetic energy of both electrons and ions is
reduced (due to polarization drifts along y^) after encounter-
ing the wavefront, while the magnetic energy behind the
wavefront increases. The effect of Ek 6¼ 0 (as on field lines
for which jk 6¼ 0) leads to extra source terms. There is an
additional electron energy source of nevekEk > 0, and an
Figure 7. The variation of potential in the wavefront frame with Y = y/‘? and Z = (z  z0)/‘k centered on
the acceleration region A2 of Figure 6. Electrons move along magnetic field lines (Y = constant) and so
cross potential contours and change their energy.
A10S08 WRIGHT: ELECTRON ACCELERATION IN A GLOBAL CONTEXT
7 of 9
A10S08
ion source of nevikEk > 0 at both A1 and A2 so electrons and
ions gain energy; however, the ion source is less than that of
the electrons by me/mi. The new contribution to the
magnetic energy source is jkEk < 0 at both A1 and A2,
so the magnetic field energy is reduced but only slightly,
since jkEk/j?E?  le2/‘?2  1. Hence the basic energy
balance is still that of ion kinetic energy (1
2
nmivi?
2 ) being
converted to magnetic energy, but a small fraction of the ion
kinetic energy goes into electron energization as well.
[40] It is evident that the use of a local potential in the wave
frame can provide much insight, and the use of a ‘‘steady’’
model is appropriate locally, although globally the solution is
time-dependent. On open field lines there is an infinite supply
of electrons for upward currents, so the reservoir will not be
depleted. A gravitational analogy of their acceleration would
be to consider the motion of ball bearings on a raised
horizontal track. The propagation of the Alfve´n wave would
correspond to moving the section of track behind the wave-
front to a lower (but constant) height. At the wavefront the
track will be inclined between the two levels, and ball
bearings will roll down the slope gaining energy and then
roll along the lower section at constant speed before being
dumped off the end of the track (ionosphere).
6. Region 2 Currents
[41] The Region 2/ring current circuit is driven by hot
plasma from the magnetotail reaching dipolar-like closed
field lines. (See the lucid account by Cowley [2000, and
references therein].) To illustrate the basic process of jk
generation and electron energization, we consider the
simplified system shown in Figure 8, which is viewed from
the magnetotail looking earthward. The solid line is the
boundary of a warm plasma cloud centered on the equatorial
plane by particle mirroring. The curvature and gradient
drifts move the ions westward and electrons eastward,
giving rise to the ring current (j?). These drifts are energy-
dependent, and in this example we take a hot ion population
(pi 6¼ 0) and neglect the electron pressure.
[42] The structure of the ring current is most easily
envisaged in terms of particle rather than fluid behavior.
Although we do not present a detailed solution here, we
note that gradient and curvature drifts do not change the
kinetic energy of an ion (i.e., the internal and kinetic
energies in the fluid description). Such a change would
arise from an electric field, the origin of which is easiest to
see within the particle description also. After some time
the ion drifts have moved the hot ion fluid to the location
identified by the dashed line in Figure 8. The original
neutral configuration begins to develop an excess of
positive charge on the western side and negative charge
on the eastern side. The electric field associated with this
charge imbalance is indicated in the figure. On the western
edge, Ek acts to draw electrons into the positively charged
region and keep it quasi-neutral. The electron energy source
term here is nevekEk > 0, so electrons are energized. On
the eastern edge, Ek expels electrons from the negative
region to maintain quasi-neutrality. Here nevekEk > 0
again, so electrons gain energy on this side too. The source
of electron energization may be seen by considering the
central section. The magnetic energy source term j  E >
0, so the magnetic field energy increases (associated with
r  B = m0j?). However, the ion energy source term
nevi  E < 0, indicating ion energy is lost.
[43] The overall picture is of a warm ion cloud drifting
westward while losing energy. The energy given up goes in
to energizing the Region 2 field-aligned current-carrying
electrons and distorting the magnetic field. A more com-
plete description of this model is beyond the scope of the
present article. The cursory discussion above draws on both
guiding center and fluid concepts to clarify some of the
underlying physical processes that will govern the system.
7. Concluding Remarks
[44] Electron acceleration in Birkeland currents such as
those in the Region 1 and 2 currents and standing Alfve´n
waves has been considered from a global perspective such
that the accelerator region and the generator region are both
clearly identifiable. A two-fluid model is adopted (being the
simplest description that permits an analysis of electron
energization) and necessarily restricts the type of processes
we are able to consider. However, this is sufficient for
identifying energy exchanges and considering issues related
to large time and space scales.
[45] In the introduction we enumerated a few key ques-
tions to which we now return. (1) Why do electrons need to
be accelerated? Within the detailed examples considered in
this paper, the electrons move to carry a field-aligned
current so that r  j  0 and the plasma can remain
quasi-neutral. Several mechanisms can give rise to j? (e.g.,
ion polarization, gradient, and curvature drifts) which will
violate charge neutrality if a suitable jk (i.e., field-aligned
electron motion) is not generated. (2) What is the source of
energy that is transferred to the electrons? The details of
energy exchange between ions, electrons, and the magnetic
Figure 8. A warm ion cloud centered on the equatorial
plane at midnight (solid line), viewed from the magnetotail
looking earthward, drifts westward (dashed line) carrying a
current and setting up a charge separation that causes
electrons to carry a field-aligned current at the edges.
A10S08 WRIGHT: ELECTRON ACCELERATION IN A GLOBAL CONTEXT
8 of 9
A10S08
field are frame-dependent. In the terrestrial frame it is a
general feature that ion energy is given up and converted to
magnetic energy and energized electrons. (3) Is the
acceleration process steady? Although a system may not
be exactly steady in a mathematical sense, it may be for
practical purposes, in the sense that the fields and
equilibrium do not change significantly over the accelera-
tion timescale. For such a system an electric potential may
be useful, and contours can extend along most of the field
line requiring large sections of flux tubes to be slightly
charged (although quasi-neutral). Criticisms relating to the
inability of localized charge distributions to provide
energization are not applicable to such a system as the
charge density is not localized over a scale that is small
compared with the particle path length.
[46] The latter comments are pertinent to reported obser-
vations of double layers in downward [Andersson et al.,
2002] and upward [Ergun et al., 2002b; Hull et al., 2003]
current regions. Ergun et al. suggest that up to half of the
electron energy can be supplied by one double layer.
Particularly for upward currents, it is possible that these
double layers are associated with steady fields and particle
energization (in the sense of section 2, te tE tn). This
would require the potential contours to map out along the
length of the current carrying flux tubes in a similar fashion
to that shown in Figure 1b [see also Wright et al., 2003]. At
low altitudes, double layers may be formed by having
adjacent contours in close proximity.
[47] Acknowledgments. The author would like to thank W. Allan,
P. Damiano, T. Neukirch, and K. Ro¨nnmark for helpful discussions and
the referees for their constructive comments.
[48] Lou-Chuang Lee thanks Bill Allan and another reviewer for their
assistance in evaluating this paper.
References
Andersson, L., R. E. Ergun, D. L. Newman, J. P. McFadden, C. W. Carlson,
and Y.-J. Su (2002), Characteristics of parallel electric fields in the
downward current region of the aurora, Phys. Plasmas, 9(8), 3600,
doi:10.1063/1.1490134.
Borovsky, J. E. (1993), The strong-double-layer model of auroral arcs:
An assessment, in Auroral Plasma Dynamics, Geophys. Monogr. Ser.,
vol. 80, edited by R. L. Lysak, p. 113, AGU, Washington, D. C.
Bryant, D. A. (1999), Electron acceleration in the aurora and beyond, Inst.
of Phys., Philadelphia, Penn.
Bryant, D. A. (2002), The roles of static and dynamic electric fields in
the auroral acceleration region, J. Geophys. Res., 107(A3), 1077,
doi:10.1029/2001JA900162.
Bryant, D. A., R. Bingham, and U. de Angelo (1992), Double layers are not
particle accelerators, Phys. Rev. Lett., 68, 37.
Carlson, C. W., et al. (1998), FAST observations in the downward auroral
current region: Energetic upgoing electron beams, parallel potential
drops, and ion heating, Geophys. Res. Lett., 25, 2017.
Cowley, S. W. H. (2000), Magnetosphere-ionosphere interactions: A
tutorial review, in Magnetospheric Current Systems, Geophys. Monogr.
Ser., vol. 118, edited by S.-I. Ohtani et al., p. 91, AGU, Washington,
D. C.
Damiano, P. A., and A. N. Wright (2005), Two-dimensional hybrid
MHD-kinetic electron simulations of an Alfve´n wave pulse, J. Geo-
phys. Res., 110, A01201, doi:10.1029/2004JA010603.
Ergun, R. E., et al. (1998), FAST satellite observations of electric field
structures in the auroral zone, Geophys. Res. Lett., 25, 2025.
Ergun, R. E., et al. (2002a), Parallel electric fields in the upward current
region of the aurora: Indirect and direct observations, Phys. Plasmas, 9,
3685.
Ergun, R. E., L. Andersson, D. Main, Y.-J. Su, D. L. Newman, M. V.
Goldman, C. W. Carlson, J. P. McFadden, and F. S. Mozer (2002b),
Parallel electric fields in the upward current region of the aurora: Numer-
ical solutions, Phys. Plasmas, 9(9), 3695, doi:10.1063/1.1499121.
Eriksson, A. I., and R. Bostro¨m (1993), Are weak double layers important
for auroral particle acceleration?, in Auroral Plasma Dynamics, Geophys.
Monogr. Ser., vol. 80, edited by R. L. Lysak, p. 105, AGU, Washington,
D. C.
Goertz, C. K., and R. W. Boswell (1979), Magnetosphere-ionosphere cou-
pling, J. Geophys. Res., 84, 7239.
Hull, A. J., J. W. Bonnell, F. S. Mozer, J. D. Scudder, and C. C. Chaston
(2003), Large parallel electric fields in the upward current region of the
aurora: Evidence for ambipolar effects, J. Geophys. Res., 108(A6), 1265,
doi:10.1029/2002JA009682.
Janhunen, P., and A. Olsson (2000), New model for auroral acceleration:
O-shaped potential structure cooperating with waves, Ann. Geophys.,
18, 596.
Mozer, F. S., and A. Hull (2001), The origin and geometry of upward
parallel electric fields in the auroral acceleration region, J. Geophys.
Res., 106, 5763.
Ro¨nnmark, K. (1999), Electron acceleration in the auroral current circuit,
Geophys. Res. Lett., 26, 983.
Southwood, D. J., and W. J. Hughes (1983), Theory of hydromagnetic
waves in the magnetosphere, Space Sci. Rev., 35, 301.
Stern, D. P. (1981), One-dimensional models of quasi-neutral parallel elec-
tric fields, J. Geophys. Res., 86, 5839.
Wright, A. N. (1996), Transfer of magnetosheath momentum and energy
to the ionosphere along open field lines, J. Geophys. Res., 101,
13,169.
Wright, A. N., W. Allan, M. R. Ruderman, and R. C. Elphic (2002), The
dynamics of current carriers in standing Alfve´n waves: Parallel electric
fields in the auroral acceleration region, J. Geophys. Res., 107(A7), 1120,
doi:10.1029/2001JA900168.
Wright, A. N., W. Allan, and P. A. Damiano (2003), Alfve´n wave dissipa-
tion via electron energization, Geophys. Res. Lett., 30(16), 1847,
doi:10.1029/2003GL017605.

A. N. Wright, Mathematical Institute, University of St. Andrews, St.
Andrews, Fife KY16 9SS, UK. (andy@mcs.st-and.ac.uk)
A10S08 WRIGHT: ELECTRON ACCELERATION IN A GLOBAL CONTEXT
9 of 9
A10S08
