DEVELOPMENT OF AN AUTOMATED MICROFACTORY:  
PART 2 – EXPERIMENTATION AND ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
Andrew E. Honegger, Graduate Research Assistant 
George Q. Langstaff, Graduate Research Assistant 
Andrew G. Phillip, Graduate Research Assistant 
Timothy D. VanRavenswaay, Graduate Research Assistant 
Shiv G. Kapoor, Grayce Wicall Gauthier Chair in Mechanical and Industrial 
Engineering 
Richard E. DeVor, College of Engineering Distinguished Professor of 
Manufacturing 
Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
Urbana, IL 
 
 
 
 
       
KEYWORDS 
 
Microfactory, mMT, calibration, automated 
tool placement, performance analysis. 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
An automated microfactory is developed and 
executed for improved multi-operation 
manufacturing of micro/meso-scale 
components.  In this paper, the technologies 
developed are implemented and quantitatively 
analyzed.  The results of performance analysis 
is presented for both pallet and mMT calibration, 
three-axis and five-axis mMTs, fixturing methods, 
automated tool placement, and part registration.  
An assessment of the microfactory performance 
and capabilities with regard to part/feature 
accuracy, portability, and throughput is made. 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
In Part I of this paper, the architecture and 
sub-system development for an automated fully-
functional microfactory have been presented.  
Current gaps in knowledge related to machine 
performance, system automation, metrology, 
part registration, tool placement, flexibility and 
portability were identified and technology 
solutions were defined and developed.  In 
particular, design strategies and component 
technology solutions for the mMTs, a metrology 
station, part handling systems, a control system 
and sensors were explained. 
 
In this paper, the technologies developed for 
the microfactory are evaluated through 
experiments conducted with each individual 
subsystem and the overall system.  First, mMT 
and pallet calibration methodologies, needed to 
achieve microfactory accuracy and portability 
goals, are described and analyzed.  Next, an 
evaluation of the performance of the three-axis 
and five-axis mMTs is presented.   Some 
analysis for fixturing methods applicable to the 
microfactory is then discussed.  Performance of 
automated tool placement and part registration 
are studied.  Finally, an assessment of the 
microfactory performance and capabilities with 
regard to part/feature accuracy, portability, and 
throughput is made. 
 
 
2. MICROFACTORY CALIBRATION  
 
2.1. Pallet Calibration  
 
A calibration procedure is necessary to 
achieve micron-level feature accuracy using the 
palletized part transfer system to compensate 
for small manufacturing and assembly 
differences between each pallet and each base.  
These differences cause a given pallet to have a 
slightly different orientation when moved from 
one machine to another and cause different 
pallets to have a slightly different orientation on 
a given machine.  In general, this orientation 
difference has six terms, each representing one 
degree of freedom.  The calibration procedure 
developed here accounts for all but one degree 
of freedom.  The remaining term is handled by 
an automated tool placement methodology. 
 
The calibration procedure uses the metrology 
capability of the microfactory to measure a 
machined artifact.  This artifact is created by 
milling two orthogonal slot features with both the 
three-axis mMT and five-axis mMT in the same 
substrate, as shown in Fig. 1.  Angular and 
linear error components are then identified 
directly using a series of measurement scans 
completed with a laser distance sensor.  These 
measurements, labeled in Fig. 1, include two 
orthogonal scans of the original artifact surface, 
scans along the bottom of each slot, and scans 
across each slot.   
 
 
FIGURE 1. PALLET CALIBRATION ARTIFACT 
 
A line is fitted by least squares to the data 
from scans 1-6.  The angle between lines 1 and 
3 provides the y-rotation angle, θY, for the three-
axis machine while the angle between lines 1 
and 5 provides θY for the five-axis machine.  
Similarly, θX for each machine is obtained using 
the angles between lines 2, 4 and 6.  The third 
angular degree of freedom, θZ is obtained using 
the series of scans labeled 8 for the three-axis 
machine and the series of scans labeled 10 for 
the five-axis machine and the orientation of the 
slot in machine coordinates.  The final two 
degrees of freedom, δX and δY, are determined 
using the series of scans labeled 7 and 9 and 
information from each machine about the 
locations of the slots in machine coordinates. 
Once determined, each pallet orientation 
component is entered into the transformation 
matrix: 
 
(1)    
⎥⎥
⎥⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢⎢
⎢⎢
⎣
⎡
++−
−−+
−
=
1000
ZYXZYXZXZXZYX
YYXZYXZXZXZYX
XYZYZY
ccssccssscsc
cssssccsccss
ssccc
A δθθθθθθθθθθθθ
δθθθθθθθθθθθθ
δθθθθθ  
 
where, s = sine and c = cosine.  In this way, a 
transformation matrix is created for each pallet-
machine combination.  Thus, as each machine 
operates using a given pallet, the appropriate 
transformation matrix is applied, allowing 
multiple-machine processing while maintaining 
the desired accuracy.   
 
The aforementioned measurement procedure 
was evaluated first using a single pallet.  For this 
experiment, the measurements were conducted 
using a laser distance sensor mounted on the 
three-axis mMT.  The error parameters for the 
machined geometries seen in Fig. 1 are 
measured on the three-axis machine.  δX, δY, 
and θZ are calculated using these 
measurements and shown in Table 1.  Figure 2 
shows the results of measurement scans 1-6.  
These scans show the depth variation of the 
three-axis and five-axis slots in relation to the 
orientation of the original surface.  Using this 
data, θX and θY between the three-axis and five-
axis machines are calculated and shown in 
Table 1. 
 
 
FIGURE 2. NOMINAL SURFACE AND SLOT DEPTH 
 
The repeatability of the calibration procedure 
was evaluated by comparing the calculated error 
component values over five calibration trials of 
the same pallet.  Table 1 shows that the 
standard deviation for θX and θY is 0.2mrad.  θZ, 
δX, and δY have higher standard deviations of 
1.3mrad, 16.5μm, and 6.1μm, respectively.  This 
difference in repeatability can be attributed to 
higher machining and measurement variations 
and the smaller number of measurements used 
for their computation.  Thus, repeatability for 
these error components can be improved by 
improving the repeatability of the machining and 
measurement processes and increasing the 
number of cross slot measurements (scan sets 
7-10) [Honegger, 2005].  
 
Using the same approach, measurements 
were taken for multiple pallets and their error 
parameters are found in Table 2.  The data 
shows that the uncompensated error variation 
among pallets is very similar to the error 
variation for multiple measurements of the same 
pallet.  This suggests that the errors between 
machines can be attributed primarily to base and 
machine variation, as opposed to pallet variation.  
Overall, the repeatability values shown in Tables 
1 and 2 suggest that the calibration procedure 
has the desired micron-level repeatability for the 
estimation of θX, and θY.  Further process 
improvements are required to improve the 
repeatability of the θZ, δX, and δY [Honegger, 
2005].   
 
TABLE 1. UNCOMPENSATED SINGLE PALLET  
 
 
TABLE 2. UNCOMPENSATED MULTIPLE PALLETS  
 
 
 
2.2. mMT Calibration and Compensation 
 
In addition to pallet calibration, machine 
calibration is necessary in order to manufacture 
accurate parts.  Machine calibration must be 
conducted periodically, especially after the 
system has been transported to a new location.  
A system and methodology has been developed 
to enable fast kinematic calibration of mMTs 
[Honegger, 2005].   
 
The measurement system, shown in Fig. 3, 
detects contact between the stylus and sensor 
assembly.  Measurements are obtained by 
reading the machine axis positions at the 
contact point.   The system consists of a stylus, 
a precision planar artifact, a 1-DOF flexure, a 
load cell for detecting contact force, and a 
kinematic coupling that enables quick and 
reliable machine attachment, since the sensor 
and stylus mount to the machine in the same 
manner as a workpiece and cutting tool, 
respectively.   
 
FIGURE 3. MEASUREMENT SYSTEM ASSEMBLY 
 
The calibration measurement methodology, 
shown in Fig. 4, enables machine calibration in 
less than 30 minutes.  Figure 4 shows that error 
measurements are divided into 1) off-machine 
measurements using a calibrated measurement 
device (such as a CMM) and 2) on-machine 
measurements for recalibration using the 
measurement system in Fig. 3.  This enables 
rapid recalibration since the off-machine 
measurements are only needed once for the 
initial machine calibration.  In addition, the on-
machine measurements are easily automated 
and quickly executed using software and control 
algorithms for error identification and 
compensation.   
 
 
FIGURE 4. mMT CALIBRATION METHODOLOGY 
Figure 5 shows the accuracy improvement of 
the microfactory three-axis mMT by measuring 
machined slots before and after compensation 
based on the aforementioned calibration 
methodology.  The slots had a nominal depth of 
0.1mm.  Compensation improved the slot depth 
errors from 2.01µm/mm to 0.08µm/mm along the 
x-axis and from 1.83µm/mm to 0.08µm/mm 
along the y-axis.  Compensation also reduced 
the perpendicularity error between the x-axis 
and y-axis from 0.074˚ to 0.01˚ [Honegger, 
2005]. 
 
 
FIGURE 5. SLOT DEPTH COMPENSATION 
 
 
3. MICROFACTORY SUB-SYSTEM ANALYSIS 
 
The following section presents a performance 
analysis of the microfactory sub-systems and 
methodogies including:  three-axis mMT, five-
axis mMT, fixturing, tool placement, and part 
registration.  All tooling used in the analysis that 
follows are solid carbide micro-endmills and 
micro-drills of standard cutting edge and flute 
geometries that are available off-the-shelf from 
several commercial sources.  It should also be 
mentioned that the microfactory has operated 
and been evaluated to date only in an air-
conditioned environment.  However, none of the 
subsystems are separately enclosed in any type 
of controlled environment. 
 
 
3.1. Three-axis and five-axis mMTs 
 
Characteristic feature sizes, as small as a 
few microns, encountered in micro-machining 
operations combined with the required high 
feedrates and accelerations result in short 
duration moves.  These micro-machining motion 
parameters demand specific design 
considerations including high closed-loop 
bandwidth in order to avoid large following errors 
[Phillip, 2005].  Closed-loop bandwidth is 
influenced by a number of variables including 
motor inductance, motor operating voltage, 
motor force and stage mass.  The five-axis mMT 
achieved an average closed-loop bandwidth of 
91Hz for all stages using AC linear motors with 
1mH inductance versus the 30mH DC linear 
motors used in the three-axis machine, where 
the average closed-loop bandwidth is 21Hz. 
Table 3 summarizes the bandwidth of each 
individual stage of each machine and the 
following error encountered at 5m/s2 
acceleration (0.5G). 
 
Performance evaluations of the UIUC mMTs 
were performed based on a new mMT test 
methodology [Phillip, 2005] involving 
measurements of following error as a function of 
acceleration.  The new acceleration-based 
methodology, developed via an analysis of 
micro-machining motion parameters, allows 
machine accuracy to be calculated as a function 
of feature size, based on relationships between 
feature size and required acceleration.  Figure 6 
is an example set of results from this 
methodology, showing the relationship between 
acceleration magnitude and both RMS and peak 
following error.  The results of the acceleration 
testing for the five-axis machine show that a 
relative accuracy of 10-2 can be achieved for 
feature sizes around 500μm, using a 750μm tool 
and the associated motion parameters involving 
accelerations up to about 5m/s2 (0.5G).  
Alternately, a relative accuracy of 10-3 can be 
achieved for feature sizes close to 1mm using a 
tool of the same size and the associated motion 
parameters involving acceleration below 2m/s2 
(0.2G).  The three-axis mMT exhibited larger 
following errors for a given acceleration due to 
its lower bandwidth and is capable of achieving 
10-3 relative accuracy when machining with 
accelerations below 1m/s2 (0.1G) [Phillip, 2005]. 
 
TABLE 3.  mMT BANDWIDTH, FOLLOWING ERROR 
Bandwidth
X 107.1 1.5 μm
Y 93.7 2.1 μm
Z 68.7 5.0 μm
B 58.3 29.5 arcsec
C 128.1 0.9 arcsec
X 15.6 10.0 μm
Y 21.2 4.9 μm
Z 26.2 7.8 μm
RMS Error at 5m/s
5-
A
xi
s
3-
A
xi
s
2
 
 
02
4
6
8
10
12
14
0 5 10 15 20
Peak Acceleration (m/s^ 2)
Fo
llo
w
in
g 
Er
ro
r 
( μm
)
RMS
Peak
 
FIGURE 6.  EXAMPLE mMT EVALUATION RESULT 
 
3.2. Fixturing  
 
An important characteristic of a fixture used 
in the microfactory is its ability to counteract the 
cutting forces applied to the part.  The forces 
expected in micro-milling applications have been 
shown to be generally less than 100N and 
commonly encountered forces are in the 1 - 3N 
range [Liu, 2004; Vogler, 2003; Rahman, 2001; 
Tansel, 1998].   
 
A porous sintered carbon air bearing with a 
circular 5cm2 area was evaluated for use in the 
microfactory because the porous surface allows 
parts to be located anywhere on its face without 
losing vacuum.  Table 4 shows the results of 
testing the holding force with various 
engineering materials covering the entire face of 
the chuck.  The table shows that the static 
pressure seal at the face of the chuck requires 
low surface roughness and flatness error in the 
mating surfaces.  The lateral holding forces 
observed suggest this may be a viable fixturing 
method for the microfactory. 
 
TABLE 4.  RESULTS OF POROUS VACUUM 
CHUCK FORCE TESTING 
Material Holding force (N) Roughness (Ra) Flatness error
Acrylic 7.57 10 nm 3 μm/cm
Aluminum 4.04 50 nm 2 μm/cm
Steel 2.17 100 nm 3.5 μm/cm
Polyethylene 1.92 800 nm 1.3 μm/cm
Pyrex glass 1.45 5 nm 6.5 μm/cm
Sintered Carbon Vacuum Chuck 140 nm 2 μm/cm  
 
 
A water soluble thermoplastic adhesive 
commonly used in silicon wafer processing has 
also been tested and been shown to work well in 
terms of holding force.  The adhesive can be 
heated to 55ºC for bonding and de-bonding and 
then dissolved in hot water for cleaning.  Tests 
have shown that although heating the parts and 
fixture is not necessary, higher forces (>100N) 
and a much thinner bond thickness (<100μm) 
and therefore better orientation is achieved if 
both are heated to the adhesive melting 
temperature [VanRavenswaay, 2006]. 
 
3.3. Automated Tool Placement Analysis 
 
The accuracy of the automated tool 
placement methodology described in Part I of 
this paper depends on locating the surface of 
the part and the tip of the tool accurately 
[Langstaff, 2005].  Figure 7 shows 100 repeat 
measurements of a given point on the workpiece 
surface.  Data shown in the figure represents the 
deviation from the mean measurement.  These 
measurements are obtained by moving the 
workpiece surface into the measurement range 
of the laser at a fixed x-y location and recording 
the laser measurement and z stage position.  
The data shows a standard deviation of 0.09μm.  
This is on the order of the resolution of the 
stages used for taking the measurements. 
 
 
FIGURE 7. MEASUREMENT REPEATABILITY DATA 
 
Table 5 shows data obtained from 50 repeat 
measurements for each of four different 
diameter tools when detecting the tip using the 
method described in Part I.  The data was taken 
with the spindle operating at 160,000rpm and 
shows that as tool diameter decreases the 
standard deviation of the repeat measurements 
increases.  Also, it can be seen that tool 
geometry (endmill vs. drill) has minimal effect on 
the repeatability of the tool tip detection system 
developed here. 
 
TABLE 5.  TOOL TIP DETECTION REPEATABILITY 
 
 
 
 
3.4. Part Registration 
 
It is necessary to compensate for part 
misalignment once a part is fixtured onto a 
workpiece pallet.  Part registration utilizes the 
methodologies developed for measuring part 
orientation and detecting features. 
 
3.4.1. Part Orientation. The planar 
orientation of a given workpiece is determined 
by taking multiple measurements on the 
workpiece surface with the laser displacement 
sensor [Langstaff, 2005].  Based on three 
unique surface measurements, (x1, y1, z1), (x2, y2, 
z2), and (x3, y3, z3), a three-dimensional plane is 
fitted to the workpiece surface by solving the 
standard equation for a plane, i.e.,  
 0=+++ DzCyBxA  (2) 
where x = [x1 x2 x3], y = [y1 y2 y3], z = [z1 z2 z3], 
and A, B, C, and D are the coefficients of the 
plane.  Using Eq. 2 to solve for the normal 
vector to the workpiece plane, the inverse 
kinematic equations for each machine are 
adapted to reflect the workpiece orientation.  In 
this way, subsequent processing is able to 
correct for misalignment due to part fixturing and 
accurately machine and measure the part.   
  (1) 
3.4.2. Feature Detection. A methodology 
has been developed that enables accurate and 
repeatable detection of edges and holes using 
the laser displacement sensor [Langstaff, 2005].  
This technology enables pre-, in-, and post-
process part validation.  Figure 8 displays data 
collected during edge detection of a machined 
slot wall.  Detection of an edge is determined 
when the magnitude of the slope of the data 
exceeds a threshold.  Using this methodology a 
series of 60 consecutive edge detection scans 
was conducted.  The edge of the slot was 
detected with a standard deviation of 0.51μm.  
 
 
FIGURE 8.  EDGE DETECTION SCAN 
 
 
4. Microfactory Capabilities Analysis 
 
In this section, the capabilities of the UIUC 
microfactory are demonstrated in order to show 
the accuracy achieved, portability, and 
throughput and to validate the overall efficacy of 
the microfactory. 
 
4.1. Accuracy and Validation 
 
Overall accuracy on part features generated 
by the microfactory is the result of the stack up 
of the individual errors of each system.  Feature 
accuracy is the result of positioning and 
repeatability errors as well as machining-
induced errors.  Machining-induced errors are 
dependent on a number of factors including 
feature geometry and machining parameters 
and are not included in this estimation.  The 
positioning and repeatability error budget for a 
generic part consists of the part registration error, 
tool tip detection error, kinematic coupling error, 
and processing machine error.  Table 6 lists 
these parameters and an estimated or 
measured standard deviation value for each. 
 
TABLE 6.  PARAMETERS AFFECTING ACCURACY 
Accuracy parameter σ (µm)
Part registration resolution (1) 0.1
Tool tip detection repeatability (1) 0.5
Kinematic Coupling repeatability (2) 0.05
3-axis machine volumetric error (1) 1.3
5-axis machine volumetric error (2) 1.3
(1) Measured    (2) Estimated  
 
In order to determine the effectiveness of the 
calibration methodologies employed, validation 
geometry was generated and subsequently 
measured with a profilometer.  A series of 
shallow slots were milled in a brass workpiece 
using both the three- and five-axis mMTs in an 
alternating manner, as seen in Fig. 9.  The slot 
depth and spacing was measured to determine 
the θX, θY, and θZ inclination angles and δX, and 
δY offsets between the two machines (shown in 
Table 7) and between the machines and the 
nominal workpiece surface (shown in Table 8).  
A comparison with the uncompensated values 
found in Table 2 shows that the average angular 
errors, θX, θY, and θZ, between machines are 
reduced from -7.9mrad, 2.6mrad, and 31.4mrad 
to -0.35mrad, 0.01mrad, and -0.05mrad, 
respectively.  Likewise, δX, and δY are reduced 
by an average factor of 9 from 87.2μm and 
176.8μm to 12.5μm and 15.6μm, respectively.   
 
FIGURE 9.  VALIDATION GEOMETRY 
 
TABLE 7.   COMPENSATED ERROR PARAMETERS 
(THREE-AXIS mMT TO FIVE-AXIS mMT) 
 
 
TABLE 8.   COMPENSATED ERROR PARAMETERS 
(NOMINAL WORKPIECE TO mMTs) 
 
 
 
4.2. Portability  
 
The portability of the microfactory was 
demonstrated by taking the system from the 
laboratory at UIUC and transporting it to a 
laboratory 200 miles away and producing 
demonstration parts.  The system was 
disassembled in approximately 90 minutes and 
loaded into a minivan.  At the other laboratory 
the system was unloaded and set up in 
approximately 3.5 hours, requiring only 110VAC 
power and compressed air to begin an 
automated part production cycle.  The machines, 
controller racks, and gantry axes can each be 
unloaded and put in place by one or two people.  
Table 9 shows the times associated with 
disassembly and reassembly. 
 
TABLE 9.  MICROFACTORY DISASSEMBLY AND 
ASSEMBLY TIMES 
Time (min) Activity
10 Unhook machines from air hoses and control wires
20 Crate machines
25 Disassemble and crate gantry
25 Remove wires / hoses from control racks / cable trays
10 Pack cable trays and miscellaneous items
Time (min) Activity
20 Unpack miscellaneous items and place cable trays
35 Reconnect wires and hoses to control racks
30 Unpack and reassemble gantry
20 Unpack and place machines 
30 Recalibrate machines
60 Retrain pallet locations
Reassembly
Disassembly 
 
 
4.3. Demonstration Part 
 
The demonstration part (Fig. 10) is a 5mm 
diameter washer-like part milled in 216 brass 
alloy with eight 250μm holes in the perimeter 
and a 300μm wide contoured spar in the center.  
The full multi-step part production operation has 
been demonstrated by sequentially producing 
parts until depletion of the part queue without 
human intervention.   
 
 
FIGURE 10.  DEMONSTRATION PART 
 
 
4.4. Throughput  
 
The microfactory throughput capabilities are 
shown by the times that contribute to a part 
cycle, where the formula for part cycle time, cyclet , 
is:  
 ∑+×+= processtransferonregistraticycle ttNtt  (3) 
where tregistration is the part registration time, N is 
the number of machine-to-machine transfers,  
ttransfer  is the part transfer time and tprocess is the 
time required for each machining operation.  
This model does not include a projected 
frequency of tool breakage and the associated 
tool change time.  The times for the different 
factory functions are shown in Table 10.  
Throughput for the demonstration part included 
two tool tip detections for the first part cycle.  
Subsequently, parts could continue to be 
produced without taking additional tool tip 
measurements.  The part cycle time for the 
demonstration part in Fig. 11 was 20 minutes.   
 
TABLE 10. TIMES FOR FACTORY FUNCTIONS. 
Time Description Value
t tip tool tip detection 60 s
t registration part location registration 60 s
t transfer machine-to-machine transfer 10 s
t process machine operations 16 min
5-axis roughing 5 min
3-axis drilling 3 min
5-axis finishing 8 min  
 
 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
 
The following conclusions can be drawn from 
this work. 
 
1. Calibration methodologies for both 
pallets and mMTs are implemented and 
significantly reduce machine error. 
2. Performance evaluations of the 3-axis 
and 5-axis machines show the 
parameters under which high accuracy 
can be achieved. 
3. Vacuum and adhesive fixturing methods 
have been analyzed for their holding 
capabilities. 
4. The error induced by automated tool 
placement is shown to be dominated by 
the size of the tool and to be less than a 
micron for commonly used tools.  
5. Part registration through the online 
metrology station can provide process 
monitoring and the ability to correct for 
errors in alignment. 
6. Compensation methods have been 
shown to successfully reduce machining 
error. 
7. Portability has been demonstrated and 
benchmarks set for time-related goals. 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support 
of the US Army Aviation and Missile Command 
through Alion Science and Technology (Contract 
DAAH23-00C-R232) during the course of this 
research.  The authors gratefully acknowledge 
the support of Jerry Dickson of the US Army 
Aviation and Missile Research and Development 
Command.  The authors also gratefully 
acknowledge the partial funding support of the 
NSF NSEC: Center for Nano-Chemical-
Electrical-Mechanical Manufacturing Systems 
(NanoCEMMS) (project DMI-0328162).  
Validation profilometry was carried out in the 
Center for Microanalysis of Materials, University 
of Illinois, which is partially supported by the U.S. 
Department of Energy under grant DEFG02-91-
ER45439.  Finally, the authors gratefully 
acknowledge the invaluable assistance in the 
construction of the microfactory by Drew Witte 
and Chris Meyer of Alion Science and 
Technology. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Honnegger, A., (2005), Master’s Thesis, 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. 
 
Langstaff, G., (2005), Master’s Thesis, 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. 
 
Liu, X., M. B. G. Jun, R. E. DeVor, and S. G. 
Kapoor, (2004), “Cutting Mechanisms and Their 
Influence on Dynamic Forces, Vibrations and 
Stability in Micro-Endmilling”, Proceedings of the 
IMECE, Manufacturing Engineering and 
Materials Handling, pp. 583-592. 
 
Phillip, A., (2005), Master’s Thesis, University of 
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. 
 
Rahman, M., A. S. Kumar, and J.R.S. Prakash, 
(2001), “Micro milling of pure copper,”  Journal 
of Materials Processing Technology,  116, pp. 
39-43. 
 
Tansel, I., O. Rodriguez, M. Trujillo, E. Paz, and 
W. Li, (1998), “Micro-end-milling—I. Wear and 
breakage,” International Journal of Machine 
Tools & Manufacture, 38, pp. 1419-1436. 
 
VanRavenswaay, T., (2006), Master’s Thesis, 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. 
 
Vogler, M. P., R. E. DeVor, and S. G. Kapoor, 
(2003), “Microstructure-Level Force Prediction 
Model for Micro-milling of Multi Phase 
Materials,” Transactions of the ASME, Vol. 125, 
pp.202-209. 
