Dopamine-serotonin interactions 
in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
 
Robert D. Oades 
 
2008 Progress in Brain Research, 172, 543-565 
This is the reformatted manuscript submitted - prior to publication in its final form at 
DOI: 10.1016/S0079-6123(08)00926-6 
 
Biopsychology Group, University Clinic for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Virchowstr. 174, 
45147 Essen, Germany. Email: robert.oades@uni-due.de   
 
Abstract: 
Poor control of attention-related and motor processes, often associated with behavioral or 
cognitive impulsivity, are typical features of numbers of children and adults with attention-
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Until recently clinicians have seen little need to 
improve on or add to the catecholaminergic model for explaining the features of ADHD. 
Recent genetic and neuroimaging studies however provide evidence for separate 
contributions of altered dopamine (DA) and serotonin (5-HT) function in this disorder. 
Genetic studies imply that for both DA and 5-HT systems variants may frequently occur in 
ADHD for neurotransmitter uptake, synthesis and breakdown functions. The separate 
distributions in the brain of mesolimbic DA transporter and mesocortical DA D4 binding sites, 
both strongly implicated in ADHD, draws attention to potentially differential contributions 
from the 5-HT system. However, the evidence here points less towards an anatomical 
differentiation, as towards one in terms inhibitory/facilitatory pre/postsynaptic location of 
receptors in the 5-HT1 and 5-HT2 families. While the monoamine metabolite levels excreted 
in ADHD are often correlated, this may well flow from a starting point where 5-HT activity is 
anomalously higher or lower than the generally lower than normal levels for DA. It appears 
that perhaps both situations may arise reflecting different diagnostic subgroups of ADHD, 
and where impulsive characteristics of the subjects reflect externalizing behavior or 
cognitive impulsivity. For these features there is clear evidence that DA and 5-HT neuronal 
systems can and do interact anomalously in ADHD at the level of the soma, the terminals 
and at a distance. Interactions mediated by macroglia are also likely. However, it remains 
difficult to ascribe specific mechanisms to their effects (in potentially different subgroups of 
patients) from this relatively new field of study that has as yet produced rather 
heterogeneous results. 
Key words: Attention, ADHD, dopamine, genetics, glia, impulsivity, prefrontal cortex, 
serotonin, venlafaxine 
Abbreviations: ADHD, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; COMT, catecholamine-ortho-
methyl transferase; CPT, continuous performance task; DA, dopamine; DAT1, dopamine 
transporter; DDC, dopa decarboxylase; 5-HT, serotonin; 5-HIAA, 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid; 
HVA, homovanillic acid; IFN-γ, gamma-interferon; IL-6, interleukin-6; NA, noradrenalin; SERT, 
serotonin transporter; SNP, single nucleotide polymorphisms; TGF-β, transforming growth 
factor-beta; TPH, tryptophan hydroxylase; VNTR, variable number tandem repeat; 
 
1. INTRODUCTION: 
1.1 The clinical problems of ADHD: 
The principle domains of dysfunction in 
this disorder are reflected in the name 
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD) and may be found in nearly 10% of 
children world-wide (Faraone et al., 2003). 
It is widely agreed that the constituent 
characteristics represent extremes of 
features normally distributed through the 
population. Indeed, the high heritability of 
the disorder at c. 70% (Faraone et al., 
2005) provides a basis for the genetic 
strategy of investigating risk factors, 
known as the quantitative trait locus 
approach (Asherson and Image 
Consortium, 2004). This has the potential 
to link the categorical disorder to 
continuously distributed traits associated 
closely with the underlying genetic liability 
in the general population. 
There is a subtype of ADHD where the 
domains of overactivity, restlessness and 
behavioral impulsivity predominate 
(hyperactive-impulsive or ADHDhi), and 
another, an inattentive subtype (ADHDin), 
where poor executive attention and 
cognitive impulsivity predominate. But for 
most of the cases seeking professional 
help these features are found together in 
the combined type (ADHDct). These 
features are not expressed all the time. 
The DSM IV manual (American Psychiatric 
Association) describes them as “often 
present”: in laboratory studies one notes a 
high intra-individual variability in the 
measures taken (Scheres et al., 2001; 
Russell et al., 2006). In all clear diagnoses 
a clinical impairment is noted.  
Some cases are markedly withdrawn 
showing low self-esteem, others show 
frequent outbursts of affect, many are 
characterized by both of these 
‘internalizing’ and ‘externalizing’ traits, 
and most have problems in social and 
academic environments. Frequently these 
problems are diagnosed as comorbid (e.g. 
oppositional and conduct disorder). Onset 
is usually in mid- or early childhood and 
affects boys more than girls [c. 3-5 to 1 
(Buitelaar et al., 2006)]. In about a third of 
cases the disorder persists into adulthood 
and the gender ratio evens out 
(Biederman et al., 2004). 
1.2 Dopamine not serotonin 
dysfunction? 
Consensus suggests that in one form or 
another dopamine (DA) activity is lower 
than normal in children and adolescents 
with ADHD (Levy, 2004; Iversen and 
Iversen, 2007). Thus, based on the 
knowledge that intimate interactions 
between DA and serotonin (5-HT) occur 
widely through the mammalian brain (see 
previous chapters) one would intuitively 
expect – as cause or effect – that there 
would be some changes in the activity of 
5-HT in cases with ADHD. One should first 
ask why this idea has to date had little 
resonance with the psychologists and 
psychiatrists who study ADHD.   
Key evidence for the view that central 
5-HT activity is irrelevant to explanations 
of ADHD derives from the success of the 
medication usually prescribed. Long- or 
short-acting forms of methylphenidate 
improve the problems of 60-70% of both 
younger and older ADHD patients (Wigal 
et al., 2004; Biederman et al., 2007a). 
Merely the domain of the problem (e.g. 
restless motor activity, poor social 
interactions and attention-related 
cognition) is differentially sensitive to dose 
(Pelham and Murphy, 1990). The overall 
proportion of patients improving with 
treatment rises to around 80% if another 
psychostimulant such as amphetamine is 
considered (Committee on children and 
disabilities and committee on drugs, 
1996). Methylphenidate inhibits the 
reuptake of DA and noradrenalin (NA), but 
has no direct effect on 5-HT (Leonard et 
al., 2004). The present discussion does not 
consider further the role of NA activity 
 3 
that undoubtedly also contributes to 
cerebrocortical dysfunction in ADHD 
(Oades, 2005).  Successful medication is 
apparently not acting on 5-HT systems and 
the clinician is happy with such a good 
response rate to these agents. Certainly 
the dogma, promulgated in older reviews 
(Oades, 1987; Zametkin and Rapoport, 
1987), has long been that one does not 
need to consider 5-HT to explain clinical 
observations, or the results of laboratory 
examinations of ADHD behavior. 
However, the argument for the 
catecholamine and against the 5-HT 
contribution to ADHD is somewhat 
superficial. It would seem important to 
seek an explanation for why around 30% 
of patients are non-responders, and seek 
reasons for why a large proportion of 
‘responders’ show far less than a 50% 
improvement. Most children with ADHD 
show little or no improvement of 
academic performance or social function 
(Abikoff et al., 2004; Gualtieri and 
Johnson, 2008). Indeed the striking 
improvement seen after methylphenidate 
treatment in the NIMH multimodal 
treatment study over the first year of the 
study dwindled to the very modest levels 
recorded after intensive psychotherapy 
over two to three years (Jensen and 
Arnold, 2004). In seeking an explanation it 
is appropriate to suggest that 5-HT or a 
quite different component of CNS function 
may be playing a significant role? 
2. Evidence for an altered 
dopaminergic and serotonergic 
contribution to ADHD: 
2.1 Dopamine (DA) 
First, it is useful to recall briefly, good 
evidence that the activity of DA and 5-HT 
are associated with the expression of 
ADHD when considered separately. 
Investigations to provide direct evidence 
of neurotransmitter involvement in ADHD 
have usually not considered the role of 
more than one transmitter. These studies 
and indirect evidence for interactions are 
discussed in section 3. Examples of key 
evidence focusing on DA (here) and 5-HT 
(section 2.2) are selected from the fields 
of neuroimaging and genetics. 
Volkow and colleagues (2007b) 
describe a comparison of D2/D3 receptor 
availability in medication-naïve adults with 
ADHD with healthy subjects using positron 
emission tomography (PET) and the D2 
ligand [
11
C] raclopride. They recorded a 
lower availability of binding sites in the 
left caudate nucleus on placebo. After 
methylphenidate treatment there was a 
blunted bilateral response in the striatum 
that extended to the limbic region of the 
amygdala and hippocampus. Similar 
PET/SPECT studies report a decrease of 
the DA transporter in the basal ganglia 
and thalamus (Hesse et al., 2006; Volkow 
et al., 2007a)). [Volkow relates how recent 
replications have resolved some of the 
differences with earlier conflicting 
reports.] Of great interest is the extension 
of the findings of ‘hypodopaminergia’ 
from striatal to both limbic and to 
thalamic regions (figure 1). In addition to 
the much-studied striatum, the thalamus 
is a major component of the fronto-
striatal circuits where DA-modulated 
dysfunction is often invoked as a basis for 
cognitive problems in ADHD (Swanson et 
al., 2007) and where the DA transporter 
(DAT) is normally so abundant (Telang et 
al., 1999; Garcia-Cabezas et al., 2007), 
figure 2). It may be noted that the usually 
extrasynaptic locus of DAT is here well 
suited to control the influence of DA on 
the moderate to dense 5-HT innervation 
of the thalamus from the raphe nuclei 
(Morrison and Foote, 1986; Vertes, 1991). 
The above reports are of particular 
interest as the authors related the 
neurochemical PET changes registered, 
with some of the clinical features of their 
patients. For example, the blunted limbic 
(raclopride-binding) response to  
Figure 1: 
 
Regions where PET measures of DAT levels differed between adults with/without ADHD (A) 
and the relationship of inattention severity to DAT level in these subjects (B) 
 A/ Regions centred on the nucleus accumbens and hypothalamus where levels of DAT 
were significantly higher in healthy controls than adults with ADHD 
 B/ Regression slopes between DAT availability (right and left putamen) and ratings of 
inattention (Conners scales) in adults with ADHD. They show severer symptoms at any given 
level of DAT in the patients. (modified after Volkow et al., 2007a) and reproduced with the 
permission of Elsevier) 
 
A/  
 
B/   
 
 
medication, and the DAT1 binding in the 
putamen were significantly related to 
ratings of inattention on the Conners scale 
(Volkow et al., 2007a, b: figure 1). 
The current state of genetic studies 
does not offer much support for unusual 
polymorphisms affecting D2/3 receptor 
function (but see Nyman et al., 2007), but 
does imply that variants of the DA D4 
receptor, abundant in mesocortical 
regions, and the DA transporter (DAT1), 
abundant in mesolimbic/striatal regions, 
are associated with features of ADHD. The 
former (D4) seems to be important for the 
 5 
“inattentive” and the latter (DAT1) for the 
“hyperactive-impulsive” part of the clinical 
spectrum of ADHD (Diamond, 2007). 
[Note: DAT1 removes most of the unused 
extracellular DA in subcortical regions, 
whereas in the cortices >60% of the DA is 
removed by the catabolic enzyme COMT.] 
Central to numerous studies of the 
DAT1, has been the association with ADHD 
of the 10-repeat-allele of a variable 
number tandem repeat (VNTR) in the 3'-
untranslated region of the DA transporter 
gene. Some recent meta-analyses have 
played down the strength of this 
association. However, the reason lies with 
a confound usually overlooked in most 
reports, namely that the 10-repeat allele 
concerned in fact tags a nearby functional 
variant, the 6-repeat-allele of another 
VNTR in intron 8. This has been replicated 
in the IMAGE cohort that now includes a 
total of 1159 children with ADHD 
(Asherson et al., 2007). 
 
Figure 2: 
 
Dense and uneven immunolabeling of DAT in the human thalamus is shown, and lies in 
proximity to the innervation from the raphe nuclei (see text). DAT labeling A/B in associative 
medio-dorsal (MD) and lateral posterior (LP) nuclei (calibration 400 µM), C/D in limbic 
antero-ventral (AV) and motor ventro-anterior (VAmc) and posterior ventrolateral (VLp) 
nuclei (calibration 40 µM): modified after Garcia-Cabezas et al., 2007 and reproduced with 
the permission of Elsevier. 
 
 
2.2. Serotonin (5-HT) 
Few have seriously investigated the 
putative involvement of 5-HT in ADHD. 
Thus, there are few studies with 
neuroimaging techniques to compare the 
potential contribution of 5-HT activity with 
that described for DA in the previous 
section. Hesse and colleagues (2006) 
report no evidence for unusual binding 
characteristics of the 5-HT transporter 
(SERT) in their SPECT study (
123
I-FP-CIT) of 
the midbrain and brainstem of adult ADHD 
patients. However, (Riikonen et al., 2005) 
used the radioligand 
123
I-labelled nor-CIT, 
which specifically labels SERT with a 10-
fold higher affinity than the DA 
transporter, in their study of children with 
ADHD and fetal alcohol syndrome. They 
reported significantly less binding (25%) in 
the anterior cingulate cortex, but found no 
reductions in the temporal cortices or in 
the midbrain. More studies are required 
to avoid the confounds of comorbidity, 
preferably with the use of high affinity 
ligands that are necessary to provide clear 
results (Elfving et al., 2007).  
Other approaches indeed suggest that 
some aspects of SERT activity do not 
function well in ADHD. For example, 
(Oades et al., 2002) describe an increased 
affinity (reduced Kd) for platelet SERT-
binding measured with paroxetine in 
children with ADHD. [The platelet model 
appears to mimic the situation in the CNS 
(Cheetham et al., 1993).] This was 
associated with the characteristically poor 
attention and performance shown on the 
stop-signal task that was also correlated 
with ratings of distractibility and 
impulsivity. This is illustrated in figure 3, 
which also shows the opposite 
relationship observed for ratings of 
(impulsive) outbursts of aggression. Much 
earlier reduced binding of 
3
H-imipramine 
to NA and 5-HT uptake sites was reported 
for prepubertal children with ADHD and 
conduct disorder (Stoff et al., 1987). 
Further, several genetic studies claim that 
short or long forms of the transport 
promoter region that show 
reduced/enhanced transcriptional 
efficiency (respectively) are preferentially 
transmitted in ADHD (Biederman and 
Faraone, 2005; Curran et al., 2005; Li et 
al., 2007). However, some recent negative 
findings (Wigg et al., 2006; Guimaraes et 
al., 2007) clearly underline the need to 
differentiate between subgroups in future 
investigations. A recent brief review of the 
heterogeneous genetics literature on 
other features of the 5-HT system (Oades, 
2007) concluded that there was tentative 
support for association of alleles 
associated with the 5-HT1B receptor in 
cases of the predominantly inattentive 
subtype, and with the 5-HT2A/C   receptor(s) 
in subjects showing more hyperactivity 
and impulsivity. This review also describes 
evidence for inefficient 5-HT synthesis in 
ADHD that relates to transmission of a 
variant for the enzyme tryptophan 
hydroxylase (TPH2). 
3. Putative dopamine and serotonin 
interactions in ADHD 
3.1 Introduction: 
The overlap of ascending 5-HT and DA 
projections to both subcortical and 
cortical territories, like the putative roles 
of 5 types of DA receptor and perhaps 22 
types of the 5-HT receptor are discussed in 
detail elsewhere in this volume (Di 
Matteo, 2008; Mengod, 2008; Steinbusch, 
2008). However, as yet, the only 
functional outcome one can discuss in the 
context of ADHD is that the numerous and 
varying types of interaction appear to 
have an effect, and that the nature of this 
effect can be described merely on a rather 
large scale with poor resolution. As a 
contribution of 5-HT to ADHD has largely 
been ignored, there is a near absence of 
studies designed to examine its potential 
specific interactions with DA. Thus this 
review largely focuses on those studies  
Figure 3:  
In children with ADHD, (A) the affinity (Kd) for 5-HT uptake in platelets vs. the 
probability of response inhibition on the stop-task (stop-signal 350 ms prior to the mean 
response time), (B) the probability of stop-task inhibition vs. the ratings of impulsivity on the 
Conners’ scale, and (C) the affinity of 5-HT uptake vs. Child behavior checklist (CBCL) 
rating of aggressive behavior (Modified after Oades et al., 2002 and reproduced with the 
permission of Taylor/Francis). 
 
that have at least considered both 
transmitters: where a change of activity 
reflecting both monoamines has been 
recorded, an interaction is inferred. 
Nonetheless such putative interactions 
are based on solid anatomical evidence for 
the frequent convergence of these two 
monoaminergic systems (Phelix and 
Broderick, 1995). It is perhaps useful in the 
following discussion to hold three 
categories or types of interaction in mind. 
At the level of the neuron or pathway, 
changes of DA activity can affect 5-HT 
responsivity (1), with inhibition in terminal 
regions (Consolo et al., 1996; Di Matteo, 
2008) or disinhibition at the autoreceptor 
 8 
level (Mendlin et al., 1999). Stimulation or 
blockade of 5-HT neurons can influence 
DA responsivity (2), especially though 
blockade or stimulation (respectively) of 
psychostimulant-induced release of 
mesolimbic DA (Porras et al., 2002; 
Esposito, 2008). Alternatively, a functional 
interaction may occur at a distance, 
mediated by an intermediate neuron (3). 
Some specific examples of these sorts 
of interaction are as follows. (1) Damage 
to DA systems in neonatal rats lead to a 
large increase of 5-HT release in the basal 
ganglia (Luthman et al., 1989). (2) 
Blockade of 5-HT2 binding sites leads to 
increased DA outflow as measured by PET 
records of raclopride binding in baboons 
(Dewey et al., 1995). These examples 
illustrate the traditional view of the 
mutual inhibition of the activity of these 
two monoamines. As models they are 
both pertinent to potential explanations of 
the situation in ADHD (see impulsive 
cognition and aggression, above). This 
disguises the nature of other forms of 
interaction that occur in detail, and vary 
with the pre- vs. postsynaptic location of 
different types of receptor in cell-body 
(midbrain) or mesolimbic/cortical 
projection regions (review:(Millan et al., 
2007).  
An important and significant example 
of influence “at a distance” (3) is the 
facilitation of ascending DA transmission 
via stimulation of 5-HT1b receptors on 
GABA interneurons in the midbrain (Millan 
et al., 2007). But there are numerous 
other potentially significant “influences at 
a distance”, as illustrated by the striofugal 
pathways to parts of the pallidum 
(Levesque and Parent, 2005). Not only can 
a major 5-HT input modulate the influence 
of DA activity directly in the organization 
of behavioral modules in the striatum, but 
it can also have a “second go” through the 
heavy innervation to the pallidum at the 
start of the final common pathway (Napier 
and Istre, 2007). Analogously, the motor 
cortices also receive a major input from 5-
HT projections whose activity facilitates 
gross motor output (Jacobs and Fornal, 
1995). Surprisingly, none of these features 
of CNS circuitry have received much 
attention in the context of the 
restlessness, hyperactivity and clumsiness 
often associated clinically with ADHD or in 
laboratory studies of impaired fine motor 
control (Meyer and Sagvolden, 2006; 
Rommelse et al., 2007). An indication that 
there is a DA/5-HT interaction affecting 
motor control is that the ratio of their 
metabolites measured in CSF has been 
reported to correlate positively with 
ratings of motor activity (Castellanos et al., 
1994). However, in this particular case 
inferences should be qualified by noting 
that the relationship reported was 
strongly driven by the DA metabolite. 
The concept of influence at a distance 
has widespread implications when one 
considers the 5-HT innervation extending 
from the midbrain raphe nuclei to a series 
of subcortical regions (e.g. habenula) or 
cortical territories (e.g. cingulate) that 
then feed back directly to the origin of DA 
pathways in the ventral tegmental area 
(Oades and Halliday, 1987). This principle 
also operates for regions innervated by 
DA. 
3.2 Studies on both dopamine and 
serotonin in investigations of ADHD 
3.2.1 Genetics:  
Meta-analysis of genetic studies of 
ADHD has shown support, from at least 
three reports each (Faraone et al., 2005), 
for an association between the disorder 
and variants of several DA and 5-HT 
receptors (D4, D5, DAT1, 5-HT1B and SERT). 
Arguably, more important and relevant to 
the present consideration of DA/5-HT 
interactions are findings from within one 
large cohort [IMAGE, (Brookes et al., 
2006)]. This is because reports of 
associations with DA and 5-HT variants 
 9 
within one cohort provide a good starting 
point for eventually demonstrating their 
joint importance in individuals. The IMAGE 
team found adjusted gene wide 
significance for variants affecting DA 
uptake (DAT1), 5-HT synthesis (TPH2) and 
monoamine breakdown (MAO-A) based 
on 674 families with 776 child and 
adolescent cases of ADHDct. Nominal 
significance extended to D4, 5-HT1E, and 
dopa decarboxylase (DDC) that is involved 
in both DA and 5-HT synthesis. In this 
study of 51 candidate genes involved in 
monoaminergic transmission, fatty acid 
synthesis and circadian rhythms, nominal 
significance extended to 12 other genes 
less relevant to this discussion, but 
importantly not to the remaining 33 
genes. Considering that a study of the 
heterogeneity in the IMAGE population 
demonstrated the appropriateness of the 
North European contribution to this 
cohort (Neale et al., 2007), there is a 
reasonably firm basis for claiming that 
aspects of both 5-HT and DA activity 
contribute to the variance in ADHD. 
Indeed our current family based 
association analyses of impulsivity in the 
IMAGE cohort suggest gene-wide 
significant associations for 5-HT1E (and 
adrenalin synthesis) alongside nominal 
indications of the relevance of variants for 
5-HT2A, TPH2, D4 and 5-HT1B, TPH2, D1 
genes in behavioral and cognitive 
impulsivity, respectively (in preparation). 
However, only now are various 
laboratories tackling the nature of the 
dependence of an individual phenotype on 
interactions between 5-HT and DA. 
Broadly supportive of part of the 
IMAGE study is the recent report from 
(Ribases et al., 2007) on adult and 
childhood cases of ADHD. They claim an 
association with ADHD for certain SNPs 
(single nucleotide polymorphisms) in the 
genes controlling expression of DDC 
(chromosome 7), the 5-HT2A receptor 
(chromosome 13) and the X-linked 
monoamine oxidase (MAO-B). Corrected 
significant results for DDC and 5-HT2A were 
based on 451 child and adult cases and for 
MAO on 188 adult cases. This is intriguing 
as DDC and MAO-B are involved in the 
synthesis and breakdown respectively of 
both DA and 5-HT. Indeed there is some 
marginally significant support elsewhere 
for the DDC result with variants reported 
from a similar location (Hawi et al., 2001). 
Neuroimaging studies also offer some 
support for anomalies in monoamine 
synthesis involving DDC. PET measures of 
fluorodopa, where interregional ratios 
index DDC activity, were reported to be 
reduced in both adult and childhood 
ADHD cases, albeit in different regions. 
Nonetheless these indices of DDC activity 
related to diagnostically relevant features, 
namely, the behavioral and hyperactive 
symptoms (Ernst et al., 1998; Ernst et al., 
1999). Using a simple additive-model, 
Ribases et al. estimated that the combined 
effect of their 3 risk haplotypes 
contributed 5.2% of the adult ADHD 
phenotypic variance and the DDC and 5-
HT2A genetic variants accounted for 2.3% 
of child ADHD variability.   
Few studies have looked for an 
association of MAO-B with ADHD, and 
these have found no association 
(Domschke et al., 2005). However, this 
region on the X chromosome bears further 
study as there is an extensive overlap for 
sequences determining MAO-A and MAO-
B. A number of polymorphisms for MAO-A 
and its promoter region have been 
examined and there are several reports of 
preferential transmission of longer, active 
and shorter, less active forms, depending 
on the putative etiology of the types of 
patient studied (Oades, 2007). 
In the current context, the finding of 
the over-representation of a specific 5-
HT2A   haplotype (G-C-C) in adult and child-
hood cases of the ADHDct subtype 
(Ribases et al., 2007), is of special interest 
 10 
as this receptor type is frequently located 
on DA neurons. While at least 5 other 
studies have not been able to find 
associations with ADHD for several 
variants affecting this receptor, there are a 
large number of SNPs available for study. 
An association with impulsivity on the 
Barratt rating scale in alcohol dependent 
patients has been described (Preuss et al., 
2001). Indeed, (Reuter et al., 2006) report 
that one allele (T102C) was significantly 
associated with ratings of hyperactivity 
and impulsivity in a group of healthy 
adults (see also (Nomura et al., 2006). This 
is intriguing as in the same cohort there 
were strong correlations for the met/met 
allele of the enzyme COMT (active in 
mesocortical DA breakdown) with 
hyperactive and impulsive as well as 
inattentive subgroups. This implies 
potentially a separate, as well as a joint, 
influence of the two monoamines on the 
phenotype. These finding are of further 
interest firstly because such ratings could 
apply to ADHDct and ADHDhi subtypes, 
secondly the association with ADHDhi 
provides an interesting counterpart to 
associations of the 5-HT1B receptor with 
the ADHDin subgroup (Hawi et al., 2002; 
Smoller et al., 2006; Oades, 2007), and 
thirdly, the results remind one of the 
blockade by 5-HT2A antagonists of hyper-
locomotion induced by DA stimulation in 
animals (O'Neill et al., 1999; Porras et al., 
2002; Bishop et al., 2005). The 5-HT1B and 
5-HT2A receptors are contrasted here as 
animal studies suggest that, respectively, 
they are frequently presynaptic and 
inhibitory, and postsynaptic and excitatory 
in location and function (Millan et al., 
2007).  
A number of genetic studies have been 
directed to SERT, and in particular, have 
concentrated on long and short forms in 
the promoter region. This is also nominally 
of interest to this analysis of DA/5-HT 
interactions, as SERT is also capable of 
transporting DA. Indeed, genetically 
speaking all 3 monoamine transporters 
share a 50% sequence homology 
(Gainetdinov and Caron, 2003). Some (but 
not all) studies of SERT transmission have 
found associations of short (Li et al., 2007) 
and long variants in the promoter region 
(Kent et al., 2002) or the 12 repeat allele 
in the intron 2 VNTR (Banerjee et al., 
2006) with ADHD expression. Oades 
(2007) suggested that the heterogeneity 
of results reported for these markers may 
reflect the need for defining more closely 
the subtype(s) and comorbidities 
expressed in the patients examined. For 
example, there is a well established 
relationship for externalizing behavior and 
conduct disorders often comorbid with 
ADHD with low 5-HT activity (Flory et al., 
2007; van Goozen et al., 2007), platelet 5-
HT uptake mechanisms (Stadler et al., 
2004) and long/short forms of the SERT 
promoter region (Cadoret et al., 2003). 
Variations of some of these measures also 
seem to reflect social stratification and 
geographic origin (Manuck et al., 2005; Li 
et al., 2007). However, only the study 
from Schmidt et al., (2007) has directly 
concerned the interaction with DA 
mechanisms. In their review of the 
literature they found that the presence of 
1-2 copies of the short allele of the SERT 
gene and the long allele (7-repeat allele) 
version of the DA D4 gene predicted 
internalizing- and externalizing-related 
behaviors, respectively. In their own work 
they reported that normal 7 year old 
children with this genetic combination did 
indeed show more externalizing and 
internalizing behavior than children with 
any other combination of long and short 
alleles. In contrast, those children with the 
long SERT form, as well as the long DA D4 
genotypes, had the lowest reported scores 
on internalizing & externalizing behaviors. 
Such an interaction suggests that the long 
SERT form could, in such circumstances, 
have a protective function. 
Evidence from genetic studies is 
 11 
starting to implicate 5-HT in 
neuroprotective and neuro-disruptive 
roles in ADHD. This could involve 
inhibitory and excitatory profiles under 
the control of receptors of the 5-HT1 and 
5-HT2 families. But as the results as yet 
remain heterogeneous, one cannot rule 
out that both may be implicated through a 
common etiological problem with 
monoamine synthesis (cf. DDC and TPH2 
results above). It is therefore natural that 
the present discussion should now 
proceed on to what is known about the 
activity of the neurotransmitter 5-HT 
itself. 
3.2.2 Neurochemistry 
It would be helpful for improving an 
understanding of the neurobiology of 
potential DA/5-HT interactions in ADHD to 
have measures of monoamine metabol-
ism, or at least the results of pharmacol-
ogical challenges on the release of 
hormones known to be controlled by 
these monoamines. These have naturally, 
for ethical reasons, been carried out rarely 
with minors, and the study of adults with 
ADHD remains in its infancy. 
Nonetheless, a few studies are relevant 
for the interest in the 5-HT1B and 5-HT2A 
sites implicated above from genetic work. 
A group of children showing both 
oppositional defiance disorder as well as 
ADHD were given a challenge dose of 
sumatripan that is an agonist at several 5-
HT1 binding sites, especially the 5-HT1B 
receptor (Snoek et al., 2002). Compared to 
control children, the patients proved to be 
twice as sensitive to the challenge dose in 
terms of the growth hormone response. 
While this result implicates the 5-HT1B site, 
it also suggests that the effect may have 
been achieved through excitatory 
postsynaptic sites rather than the more 
usual inhibitory presynaptic sites. In the 
second report Schulz et al. (1998) 
compared the cortisol and prolactin 
response to fenfluramine in ADHD 
children with and without fathers with 
alcohol problems (Schulz et al., 1998). 
While both groups showed similar 
increases of prolactin, only the former risk 
group showed a marked increase in 
cortisol. The authors point out that as 
both 5-HT2 and 5-HT1 sites influence 
cortisol release, but only the 5-HT2 sites 
affect prolactin, the conclusion must be 
that the 5-HT2A/C sites were not 
responding anomalously. Nonetheless 
considering that NA and 5-HT uptake 
blockade through desipramine can be 
clinically helpful (Gastfriend et al., 1985; 
Donnelly et al., 1986), and can also speed 
responses on a stop task and increase 
prolactin levels in ADHD children 
(Overtoom et al., 2003), taken together 
the results do suggest that the 5-HT2 site 
may influence processes normally 
approached by pharmacotherapy with 
methylphenidate alone. 
Together, these studies support a 
potential involvement of 5-HT activity in 
ADHD, arguably by way of 5-HT1 if not also 
via the 5-HT2 receptor family, at least in a 
sub-group of patients. However, it is 
important to ask whether unusual levels 5-
HT availability and metabolism at these 
receptors interact with DA (or vice versa) 
in ADHD. On the whole levels of the DA 
and 5-HT metabolites (homovanillic acid, 
HVA and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid, 5-
HIAA) measured in the CSF of patients are 
inter-correlated. If symptoms are severe 
then HVA levels are often high. If levels 
are high they predict a good response to 
psychostimulant treatment and 
subsequently fall: falling HVA levels are 
followed by those for 5-HIAA (Castellanos 
et al., 1996). HVA levels are not always 
high in ADHD, but low levels predict a 
poor treatment response. Low levels of 5-
HIAA in the CSF are associated with 
episodes of aggression in children, 
adolescents (Kruesi et al., 1990) and non-
human primates (Higley et al., 1996). 
Unexpectedly, these studies could report 
 12 
no relationship for HVA with aggression. 
By contrast, in aggressive rats anticipating 
an encounter, microdialysis of mesolimbic 
regions demonstrated rising DA and falling 
5-HT release (Ferrari et al., 2003). 
However, of course, the rodent and 
primate situations are not exactly 
comparable.       
It is interesting that the Castellanos CSF 
studies reported that there was no 
correlation between the monoamine 
metabolites they measured and indices of 
cognition and accuracy on a continuous 
performance task (CPT). However, they 
did find that the more controversial 
peripheral levels of the metabolites 
measured in urine correlated with those in 
the CSF. This lends support to the claim 
that urinary indices of monoamine 
metabolism are reflecting both somatic 
and brain sources.  Here, in urinary 
sources the HVA/5-HIAA ratio was 
reported as being significantly lower in 
ADHD children than in healthy controls 
(Oades and Müller, 1997). The skew 
seemed to be driven by the higher levels 
of the 5-HT metabolite. Uzbekov, (2006) 
confirmed not only that HVA excretion 
was relatively low in children with ADHD, 
but that response to treatment with 
sydnocarb was accompanied by markedly 
reduced levels of 5-HIAA. 
In summary it would seem that there is 
at least a subgroup of cases of ADHD 
where 5-HT systems are more active than 
normal and this can be partially corrected 
by stimulating DA activity. The discussion 
now proceeds to consider if these markers 
of the apparent involvement of 5-HT 
receptors and their activity in ADHD are 
associated with the activity of the brain 
and neuropsychological function where 
the DA innervation plays a role   
3.2.3 Neuropsychology (Neuroimaging) 
A recent review catalogued an 
increasing degree of influence of central 5-
HT activity in ADHD across the field of 
attention-related processes from the 
treatment of salient stimuli (exogenous 
attention), over the inter-regional 
selective processes (endogenous 
attention) to cognitive impulsivity that 
reflects poor executive attentional control 
(Oades, 2007). It is, therefore, reasonable 
to examine first whether these processes 
reflect cognitive mechanisms that 
methylphenidate also influences through 
promoting catecholaminergic activity? 
Certainly, on various versions of the 
CPT that reflect sustained attentional 
processes methylphenidate speeds 
responses, and the effect is blocked by 
antipsychotic agents (Levy, 1991; Levy and 
Hobbes, 1996). A contribution of DA is 
implicated. Slow latencies and more 
impulsive errors of commission in ADHD 
have been associated with the short allele 
of the DA D4 receptor (Manor et al., 
2002), a 148 bp allele of the D5 gene 
(Manor et al., 2004), the 9 and 10-repeat 
alleles of the DA transporter (Loo et al., 
2003), and the highly active valine allele of 
COMT (Eisenberg et al., 2003). In turn 
these have been associated with 
improvements following methylphenidate 
treatment (Manor et al., 2002, 2004). 
Indeed CPT indices of inattention and 
impulsivity have been linked to PET 
measures of DA receptor sensitivity and 
availability when challenged with 
methylphenidate (Rosa-Neto et al., 2005). 
[However, it is instructive to note that 
“improvement” does not mean that task 
performance normalized (Tucha et al., 
2005).] These reports complement the 
aforementioned contribution from 5-HT, 
where high activity (5-HIAA) impairs, and 
decreases relate to improved signal 
detection measures and performance 
(Oades, 2002; Overtoom et al., 2003). 
Poor task performance can be associated 
with a variant of the TPH2 gene 
influencing 5-HT performance (-703 G/T: 
Reuter et al., 2007). The potential for an 
interaction between these monoaminergic 
 13 
systems is supported by improvements 
after methylphenidate treatment in those 
ADHD cases carrying risk variants of TPH2 
for 5-HT synthesis, and who showed poor 
CPT performance in terms of speed of 
processing, reaction time variability and 
errors of omission (Manor et al., 2008). 
A recent report from Rubia et al. (Rubia 
et al., 2007) concentrated on a set of tasks 
in which ADHD subjects have often been 
reported to make errors of commission. 
They found that cognitive impulsivity and 
an increased variability of response was 
the dominant overall result from 
administering a battery of 6 tasks where 
each tested a different aspect of inhibitory 
control in young people with ADHD. Not 
only do such tasks habitually engage 
frontal regions in the right hemisphere, 
but Rubia and colleagues (Rubia et al., 
2004) showed that decreased activity in 
these regions in healthy subjects who had 
taken a tryptophan depleting drink, was 
associated with trials on which they had 
difficulty to withhold a response as 
required.  Several laboratories have found 
that after taking such a drink that restricts 
5-HT synthesis, normal people do 
experience a range of difficulties in making 
stimulus-response associations, acquiring 
a reversal learning task and indeed show 
an impulsive style (Park et al., 1994; 
Walderhaug et al., 2002). 
Delay avoidance or the preference for 
immediate, over delayed reward, even if it 
is larger, is a typical feature of childhood 
behavior and is exaggerated in many of 
those with ADHD: it has been described as 
the consequence of the failure of an 
impulsive child to engage effectively with 
delay-rich environments (Sonuga-Barke, 
2005). Arguably, the phenomenon is 
related to the steeper reinforcement 
gradients attributed to ADHD children 
(Sagvolden et al., 2005). That is, a stimulus 
and the appropriate response, have to 
occur closer together in time for an 
association to be acquired both in the 
animal model and for children with ADHD. 
There is wide agreement on the basis of 
animal studies, that the choice of, and 
switching to, an alternative stimulus for 
response depends on its salience, the 
perceived adaptiveness of a new situation 
or, very often, the anticipated reward: this 
involves bursts of DA activity (Oades, 
1985; Goto et al., 2007; Roesch et al., 
2007). It is less widely appreciated that to 
elicit such shifts requires region specific 5-
HT participation (Winstanley et al., 2006; 
van der Plasse and Feenstra, 2007). The 
role here is likely that of modulating the 
gain of the signal (Oades, 2006). While 
these authors emphasize mechanisms 
taking place in mesocortical projection 
regions (medial and orbito-frontal 
cortices: (Floden et al., 2008) it may be 
noted that treatments that also influence 
subcortical regions will be involved in 
these DA/5-HT interactions. Thus, if the 
DA transporter is knocked out in rodents, 
reinforcement as measured by cocaine 
administration (Mateo et al., 2004) or by 
conditioned place preference to 
amphetamine (Budygin et al., 2004) 
remains, until a 5-HT1A antagonist is 
administered. Indeed, stimulation of 5-
HT2C receptors actually attenuates the 
cocaine-induced release of DA from the 
rat’s nucleus accumbens (Navailles et al., 
2008) while 5-HT1B stimulation, as an 
example of gain modulation, enhances 
place preference responses for cocaine 
(Barot et al., 2007). Clearly both DA and 5-
HT systems were involved from the outset 
in mechanisms largely mediated by the 
mesolimbic system. Further, illustrating 
that the interaction can work both ways, 
Banks et al. (Banks et al., 2008) reported 
that SERT availability is markedly 
increased in monkeys experienced in 
cocaine self-administration. These results 
could pertain to the vulnerability of ADHD 
patients for succumbing to substance 
misuse, where a bidirectional risk for 
 14 
comorbidity is in fact apparent 
(Biederman et al., 2007b). 
However, underlying the reward 
aspects of risky decision making, there is 
an important component of information 
processing contributing to an “impulsive 
response style”. Errors of commission 
made during a CPT task are regarded 
conventionally as a classic indicator of 
cognitive impulsivity. If children with 
ADHD persist in making such errors then 
one should consider whether there is 
anything amiss with their processing of 
their responses, and the feedback 
designating the response as an error. 
Some authors report that the increase in 
response latency normally seen in the first 
correct response after an error is often 
missing in those with ADHD (Schachar et 
al., 2004), until treated with methyl-
phenidate (Krusch et al., 1996). It is then 
natural to ask about the Neurophysiol-
gical response in this situation. As yet, it is 
still too early to resolve the conflicting 
reports on the nature of the 
neurophysiological ERP responses record-
ed after the errors made by ADHD children 
(i.e. error-related negativity and 
positivity). Studied on different types of 
task, the negative response has been 
reported to be larger (Burgio-Murphy et 
al., 2007), normal (Wiersema et al., 2005) 
or reduced (Van Meel et al., 2007). 
However, a participation of both DA and 
5-HT projections in the neurophysiological 
response to an error of commission is 
evident in apparently healthy subjects. 
Here, the presence of one or two copies of 
the low-activity, short SERT promoter 
allele is associated with larger negative 
and positive ERPs following an error 
(Fallgatter et al., 2005). The early negative 
ERP response also becomes larger in 
subjects treated with amphetamine (De 
Bruijn et al., 2004).  
This section has indicated that while DA 
and 5-HT interact in some of the 
endogenous mechanisms involved in 
selecting information for further 
processing, the best defined of these incur 
executive attentional control, where poor 
function results in cognitive impulsivity 
and variability. 
3.3 Studies of Medication show signs 
of interactions in ADHD 
Given that that the efficacy of 
catecholamine reuptake blockade in ADHD 
is well established (section 2), it is 
appropriate to consider evidence about 
medication that affects the 5-HT system. 
There is considerable anecdotal experi-
ence suggesting that venlafaxine, an 
inhibitor at SERT and to a lesser degree 
the NA transporter (Gould et al., 2006), 
can present an effective treatment, 
especially with adult patients with ADHD 
(Hedges et al., 1995; Findling et al., 1996; 
Popper, 2000). Open trials report a 
response rate of 50-78% that is 
comparable with psychostimulants 
(Findling et al., 2007; Maidment, 2003). 
The primary reason for its use is reflected 
in its antidepressant profile. But as noted 
above, while lability of mood and affect is 
often a feature of ADHD, so also is the 
variability of behavior in a wider context. 
Indeed, the control by 5-HT activity of 
impulsive responses, whether of a 
cognitive or aggressive nature, represents 
a potential target for pharmacotherapy, 
albeit reflecting a need for alterations in 
different directions. Past experience with 
desipramine (inhibitor of NA and 5-HT 
uptake: Maidment 2003) and tranyl-
cypromine (two enantiomers involved in 
inhibition of MAO and inter-ference with 
monoamine uptake (Baker et al., 1991) is 
also relevant even though their 
prescription is now restricted due to the 
adverse side effects. 
Evidence pointing to the relevance of 5-
HT/DA interactions comes from 
pharmacological and neurobiological 
studies. Weikop and colleagues 
Figure 4: 
 
(a) Frontal 5-HT levels after venlafaxine alone (10 mg/kg, ip at 0 min) or with GBR12909 (10 
mg/kg, sc at -20 min), or WAY-100635 (0.1 mg/kg, sc at -20 min) or all 3 substances. The 
inset shows the effects of 3 doses of venlafaxine co-administered with GBR12909 with 
respect to the area under the curve (0-160 min) for controls. (b) Frontal DA levels after the 
same 4 treatment as (a). The inset shows the effects of 3 doses of GBR12909 co-administered 
with venlafaxine (Modified after Weikop et al., 2007a and reproduced with the permission of 
Sage Publishers) 
 
 
 
 
 
(Weikop et al., 2007a, b) reported initially 
surprising results from microdialysis 
experiments using the frontal cortex of 
rats following combinations of treatments 
with agents that block reuptake. 
Adjunctive treatment of the specific 5-HT 
reuptake inhibitor citalopram with 
methylphenidate resulted in a large 
increase of DA over that recorded 
following methylphenidate treatment 
alone, but a marked reduction of 5-HT 
release compared to treatment with 
citalopram alone. These effects were not 
evident in the nigrostriatal system. The 
authors suggested that the effect on DA 
could reflect a local elevation of 5-HT tone 
resulting in disinhibition in the ventral 
tegmental area. Normally, such an 
autoreceptor (or presynaptic) effect might 
be expected to stimulate 5-HT1A receptors 
that would increase DA release, and 
increase burst firing in the mesolimbic and 
mesocortical projections (Millan et al., 
2007). With systemic administration of 
other 5-HT uptake inhibitors, post-
synaptic effects of 5-HT1 stimulation can 
be expected that would result in 
decreased DA neuronal activity (Di Mascio 
et al., 1998). Weikop et al. (2007a) also 
reported on the effect of blocking DA 
reuptake (with GBR 12909) at the same 
time as treating their animals with 
systemic venlafaxine. GBR 12909 alone 
had no effect on mesocortical monoamine 
levels. However, venlafaxine alone can 
increase DA, NA and 5-HT levels by 136-
256%, reminiscent of the effect of 
tranylcypromine, while inhibiting firing in 
the dorsal raphe and locus ceruleus 
(Haddjeri et al., 2004).  The combination 
(as above) raised DA levels and reduced 5-
HT levels further (figure 4). As noted 
above, the underlying mechanism could 
reflect postsynaptic activation of receptors 
in the 5-HT1/3/7 families, blockade of the 5-
HT2A site and/or long-loop feedback to 
GABA neurons in the brain stem nuclei 
(Weikop et al. 2007a). Direct evidence is 
still required. Whichever way the studies 
are viewed, there is the strong implication 
that venlafaxine can influence DA/5-HT 
interactions in a way that can result in 
improvements in ADHD. There remain 
many questions of how this happens in 
detail. 
It is noteworthy that a PET study of the 
effect of venlafaxine on brain glucose 
metabolism, which naturally focused on 
depressed patients, described marked 
decreases of metabolic activity in the 
orbito-frontal and medial frontal regions 
(Kennedy et al., 2007). This is of interest, 
firstly because these regions overlap with 
those found in animal studies of DA and 5-
HT activity changes in impulsive behavior 
on delayed reinforcement tasks 
(Winstanley et al., 2006; section 3.2.3). 
Secondly, also on the topic of impulsive 
responses, the effect of tryptophan 
depletion in young healthy adults (Rubia 
et al., 2004, see above) not only reduced 
activity in these frontal regions, but like 
the subjects of Kennedy and colleagues, 
increased right occipito-temporal activity. 
Lastly, also on the subject of energy 
metabolism, it seems appropriate to 
mention one hypothetical locus for DA/5-
HT interactions in ADHD that has received 
hardly any attention. Russell et al. (2006) 
proposed a re-direction of research effort 
to achieve a better understanding of the 
energy supply via the lactate shuttle from 
glia to neurons. They suggested that the 
variability of behavioral responsiveness in 
ADHD, previously mentioned in associ-
ation with impulsivity, could be explained 
by a lack of energy from astrocyte sources 
to sustain rapid or burst firing in neurons 
when required. They also extended the 
hypothesis to account for delayed 
maturation and myelination in the CNS of 
those with ADHD (Shaw et al., 2007) and 
attributed this to a lack of energy and 
precursor supply from the oligodendro-
cytes. To understand the relevance here it 
 17 
is important to realize that most DA 
receptors have been localized on these 
glial cells [D1, D3, D4, D5: (Miyazaki et al., 
2004)]. Increased levels of catechol-
amines, facilitated by methylphenidate 
treatment, stimulate glycolysis (Todd and 
Botteron, 2001). So what is the function of 
the 5-HT receptors also identified on 
astrocytes, namely 5-HT1A, B, D, F; 5-HT2A, B, C; 
5-HT6 and 5-HT7  (Hirst et al., 1998; 
Doherty and Pickel, 2001)?  
The question of the nature of the 
function of monoaminergic binding sites 
on glia has hardly been tackled. However, 
it is not surprising that initial results 
suggest that the activation of 5-HT1A sites 
in the amygdala and prefrontal regions 
can tone down the release of lactate 
stimulated by an environmental stressor 
(Uehara et al., 2006). This was 
demonstrated by blockade of the effects 
of tandospirone with a specific 5-HT1A 
antagonist. However, as the antagonist did 
not interfere with the similar effects of 
perospirone, it is possible that the affinity 
of this drug for 5-HT2A and D2 sites may 
have come into play and also modulated 
the supply of energy. Also relevant in the 
context of this section, are the effects 
reported to follow treatment of an 
astroglia-microglia culture with 
venlafaxine (Vollmar et al., 2007). They 
found that after provoking an 
inflammatory situation, venlafaxine 
promoted an augmentation of anti-
inflammatory cytokines (TGF-β) and 
reduced levels of the pro-inflammatory 
cytokines (IL-6 and IFN-γ). Thus, it would 
seem likely that venlafaxine exerted anti-
inflammatory effects that could have been 
due to the increased levels of 
monoamines that the treatment induced. 
The potential significance for ADHD is that 
a predominance of the pro-inflammatory 
cytokines would otherwise bias the 
metabolism of tryptophan towards 
neurotoxic metabolites such as quinolinic 
acid (Myint et al., 2007). 
In this section the idea has been put 
forward that combining pharmacological 
treatments that influence both the DA and 
5-HT systems may have differential even 
opposite effects on the release and 
availability of these two monoamines, and 
that this can be associated with beneficial 
consequence for ADHD pathology. 
However, there is still a need for 
controlled studies of this claim. A further 
challenge requiring detailed study is to 
find out whether the purported 
consequences of DA and 5-HT uptake 
blockade result primarily from neuronal 
neurophysiology and/or glial energetics.   
4. Discussion and Conclusions 
For a consideration of 5-HT/DA 
interactions and their putative dysfunction 
in ADHD there are 3 major CNS territories 
of interest, the mesostriatal, the 
mesolimbic and the mesocortical. In the 
mesostriatal (and meso-thalamic) domain 
there are two features of special 
neurobiological interest relating to the 
nature of DA/5-HT interactions. Compared 
to the other DA projection systems, this is 
where the distribution of the DA 
transporter predominates. This is also 
where the 5-HT innervation primarily 
derives from the dorsal raphe. The 
anatomical nature of this input differs 
from that deriving from the median raphe 
in that it is construed to be better at 
volume control than at advancing specific 
synaptic control of the target regions 
(Vertes, 1991; Michelsen et al., 2007).  
The mesostriatal/thalamic mode of 
action contrasts with the situation in 
mesocortical projection regions. Here, 
extracellular DA availability is more under 
the control of synaptic COMT, and the 
release of 5-HT, mostly of median raphe 
origin, is more localized with the aid of 
clusters of boutons around the target 
neurons (Michelsen et al., 2007). The 
characteristics of mesolimbic structures lie 
between these two extremes, with the 
 18 
innervation of specific parts of the 
hippocampus or amygdala arising 
predominantly from one or the other 
raphe complex (Steinbusch, 2008). The 
generalizations proposed here must be 
tempered by an awareness of a 
considerable overlap of these two modes 
of innervation. For example, far more 5-HT 
of dorsal raphe origin is released in the 
frontal than in posterior cortices: there is 
an inverse trend for 5-HT with origin in the 
median raphe. 
One of the more salient difficulties in 
focusing on the contribution of 5HT/DA 
interactions in ADHD is the evident 
contribution of components of 5-HT 
controlled processes to the expression of 
frequently comorbid conditions such as 
conduct disorder (and its associated 
externalizing, aggressive characteristics). 
Short variants of the SERT promoter are 
associated with lower levels of SERT 
expression and high levels of extrasynaptic 
5-HT. These features have been reported 
to have some association with signs of 
aggression and conduct disorder in young 
males (Beitchman et al., 2006; Cadoret et 
al., 2003) but also, infrequently, with 
ADHD (Cadoret et al., 2003, Li et al. 2007). 
In view of the unequivocal association of 
ADHD and features of the DA system, one 
might speculate that a search for genetic 
associations between aspects of both 
monoamines and young people diagnosed 
with ADHD versus conduct disorder would 
help disentangle the relative contributions 
of these two monoamines. Perhaps the 
tagging of function to the COMT gene is an 
example. For example, COMT deficient 
mice, if male, are aggressive, rather as in 
humans (Gogos et al., 1998): this forms a 
parallel to the association of the met allele 
in Chinese ADHD patients, if male (Qian et 
al., 2003). 
This review describes evidence for a 
role for receptors belonging to the 5-HT1 
and 5-HT2 families of receptors in the 
interaction between the 5-HT and DA 
projection systems, and in some of the 
dysfunctions evident in ADHD. 
Descriptions of clearly too much or too 
little activity are often difficult to elucidate 
where it remains uncertain whether post- 
or pre-synaptic activity predominates, or 
an inhibitory interneuron permits 
disinhibition in the control of specific 
functions. Each is possible in the context 
of the expression of ADHD in an individual 
on the one hand, as comorbid with 
conduct disorder or, in another individual 
as being of the inattentive type. This has 
been illustrated by the contrast of 
behavioral versus cognitive impulsivity. 
More detailed neurobiological studies are 
necessary. Nonetheless, an understanding 
of the basic anatomical features (above) 
does provide a basis for prediction and 
further detailed investigation. For 
example, immunocytochemical work 
shows that more 5-HT1A labeled dendrites 
in the ventral tegmental area are found in 
the nucleus parabrachialis than the 
nucleus paranigralis (Doherty and Pickel, 
2001). This suggests that 5-HT1A 
stimulation is more likely to influence 
mesocortical than subcortical DA function. 
Indeed, stimulation of these sites can have 
anomalous influences on DA function and 
executive attentional processes, such as 
those impaired in ADHD. 
Until recently clinicians have seen little 
need to improve on the catecholaminergic 
model for explaining the features of 
ADHD. Recent genetic and neuroimaging 
studies, however, provide evidence for 
separate contributions of altered DA and 
5-HT function in this disorder. Genetic 
studies imply that for both DA and 5-HT 
systems variants may frequently occur in 
ADHD for neurotransmitter uptake (DAT1, 
SERT), synthesis (TPH2, DDC) and 
breakdown functions (MAO and perhaps 
COMT). The mesolimbic (striatal) 
distribution of DAT1 and the mesocortical 
abundance of D4 binding sites, both 
 19 
strongly implicated in ADHD, draw 
attention to the possibility of differential 
contributions from the 5-HT system. Here 
the evidence points not so much to region 
specific anomalies as a differentiation in 
terms of inhibitory/facilitatory pre/ 
postsynaptic location of receptors in the 5-
HT1 and 5-HT2 families. Whether these 
receptor-based changes are secondary to 
the processes controlling transmitter 
availability is a question that remains to be 
answered. While levels of activity and 
metabolism (HVA and 5-HIAA) are often 
correlated, this may well flow from a 
starting point where 5-HT activity is 
anomalously higher or lower than the 
generally lower than normal levels for DA. 
It appears that perhaps both situations 
may arise reflecting different subgroups of 
ADHD, and where impulsive 
characteristics reflect externalizing 
behavior or cognitive impulsivity. This 
differentiation on a dimensional level 
however has yet to be studied 
systematically on the nosological level.
References: 
Abikoff, H. B., Hechtman, L., Klein, R. G., 
Gallagher, R., Fleiss, K., Etcovitch, J., 
Cousins, L., Greenfield, B., Maertin, D., 
and Pollack, S. (2004) Social Functioning 
in Children With ADHD Treated With 
Long-Term Methylphenidate and 
Multimodal Psychosocial Treatment. J 
Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiat 43, 
820-829. 
Asherson, P., Brookes, K.-J., Franke, B., 
Chen, W., Gill, M., Ebstein, R. P., 
Buitelaar, J., Banaschewski, T., Sonuga-
Barke, E. J. S., Eisenberg, J., Manor, I., 
Miranda, A., Oades, R. D., Roeyers, H., 
Rothenberger, A., Sergeant, J. A., 
Steinhausen, H.-C., and Faraone, S. V. 
(2007) Confirmation that a specific 
haplotype of the dopamine transporter 
gene is associated with combined type 
ADHD. Am J Psychiat 164, 674-677. 
Asherson, P. and Image Consortium (2004) 
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
in the post-genomic era. Eur Child 
Adolesc Psychiat 13, 50-66. 
Baker, G. B., Bornstein, R. A., Rouget, A. C., 
Ashton, S. E., Van Muyden, J. C., and 
Coutts, R. T. (1991) Phenylethyl-
aminergic mechanisms in attention-
deficit disorder. Biol Psychiat 29, 15-22. 
Banerjee, E., Sinha, S., Chatterjee, A., 
Gangopdhyay, P. K., Singh, M., and 
Nandogopal, K. (2006) A family-based 
study of Indian subjects from Kolkata 
reveals allelic association of the 
serotonin transporter intron-2 (STin2) 
polymorphism and attention-deficit-
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Am J 
Med Genet part B 141, 361-366. 
Banks, M. L., Czoty, P. W., Gage, H. D., 
Bounds, M. C., Garg, P. K., Garg, S., and 
Nader, M. A. (2008) Effects of Cocaine 
and MDMA Self-Administration on 
Serotonin Transporter Availability in 
Monkeys. Neuropsychopharmacol 33, 
219-225. 
Barot, S. K., Ferguson, S. M., and 
Neumaier, J. F. (2007) 5-HT1B receptors 
in nucleus accumbens efferents 
enhance both rewarding and aversive 
effects of cocaine. Eur J Neurosci 25, 
3125-3131. 
Beitchman, J. H., Baldasarra, L., Mik, H., De 
Luca, V., King, N., Bender, D., 
Ehtesham, S., and Kennedy, J. L. (2006) 
Serotonin Transporter Polymorphisms 
and Persistent, Pervasive Childhood 
Aggression. Am J Psychiat 163, 1103-
1105. 
Biederman, J. and Faraone, S. V. (2005) 
Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. 
Lancet 366, 237-248. 
Biederman, J., Faraone, S. V., Monuteaux, 
M., Bober, M., and Cadogen, E. (2004) 
 20 
Gender effects on Attention-
Deficit/Hyperactivity disorder in adults, 
revisited. Biol Psychiat 55, 692-700. 
Biederman, J., Mick, E. O., Surman, C., 
Doyle, R., Hammerness, P., Michel, E., 
Martin, J., and Spencer, T. J. (2007a) 
Comparative acute efficacy and 
tolerability of OROS and immediate 
release formulations of methyl-
phenidate in the treatment of adults 
with attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder. BMC Psychiatry 7, 49. 
Biederman, J., Petty, C. R., Wilens, T. E., 
Fraire, M. G., Purcell, C. A., Mick, E., 
Monuteaux, M. C., and Faraone, S. V. 
(2007b) Familial Risk Analyses of 
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder 
and Substance Use Disorders. Am J 
Psychiat doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2007. 
07030419. 
Bishop, C., Daut, G. S., and Walker, P. D. 
(2005) Serotonin 5-HT2A but not 5-HT2C 
receptor antagonism reduces hyper-
locomotor activity induced in 
dopamine-depleted rats by striatal 
administration of the D1 agonist SKF 
82958. Neuropharmacol 49, 350-358. 
Brookes, K.-J., Xu, X., Chen, W., Zhou, K., 
Neale, B. M., Lowe, N., Aneley, R., 
Franke, B., Gill, M., Ebstein, R. P., 
Buitelaar, J., Sham, P., Cambell, D., 
Knight, J., Andreou, P., Altink, M., 
Arnold, R., Boer, F., Buschgens, C., 
Butler, L., Christiansen, H., Feldman, L., 
Fleischman, K., Fliers, E., Howe-Forbes, 
R., Goldfarb, A., Heise, A., Gabriels, I., 
Lubetzki, I., Marco, R., Medad, S., 
Minderaa, R. B., Mulas, F., Müller, U. C., 
Mulligan, A., Rabin, K., Rommelse, N. N. 
J., Sethna, V., Sorohan, J., Uebel, H., 
Psychogiou, L., Weeks, A., Barrett, R., 
Craig, I., Banaschewski, T., Sonuga-
Barke, E. J. S., Eisenberg, J., Kuntsi, J., 
Manor, I., McGuffin, P., Miranda, A., 
Oades, R. D., Plomin, R., Roeyers, H., 
Rothenberger, A., Sergeant, J. A., 
Steinhausen, H.-C., Taylor, E. A., 
Thompson, M. J., Faraone, S. V., 
Asherson, P., and Johansson, L. (2006) 
Analysis of 51 candidate genes in DSM-
IV combined subtype attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder: association 
signals in DRD4, DAT1 and 16 other 
genes. Mol Psychiat 11, 934-953. 
Budygin, E. A., Brodie, M. S., Sotnikova, T. 
D., Mateo, Y., John, C. E., Cyr, M., 
Gainetdinov, R. R., and Jones, S. R. 
(2004) Dissociation of rewarding and 
dopamine transporter-mediated 
properties of amphetamine. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci (USA) 101, 7781-7786. 
Buitelaar, J. K., Barton, J., Danckaerts, M., 
Friedrichs, E., Gillberg, C., Hazell, P. L., 
Hellemans, H., Johnson, M., Kalverdijk, 
L. J., Masi, G., Michelson, D., Revol, O., 
San Sebastian, J., Zhang, S., and Zuddas, 
A. (2006) A comparison of North 
American versus non-North American 
ADHD study populations. Eur Child 
Adolesc Psychiat 15, 177-181. 
Burgio-Murphy, A., Klorman, R., Shaywitz, 
S. E., Fletcher, J. M., Marchione, K. E., 
Holahan, J., Stuebing, K. K., Thatcher, J. 
E., and Shaywitz, B. A. (2007) Error-
related event-related potentials in 
children with attention-deficit 
hyperactivity disorder, oppositional 
defiant disorder, reading disorder, and 
math disorder. Biol Psychol 75, 75-86. 
Cadoret, R. J., Langbehn, D., Caspers, K., 
Troughton, E. P., Yucuis, R., Sandhu, H. 
K., and Philibert, R. (2003) Associations 
of the serotonin transporter promoter 
polymorphism with aggressivity, 
attention deficit, and conduct disorder 
in an adoptee population. Compr 
Psychiat 44, 88-101. 
Castellanos, F. X., Elia, J., Kruesi, M. J. P., 
Gulotta, C. S., Mefford, I. N., Potter, W. 
Z., Ritchie, G. F., and Rapoport, J. L. 
(1994) Cerebrospinal fluid monoamine 
metabolites in boys with attention-
deficit hyperactivity disorder. Psychiat 
 21 
Res 52, 305-316. 
Castellanos, F. X., Elia, J., Kruesi, M. J. P., 
Marsh, W. L., Gulotta, C. S., Potter, W. 
Z., Ritchie, G. F., Hamburger, S. D., and 
Rapoport, J. L. (1996) Cerebrospinal 
fluid homovanillic acid predicts 
behavioral response to stimulants in 45 
boys with attention deficit/ 
hyperactivity disorder. Neuropsycho-
pharmacol 14, 125-137. 
Cheetham, S. C., Viggers, J. A., Slater, N. 
A., Heal, D. J., and Buckett, W. R. (1993) 
[
3
H] Paroxetine binding in rat frontal 
cortex strongly correlates with [
3
H] 5HT 
uptake: effect of administration of 
various antidepressant treatments. 
Neuropharmacol 32, 737-743. 
Committee on children and disabilities and 
committee on drugs (1996) Medication 
for children with attentional disorders. 
Pediatr 98, 301-304. 
Consolo, S., Ramponi, S., Ladinsky, H., and 
Baldi, G. (1996) A critical role for D1 
receptors in the 5-HT1a mediated 
facilitation of in vivo acetylcholine 
release in rat frontal cortex. Brain Res 
707, 320-325. 
Curran, S., Purcell, S., Craig, I., Asherson, 
P., and Sham, P. (2005) The Serotonin 
Transporter Gene as a QTL for ADHD. 
Am J Med Genet 134B, 42-47. 
De Bruijn, E. R. A., Hulstijn, W., Verkes, R. 
J., Ruigt, G. S. F., and Sabbe, B. G. C. 
(2004) Drug-induced stimulation and 
suppression of action monitoring in 
healthy volunteers. Psychopharmacol 
177, 151-160. 
Dewey, S. L., Smith, G. S., Logan, J., Ding, 
Y.-S., King, P., Pappas, N. S., Brodie, J. 
D., and Ashby, C. R. (1995) Serotonergic 
modulation of striatal dopamine 
measured with positron emission 
tomography (PET) and in vivo 
microdialysis. J Neurosci 15, 821-829. 
Di Mascio, M., Di Giovanni, G., Di Matteo, 
V., Prisco, S., and Esposito, E. (1998) 
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
reduce the spontaneous activity of 
dopaminergic neurons in the ventral 
tegmental area. Brain Res Bull 46, 547-
554. 
Di Matteo, V. (2008) Serotonin/dopamine 
interactions: neurochemical evidence. 
In: Serotonin-dopamine interaction: 
Experimental evidence and therapeutic 
relevance, Eds G. Di Giovanni, V. Di 
Matteo, E. Esposito. 
Diamond, A. (2007) Consequences of 
Variations in Genes that affect 
Dopamine in Prefrontal Cortex. Cereb 
Cortex 17, i161-i170. 
Doherty, M. D. and Pickel, V. M. (2001) 
Targeting of serotonin 1a receptors to 
dopaminergic neurons within the 
parabrachial subdivision of the ventral 
tegmental area in rat brain. J Comp 
Neurol 433, 390-400. 
Domschke, K., Sheehan, K., Lowe, N., 
Kirley, A., Mullins, C., O'Sullivan, R., 
Freitag, C., Becker, T., Conroy, J., 
Fitzgerald, M., Gill, M., and Hawi, Z. 
(2005) Association Analysis of the 
Monoamine Oxidase A and B Genes 
With Attention Deficit Hyperactivity 
Disorder (ADHD) in an Irish Sample: 
Preferential Transmission of the MAO-A 
941G Allele to Affected Children. Am J 
Med Genet 134B, 110-114. 
Donnelly, M., Zametkin, A. J., Rapoport, J. 
L., Ismond, D. R., Weingartner, H., Lane, 
E., Oliver, J., Linnoila, M., and Potter, 
W. Z. (1986) Treatment of childhood 
hyperactivity with desipramine: plasma 
drug concentration, cardiovascular 
effects, plasma and urinary 
catecholamine levels, and clinical 
response. Clin Pharmacol Ther 39, 72-
81. 
Eisenberg, J., Mei-Tal, G., Steinberg, A., 
Tartakovsky, E., Zohar, A., Gritsenko, I., 
Nemanov, L., and Ebstein, R. P. (2003) 
 22 
Haplotype relative risk study of 
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) 
and attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD): association of the 
high-enzyme activity Val allele with 
ADHD impulsive-hyperactive pheno-
type. Am J Med Genet 88, 497-502. 
Elfving, B., Madsen, and Knudsen, G. M. 
(2007) Neuroimaging of the serotonin 
reuptake site requires high-affinity 
ligands. Synapse 61, 882-888. 
Ernst, M., Zametkin, A. J., Matochik, J. A., 
Jons, P. H., and Cohen, R. M. (1998) 
DOPA decarboxylase activity in 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
adults. A [fluorine-18] fluorodopa 
positron emission tomography study. J 
Neurosci 18, 5901-5907. 
Ernst, M., Zametkin, A. J., Matochik, J. A., 
Pascualvaca, D., Jons, P. H., and Cohen, 
R. M. (1999) High midbrain [18F]DOPA 
accumulation in children with attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder. Am J 
Psychiat 156, 1209-1215. 
Esposito, E. (2008) Serotonin/dopamine 
interactions: electrophysiological 
evidence. In: Serotonin-dopamine 
interaction: Experimental evidence and 
therapeutic relevance, Eds G. Di 
Giovanni, V. Di Matteo, E. Esposito. 
Fallgatter, A. J., Herrmann, M. J., 
Roemmler, J., Ehlis, A.-C., Wagener, A., 
Heidrich, A., Ortega, G., Zeng, Y., and 
Lesch, K.-P. (2005) Allelic variation of 
serotonin transporter function 
modulates the brain electrical response 
for error processing. Neuropsycho-
pharmacol 29, 1506-1511. 
Faraone, S. V., Perlis, R. H., Doyle, A. E., 
Smoller, J. W., Goralnick, J. J., 
Holmgren, M. A., and Sklar, P. (2005) 
Molecular Genetics of Attention Deficit 
Hyperactivity Disorder. Biol Psychiat 57, 
1313-1323. 
Faraone, S. V., Sergeant, J. A., Gillberg, C., 
and Biederman, J. (2003) The 
worldwide prevalence of ADHD: is it an 
American condition? World Psychiatry 
2, 104-113. 
Ferrari, P. F., Van Erp, A. M., Tornatzky, 
W., and Miczek, K. A. (2003) Accumbal 
dopamine and serotonin in anticipation 
of the next aggressive episode in rats. 
Eur J Neurosci 17, 371-378. 
Findling, R. L., Greenhill, L. L., McNamara, 
N. K., Demeter, C. A., Kotler, L. A., 
O'Riordan, M. A., Myers, C., and Reed, 
M. D. (2007) Venlafaxine in the 
treatment of children and adolescents 
with attention-deficit/hyperactivity dis-
order. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol 
17, 433-445. 
Findling, R. L., Schwartz, M. A., Flannery, 
D. J., and Manos, M. J. (1996) 
Venlafaxine in adults with attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder: an open 
clinical trial. J Clin Psychiat 58, 178-179. 
Floden, D., Alexander, M. P., Kubu, C. S., 
and Stuss, D. T. (2008) Impulsivity and 
risk-taking behavior in focal frontal lobe 
lesions. Neuropsychologia 46, 213-223. 
Flory, J. D., Newcorn, J. H., Miller, C., 
Harty, S., and Halperin, J. M. (2007) 
Serotonergic function in children with 
attention - deficit hyperactivity disorder 
Relationship to later antisocial 
personality disorder. Br J Psychiat 190, 
410-414. 
Gainetdinov, R. R. and Caron, M. G. (2003) 
Monoamine transporters: from genes 
to behavior. Ann Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 
43, 261-284. 
Garcia-Cabezas, M. A., Rico, B., Sanchez-
Gonzalez, M. A., and Cavada, C. (2007) 
Distribution of the dopamine 
innervation in the macaque and human 
thalamus. Neuroimage 34, 965-984. 
Gastfriend, D. R., Biederman, J., and 
Jellinek, M. S. (1985) Desipramine in 
the treatment of attention deficit 
 23 
disorder in adolescents. Psychopharm-
acol Bull 21, 144-145. 
Gogos, J. A., Morgan, M., Luine, V. N., 
Santha, M., Ogawa, S., Pfaff, D. W., and 
Karayiorgou, M. (1998) Catechol-O-
methyltransferase-deficient mice 
exhibit sexually dimorphic changes in 
catecholamine levels and behavior. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci (USA) 95, 9991-9996. 
Goto, Y., Otani, S., and Grace, A. A. (2007) 
The Yin and Yang of dopamine release: 
a new perspective. Neuropharmacol 53, 
583-587. 
Gould, G. C., Altamirano, A. V., Javors, M. 
A., and Frazer, A. (2006) A Comparison 
of the Chronic Treatment Effects of 
Venlafaxine and Other Antidepressants 
on Serotonin and Norepinephrine 
Transporters. Biol Psychiat 59, 408-414. 
Gualtieri, C. T. and Johnson, L. G. (2008) 
Medications Do Not Necessarily 
Normalize Cognition in ADHD Patients. 
J Atten Disord 11, 459-469. 
Guimaraes, A. P. M., Zeni, C., Polanczyk, G. 
V., Genro, J. P., Roman, T., Rohde, L. A., 
and Hutz, M. H. (2007) Serotonin Genes 
and Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity 
Disorder in a Brazilian Sample: 
Preferential Transmission of the HTR2A 
452His Allele to Affected Boys. Am J 
Med Genet Part B 144B, 69-73. 
Haddjeri, N., Fare, C., Lucas, G., Mnie-
Filali, O., Astier, B., Renaud, B., Blier, P., 
and Debonnel, G. (2004) In-vivo 
modulation of central 5-
hydroxytryptamine (5-HT1A) receptor-
mediated responses by the cholinergic 
system. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 7, 
391-399. 
Hawi, Z., Dring, M., Kirley, A., Foley, D., 
Kent, L., Craddock, N., Asherson, P., 
Curran, S., Gould, A., Richards, S., 
Lawson, D., Pay, H., Turic, D., Langley, 
K., Owen, M., O'Donovan, M., Thapar, 
A., Fitzgerald, M., and Gill, M. (2002) 
Serotonergic system and attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): a 
potential susceptibility locus at the 5-
HT1B receptor gene in 273 nuclear 
families from a multi-centre sample. 
Mol Psychiat 7, 718-725. 
Hawi, Z., Foley, D., Kirley, A., McCarron, 
M., Fitzgerald, M., and Gill, M. (2001) 
Dopa decarboxylase gene 
polymorphisms and attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): no 
evidence for association in the Irish 
population. Mol Psychiatry 6, 420-424. 
Hedges, D., Reimherr, F. W., Rogers, A., 
Strong, R., and Wender, P. H. (1995) An 
open trial of venlafaxine in adult 
patients with attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder. Psychopharm-
acol Bull 31, 779-783. 
Hesse, S., Ballaschkle, O., Barthel, H., von 
Cramon, D. Y., and Sabri, O. (2006) The 
striatal dopamine transporter 
availability is reduced in adults with 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. 
J Nucl Med 47, 142P. 
Higley, J. D., King, S. T., Hasert, M. F., 
Champoux, M., Suomi, S. J., and 
Linnoila, M. (1996) Stability of inter-
individual differences in serotonin 
function and its relationship to severe 
aggression and competent social 
behavior in Rhesus Macaque females. 
Neuropsychopharmacol 14, 67-76. 
Hirst, W. D., Cheung, N. Y., Rattray, M., 
Price, G. W., and Wilkin, G. P. (1998) 
Cultured astrocytes express messenger 
RNA for multiple serotonin receptor 
subtypes, without functional coupling 
of 5-HT1 receptor subtypes to adenylyl 
cyclase. Mol Brain Res 61, 90-99. 
Iversen, S. D. and Iversen, L. L. (2007) 
Dopamine: 50 years in perspective. 
Trends Neurosci 30, 188-193. 
Jacobs, B. L. and Fornal, C. A. (1995) 
Serotonin and Behavior: a General 
 24 
Hypothesis. In: Psychopharmacology: 
The Fourth Generation of Progress, pp. 
461-469. Eds F. E. Bloom, D. J. Kupfer. 
Raven Press: New York. 
Jensen, P. S. and Arnold, L. E. (2004) 
National Institute of Mental Health 
Multimodal Treatment Study of ADHD 
Follow-up: 24-Month Outcomes of 
Treatment Strategies for Attention-
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Pediatr 
113, 754-761. 
Kennedy, S. H., Konarski, J. Z., Segal, Z. V., 
Lau, M. A., Bieling, P. J., McIntyre, R. S., 
and Mayberg, H. S. (2007) Differences 
in Brain Glucose Metabolism Between 
Responders to CBT and Venlafaxine in a 
16-Week Randomized Controlled Trial. 
Am J Psychiat 164, 778-788. 
Kent, L., Doerry, U., Hardy, E., Parmar, R., 
Gingell, K., Hawi, Z., Kirley, A., Lowe, N., 
Fitzgerald, M., Gill, M., and Craddock, 
N. (2002) Evidence that variation at the 
serotonin transporter gene influences 
susceptibility to attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): analysis 
and pooled analysis. Mol Psychiat 7, 
908-912. 
Kruesi, M. J. P., Rapoport, J. L., 
Hamburger, S. D., Hibbs, E., Potter, W. 
Z., Lenane, M., and Brown, G. L. (1990) 
Cerebrospinal fluid monoamine 
metabolites, aggression and impulsivity 
in disruptive behavior disorders of 
children and adolescents. Arch Gen 
Psychiat 47, 419-426. 
Krusch, D. A., Klorman, R., Brumaghim, J. 
T., Fitzpatrick, P. A., Borgstedt, A. D., 
and Strauss, J. S. (1996) 
Methylphenidate slows reactions of 
children with attention deficit disorder 
during and after an error. J Abnorm 
Child Psychol 24, 633-650. 
Leonard, B. E., McCartan, D., White, J., and 
King, D. J. (2004) Methylphenidate: a 
review of its neuropharmacological, 
neuropsychological and adverse clinical 
effects. Hum Psychopharmacol Clin Exp 
19, 151-180. 
Levesque, M. and Parent, A. (2005) The 
striato-fugal fiber system in primates: A 
reevaluation of its organization based 
on single-axon tracing studies. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci (USA) 102, 11888-11893. 
Levy, F. (1991) The dopamine theory of 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD). Aust NZ J Psychiat 25, 277-283. 
Levy, F. (2004) Synaptic gating and ADHD: 
a biological theory of comorbidity of 
ADHD and anxiety. Neuropsychopharm-
acol 29, 1589-1596. 
Levy, F. and Hobbes, G. (1996) Does 
haloperidol block methylphenidate? 
Motivation or attention? Psychopharm-
acol 126, 70-79. 
Li, J., Wang, Y., Zhou, R., Zhang, H., Yang, 
H., Yang, L., Wang, B., and Faraone, S. 
V. (2007) Association Between 
Polymorphisms in Serotonin Transport-
er Gene and Attention Deficit Hyper-
activity Disorder in Chinese Han 
Subjects. Am J Med Genet Part B 144B, 
14-19. 
Loo, S. K., Specter, E., Smolen, A., Hopfer, 
C., Teale, P. D., and Reite, M. L. (2003) 
Functional effects of the DAT1 
polymorphism on EEG measures in 
ADHD. J Am Acad Child Adolesc 
Psychiat 42, 986-993. 
Luthman, J., Frederiksson, A., Sundström, 
E., Jonsson, G., and Archer, T. (1989) 
Selective lesion of central dopamine or 
noradrenaline neuron systems in the 
neonatal rat: motor behavior and 
monoamine alterations at adult stage. 
Behav Brain Res 33, 267-277. 
Maidment, I. D. (2003) The use of 
antidepressants to treat attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder in adults. J 
Psychopharmacol 17, 332-336. 
Manor, I., Corbex, M., Eisenberg, J., 
Gritsenkso, I., Bachner-Melman, R., 
 25 
Tyano, S., and Ebstein, R. P. (2004) 
Association of the dopamine D5 
receptor with attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and 
scores on a continuous performance 
test (TOVA). Am J Med Genet 127B, 73-
77. 
Manor, I., Eisenberg, J., Meidad, S., Laibe, 
E., Lerer, E., Gritsenko, I., Faraone, S. V., 
and Ebstein, R. P. (2008) Association 
between tryptophan hydroxylase 2 
(TPH2) SNPs, performance on a 
continuance performance test 
(T.O.V.A.) and response to 
methylphenidate in participants with 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD). in press. 
Manor, I., Tyano, S., Eisenberg, J., 
Bachner-Melman, R., Kotler, M., and 
Ebstein, R. P. (2002) The short DRD4 
repeats confer risk to attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder in a family-based 
design and impair performance on a 
continuous performance test (TOVA). 
Mol Psychiat 7, 790-794. 
Manuck, S. B., Bleil, M. E., Petersen, K. L., 
Flory, J. D., Mann, J. J., Ferrell, R. E., and 
Muldoon, M. F. (2005) The socio-
economic status of communities 
predicts variation in brain serotonergic 
responsivity. Psychol Med 35, 519-528. 
Mateo, Y., Budygin, E. A., John, C. E., and 
Jones, S. R. (2004) Role of serotonin in 
cocaine effects in mice with reduced 
dopamine transporter function. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci (USA) 101, 372-377. 
Mendlin, A., Martin, F. J., and Jacobs, B. L. 
(1999) Dopaminergic input is required 
for increases in serotonin output 
produced by behavioral activation: an 
in vivo microdialysis study in rat 
forebrain. Neurosci 93, 897-906. 
Mengod, G. (2008) Distribution of 
serotonergic and dopaminergic 
receptors in primate prefrontal cortex: 
implications for pathophysiology and 
treatment. Prog Brain Res in press. 
Meyer, A. and Sagvolden, T. (2006) Fine 
motor skills in South African children 
with symptoms of ADHD: influence of 
subtype, gender, age, and hand 
dominance. Behav Brain Funct 2, 33. 
Michelsen, K. A., Schmitz, C., and 
Steinbusch, H. W. M. (2007) The dorsal 
raphe nucleus-From silver stainings to a 
role in depression. Brain Res Rev 55, 
329-342. 
Millan, M. J., Lejeune, F., and Gobert, A. 
(2007) Reciprocal autoreceptor and 
heteroreceptor control of serotonergic, 
dopaminergic and noradrenergic 
transmission in the frontal cortex: 
relevance to the actions of 
antidepressant agents. J Psychopharm-
acol 14, 114-138. 
Miyazaki, I., Asanuma, M., Diaz-Corrales, 
F. J., Miyoshi, K., and Ogawa, N. (2004) 
Direct evidence for expression of 
dopamine receptors in astrocytes from 
basal ganglia. Brain Res 1029, 120-123. 
Morrison, J. H. and Foote, S. L. (1986) 
Noradrenergic and serotonergic 
innervation of the cortical, thalamic, 
and tectal visual structures in old and 
new world monkeys. J Comp Neurol 
243, 117-138. 
Myint, A. M., Kim, Y. K., Verkerk, R., 
Scharpe, S., Steinbusch, H. W. M., and 
Leonard, B. E. (2007) Kynurenine 
pathway in major depression: Evidence 
of impaired neuroprotection. J Affect 
Disord 98, 143-151. 
Napier, T. C. and Istre, E. D. (2007) 
Methamphetamine-induced 
sensitization includes a functional 
upregulation of ventral pallidal 5-
HT2A/2C receptors. Synapse 62, 14-21. 
Navailles, S., Moison, D., Cunningham, K. 
A., and Spampinato, U. (2008) 
Differential Regulation of the Meso 
 26 
accumbens Dopamine Circuit by 
Serotonin2C Receptors in the Ventral 
Tegmental Area and the Nucleus 
Accumbens: An In Vivo Microdialysis 
Study with Cocaine. Neuropsycho-
pharmacol 33, 237-246. 
Neale, B. M., Sham, P. C., Purcell, S., 
Banaschewski, T., Buitelaar, J., Franke, 
B., Sonuga-Barke, E. J. S., Ebstein, R. P., 
Eisenberg, J., Mulligan, A., Gill, M., 
Manor, I., Miranda, A., Mulas, F., 
Oades, R. D., Roeyers, H., 
Rothenberger, A., Sergeant, J. A., 
Steinhausen, H.-C., Taylor, E. A., 
Thompson, M., Zhou, K., Asherson, P., 
and Faraone, S. V. (2007) Population 
Differences in the International Multi-
Centre ADHD Gene Project. Genet 
Epidemiol DOI: 10.1002/gepi.20265. 
Nomura, M., Kusumi, I., Kaneko, M., 
Masui, T., Daiguji, M., Ueno, T., 
Koyama, T., and Nomura, Y. (2006) 
Involvement of a polymorphism in the 
5-HT2A receptor gene in impulsive 
behavior. Psychopharmacol 187, 30-35. 
Nyman, E. S., Ogdie, M. N., Loukola, A., 
Varilo, T., Taanila, A., Hurtig, T., 
Moilanen, I. K., Loo, S. K., McGough, J. 
J., Järvelin, M.-R., Smalley, S. L., Nelson, 
S. F., and Peltonen, L. (2007) ADHD 
Candidate Gene Study in a Population-
Based Birth Cohort: Association with 
DBH and DRD2. J Am Acad Child 
Psychiat 46, 1614-1621. 
O'Neill, M. F., Heron-Maxwell, C. L., and 
Shaw, G. (1999) 5-HT2 receptor 
antagonism reduces hyperactivity 
induced by amphetamine, cocaine and 
MK-801 but not D-1 agonist c-APB. 
Pharmacol Biochem Behav 63, 237-244. 
Oades, R. D. (1987) Attention deficit 
disorder with hyperactivity (ADDH): the 
contribution of catecholaminergic 
activity. Prog Neurobiol 29, 365-391. 
Oades, R. D. (2006) Function and dys-
function of monoamine interactions in 
children and adolescents with AD/HD. 
In: Neurotransmitter interactions and 
cognitive function, pp. 207-244. Ed E. D. 
Levin. Birkhäuser Verlag: Basel. 
Oades, R. D. (1985) The role of 
noradrenaline in tuning and dopamine 
in switching between signals in the 
CNS. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 9, 261-283. 
Oades, R. D. (2005) The Roles of Norepi-
nephrine and Serotonin in ADHD. In: 
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: 
From Genes to Animal Models to 
Patients, pp. 97-130. Eds D. Gozal, D. L. 
Molfese. Humana Press: Tootawa, N.Y. 
Oades, R. D. (2007) The role of the 
serotonin system in ADHD: treatment 
implications. Expert Rev Neurother-
apeutics 7, 1357-1374. 
Oades, R. D. (2002) Dopamine may be 
'hyper' with respect to noradrenaline 
metabolism, but 'hypo' with respect to 
serotonin metabolism in children with 
ADHD. Behav Brain Res 130, 97-101. 
Oades, R. D. and Halliday, G. M. (1987) 
The ventral tegmental (A 10) system. 
Neurobiology I: anatomy and 
connectivity. Brain Res Rev 12, 117-165. 
Oades, R. D. and Müller, B. W. (1997) The 
development of conditioned blocking 
and monoamine metabolism in children 
with attention-deficit-hyperactivity 
disorder or complex tics and healthy 
controls: an exploratory analysis. Behav 
Brain Res 88, 95-102. 
Oades, R. D., Slusarek, M., Velling, S., and 
Bondy, B. (2002) Serotonin platelet-
transporter measures in childhood 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD): clinical versus experimental 
measures of impulsivity. World J Biol 
Psychiatry 3, 96-100. 
Overtoom, C. C. E., Verbaten, M. N., 
Kemner, C., Kenemans, J. L., van 
Engeland, H., Buitelaar, J. K., van der 
Molen, M. W., Van der Gugten, J., 
 27 
Westenburg, H. G. M., Maes, R. A. A., 
and Koelega, H. S. (2003) Effects of 
methylphenidate, desipramine and L-
DOPA on attention and inhibition in 
children with attention deficit hyper-
activity disorder. Behav Brain Res 145, 
7-15. 
Park, S. B., Coull, J. T., McShane, R. H., 
Young, A. H., Sahakian, B. J., Robbins, T. 
W., and Cowen, P. J. (1994) Tryptophan 
depletion in normal volunteers 
produces selective impairments in 
learning and memory. Neuropharmacol 
33, 575-588. 
Pelham, W. E. and Murphy, D. A. (1990) 
Attention Deficit Disorder. In: 
International perspectives in behavioral 
medicine, pp. 1-30. Eds W. E. Pelham, 
D. A. Murphy. International 
Perspectives in Behavioral Medicine: 
Norwood, New Jersey. 
Phelix, C. F. and Broderick, P. A. (1995) 
Light microscopic immunocytochemical 
evidence for converging serotonin and 
dopamine terminals in ventrolateral 
nucleus accumbens. Brain Res Bull 37, 
37-41. 
Popper, C. W. (2000) Pharmacologic 
alternatives to psychostimulants for the 
treatment of attention-deficit/ 
hyperactivity disorder. Child Adolesc 
Psychiat Clin N America 9, 605-646. 
Porras, G., Di Matteo, V., Fracasso, C., 
Lucas, G., De Deurwaerdere, P., Caccia, 
S., Esposito, E., and Spampinato, U. 
(2002) 5-HT(2A) and 5-HT(2C/2B) 
receptor subtypes modulate dopamine 
release induced in vivo by 
amphetamine and morphine in both 
the rat nucleus accumbens and 
striatum. Neuropsychopharmacol 26, 
311-324. 
Preuss, U. W., Koller, G., Bondy, B., 
Bahlmann, M., and Soyka, M. (2001) 
Impulsive traits and 5-HT2A receptor 
promoter polymorphism in alcohol 
dependents: possible association but 
no influence of personality disorders . 
Neuropsychobiol 43, 186-191. 
Qian, Q., Wang, Y., Zhou, R., Li, J., Wang, 
B., Glatt, S. J., and Faraone, S. V. (2003) 
Family-based and case-control 
association studies of catechol-O-
methyltransferase in attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder suggest genetic 
sexual dimorphism. Am J Med Genet 
Part B 118, 103-109. 
Reuter, M., Kirsch, P., and Hennig, J. 
(2006) Inferring candidate genes for 
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder 
(ADHD) assessed by the World Health 
Organization Adult ADHD Self-Report 
Scale (ASRS). J Neural Transm 113, 929-
938. 
Reuter, M., Kuepper, Y., and Hennig, J. 
(2007) Association between a 
polymorphism in the promoter region 
of the TPH2 gene and the personality 
trait of harm avoidance. Int J 
Neuropsychopharmacol 10, 401-404. 
Ribases, M., Ramos-Quiroga, J. A., Hervas, 
A., Bosch, R., Bielsa, A., Gastaminza, X., 
Artigas, J., Rodriguez-Ben, S., Estivill, X., 
Casas, M., Cormand, B., and Bayes, M. 
(2007) Exploration of 19 serotoninergic 
candidate genes in adults and children 
with attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder identifies association for 
5HT2A, DDC and MAOB. Mol Psychiatry 
doi:10.1038/sj.mp.4002100. 
Riikonen, R. S., Nokelainen, P., Valkonen, 
K., Kolemainen, A. I., Kupulainen, K. I., 
Koenoenen, M., Vanninen, R.-L. S., and 
Kuikka, J. T. (2005) Deep Serotonergic 
and Dopaminergic Structures in Fetal 
Alcoholic Syndrome: A Study with nor-
ß-CIT-Single-Photon Emission Comput-
ed Tomography and Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging Volumetry. Biol 
Psychiat 57, 1565-1572. 
Roesch, M. R., Calu, D. J., and 
Schoenbaum, G. (2007) Dopamine 
 28 
neurons encode the better option in 
rats deciding between differently 
delayed or sized rewards. Nature 
Neurosci 10, 1615-1624. 
Rommelse, N. N. J., Altink, M. E., 
Oosterlaan, J., Buschgens, C. J. M., 
Buitelaar, J., de Sonneville, L. M. J., and 
Sergeant, J. A. (2007) Motor control in 
children with ADHD and non-affected 
siblings: deficits most pronounced 
using the left hand. J Child Psychol 
Psychiat 48, 1071-1079. 
Rosa-Neto, P., Lou, H. C., Cumming, P., 
Pryds, O., Karrebaek, H., Lunding, J., 
and Gjedde, A. (2005) Methyl-
phenidate-evoked changes in striatal 
dopamine correlate with inattention 
and impulsivity in adolescents with 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. 
Neuroimage 25, 868-876. 
Rubia, K., Lee, F., Cleare, A. J., Tunstall, N., 
Fu, C. H. Y., Brammer, M. J., and 
McGuire, P. K. (2004) Tryptophan 
depletion reduces right inferior 
prefrontal activation during no-go trials 
in fast, event-related fMRI. 
Psychopharmacol 179, 791-803. 
Rubia, K., Smith, A. B., and Taylor, E. A. 
(2007) Performance of Children with 
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder 
(ADHD) on a Test Battery of 
Impulsiveness. Child Neuropsychol 13, 
276-304. 
Russell, V. A., Oades, R. D., Tannock, R., 
Auerbach, J., Killeen, P. R., Johansen, E. 
B., and Sagvolden, T. (2006) Response 
variability in attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a 
neuronal and glial energetics 
hypothesis. Behav Brain Functn 2, 30. 
Sagvolden, T., Johansen, E. B., Aase, H., 
and Russell, V. A. (2005) A dynamic 
developmental theory of attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
predominantly hyperactive/impulsive 
and combined subtypes. Behav Brain 
Sci 28, 397-468. 
Schachar, R. J., Chen, S., Logan, G. D., 
Ornstein, T. J., Crosbie, J., Ickowicz, A., 
and Pakulak, A. (2004) Evidence for an 
error monitoring deficit in attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder. J Abnorm 
Child Psychol 32, 285-293. 
Scheres, A., Oosterlaan, J., and Sergeant, J. 
A. (2001) Response execution and 
inhibition in children with AD/HD and 
other disruptive disorders: the role of 
behavioural activation. J Child Psychol 
Psychiat 42, 347-357. 
Schmidt, L. A., Fox, N. A., and Hamer, D. H. 
(2007) Evidence for a gene-gene 
interaction in predicting children's 
behavior problems: Association of 
serotonin transporter short and 
dopamine receptor D4 long genotypes 
with internalizing and externalizing 
behaviors in typically developing 7-
year-olds. Dev Psychopathol 19, 1105-
1116. 
Schulz, K. P., McKay, K. E., Newcorn, J. H., 
Sharma, V., Gabriel, S., and Halperin, J. 
M. (1998) Serotonin function and risk 
for alcoholism in boys with attention-
deficit hyperactivity disorder. 
Neuropsychopharmacol 18, 10-17. 
Shaw, P., Eckstrand, K., Sharp, W., 
Blumenthal, J., Lerch, J. P., Greenstein, 
D., Clasen, L., Evans, A., Giedd, J. N., 
and Rapoport, J. L. (2007) Attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder is 
characterized by a delay in cortical 
maturation. Proc Natl Acad Sci (USA) 
104, 19649-19654. 
Smoller, J. W., Biederman, J., Arbeitman, 
L., Doyle, A. E., Fagerness, J., Perlis, R. 
H., Sklar, P., and Faraone, S. V. (2006) 
Association Between the 5HT1B 
Receptor Gene (HTR1B) and the 
Inattentive Subtype of ADHD. Biol 
Psychiat 59, 460-467. 
Snoek, H., van Goozen, S. H. M., Matthys, 
 29 
W., Sigling, H. O., Koppeschaar, H. P. F., 
Westenberg, H. G. M., and van 
Engeland, H. (2002) Serotonergic 
functioning in children with 
oppositional defiant disorder: a 
sumatriptan challenge study. Biol 
Psychiat 51, 319-325. 
Sonuga-Barke, E. J. S. (2005) Causal 
models of attention-deficit/ 
hyperactivity disorder: from common 
simple deficits to multiple 
developmental pathways. Biol Psychiat 
57, 1231-1238. 
Stadler, C., Schmeck, K., Nowraty, I., 
Müller, W. E., and Poustka, F. (2004) 
Platelet 5-HT Uptake in Boys with 
Conduct Disorder. Neuropsychobiol 50, 
244-251. 
Steinbusch, H. W. M. (2008) The 
anatomical interaction between the 
dopaminergic and serotonergic system. 
In: Serotonin-dopamine interaction: 
Experimental evidence and therapeutic 
relevance, Eds G. Di Giovanni, V. Di 
Matteo, E. Esposito. 
Stoff, D. M., Pollock, L., Vitiello, B., Behar, 
D., and Bridger, W. H. (1987) Reduction 
of (3H)-imipramine binding sites on 
platelets of conduct-disordered 
children. Neuropsychopharmacol 1, 55-
62. 
Telang, F. W., Volkow, N. D., Levy, A., 
Logan, J., Wong, C., and Wang, G. J. 
(1999) Distribution of tracer levels of 
cocaine in the human brain as assessed 
with averaged [11C]cocaine images. 
Synapse 31, 290-296. 
Todd, R. D. and Botteron, K. N. (2001) Is 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
an energy deficiency syndrome? Biol 
Psychiat 50, 151-158. 
Tucha, O., Mecklinger, L., Laufkoetter, R., 
Kaunzinger, I., Paul, G. M., Klein, H. E., 
and Lange, K. W. (2005) Clustering and 
switching on verbal and figural fluency 
functions in adults with attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder. Cogn 
Neuropsychiat 10, 231-248. 
Uehara, T., Sumiyoshi, T., Matsuoka, T., 
Itoh, H., and Kurachi, M. (2006) Role of 
5-HT1A receptors in the modulation of 
stress-induced lactate metabolism in 
the medial prefrontal cortex and 
basolateral amygdala. Psychopharma-
col 186, 218-225. 
Uzbekov, M. G. (2006) Hyperkinetic 
syndrome as a manifestation of a 
disturbance of metabolism and mental 
development. In: Attention-Deficit/ 
Hyperactivity Disorder and the 
Hyperkinetic Syndrome: Current Ideas 
and Ways Forward, pp. 133-154. Ed R. 
D. Oades. Nova Science Publishers, Inc.: 
Hauppauge, New York. 
van der Plasse, G. and Feenstra, M. G. P. 
(2007) Serial reversal learning and 
acute tryptophan depletion. Behav 
Brain Res 186, 23-31. 
van Goozen, S. H. M., Fairchild, G., Snoek, 
H., and Harold, G. T. (2007) The 
Evidence for a Neurobiological Model 
of Childhood Antisocial Behavior. 
Psychol Bull 133, 149-182. 
Van Meel, C. S., Heslenfeld, D. J., 
Oosterlaan, J., and Sergeant, J. A. 
(2007) Adaptive control deficits in 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD): The role of error processing. 
Psychiat Res 151, 211-220. 
Vertes, R. P. (1991) A PHA-L analysis of 
ascending projections of the dorsal 
raphe nucleus in the rat. J Comp Neurol 
313, 643-668. 
Volkow, N. D., Wang, G.-J., Newcorn, J. H., 
Fowler, J. S., Telang, F. W., Solanto, M. 
V., Logan, J., Wong, C., Ma, Y., 
Swanson, J. M., Schulz, K. P., and 
Pradhan, K. (2007a) Brain dopamine 
transporter levels in treatment and 
drug naïve adults with ADHD. 
 30 
Neuroimage 34, 1182-1190. 
Volkow, N. D., Wang, G.-J., Newcorn, J. H., 
Telang, F. W., Solanto, M. V., Fowler, J. 
S., Logan, J., Ma, Y., Schulz, K., Pradhan, 
K., Wong, C., and Swanson, J. M. 
(2007b) Depressed Dopamine Activity 
in Caudate and Preliminary Evidence of 
Limbic Involvement in Adults With 
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disord-
er. Arch Gen Psychiat 64, 932-940. 
Vollmar, P., Haghikia, A., Dermietzel, R., 
and Faustmann, P. M. (2007) Venla-
faxine exhibits an anti-inflammatory 
effect in an inflammatory co-culture 
model. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 
doi:10.1017/S1461145707007729. 
Walderhaug, E., Lunde, H., Nordvik, J. E., 
Landro, N. I., Refsum, H., and 
Magnusson, A. (2002) Lowering of 
serotonin by rapid tryptophan 
depletion increases impulsiveness in 
normal individuals. Psychopharmacol 
164, 385-391. 
Weikop, P., Kehr, J., and Scheel-Kruger, J. 
(2007a) Reciprocal effects of combined 
administration of serotonin, 
noradrenaline and dopamine reuptake 
inhibitors on serotonin and dopamine 
levels in the rat prefrontal cortex: the 
role of 5-HT1A receptors. J 
Psychopharmacol 21, 795-804. 
Weikop, P., Yoshitake, T., and Kehr, J. 
(2007b) Differential effects of adjunct-
ive methylphenidate and citalopram on 
extracellular levels of serotonin, 
noradrenaline and dopamine in the rat 
brain. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 17, 
658-671. 
Wiersema, J. R., van der Meere, J. J., and 
Roeyers, H. (2005) ERP correlates of 
impaired error monitoring in children 
with ADHD. J Neural Transm 112, 1417-
1430. 
Wigal, S. B., Swanson, J. M., Feifel, D., 
Sangal, R. B., Elia, J., Casat, C. D., Zeldis, 
J. B., and Conners, C. K. (2004) A 
Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trial 
of Dexmethylphenidate Hydrochloride 
and d,l-threo-Methylphenidate Hydro-
chloride in Children With Attention-
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. J Am 
Acad Child Adolesc Psychiat 43, 1406-
1414. 
Wigg, K. G., Takhar, A., Ickowicz, A., 
Tannock, R., Kennedy, J. L., Pathare, T., 
Malone, M., Schachar, R. J., and Barr, C. 
L. (2006) Gene for the Serotonin 
Transporter and ADHD: No Association 
with Two Functional Polymorphisms. 
Am J Med Genet Part B 141B, 566-570. 
Winstanley, C. A., Theobald, D. E. H., 
Dalley, J. W., Cardinal, R. N., and 
Robbins, T. W. (2006) Double 
Dissociation between Serotonergic and 
Dopaminergic Modulation of Medial 
Prefrontal and Orbitofrontal Cortex 
during a Test of Impulsive Choice. Cereb 
Cortex 16, 106-114. 
Zametkin, A. J. and Rapoport, J. L. (1987) 
Neurobiology of attention deficit 
disorder with hyperactivity: where have 
we come in 50 years? J Am Acad Child 
Psychiat 26, 676-686. 
 
 
 
