Transcription induces strand-specific mutations
at the 5! end of human genes
Paz Polak1 and Peter F. Arndt
Department of Computational Molecular Biology, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 14195 Berlin, Germany
A regional analysis of nucleotide substitution rates along human genes and their flanking regions allows us to
quantify the effect of mutational mechanisms associated with transcription in germ line cells. Our analysis reveals
three distinct patterns of substitution rates. First, a sharp decline in the deamination rate of methylated CpG
dinucleotides, which is observed in the vicinity of the 5! end of genes. Second, a strand asymmetry in
complementary substitution rates, which extends from the 5! end to 1 kbp downstream from the 3! end, associated
with transcription-coupled repair. Finally, a localized strand asymmetry, an excess of C→T over G→A substitution
in the nontemplate strand confined to the first 1–2 kbp downstream of the 5! end of genes. We hypothesize that
higher exposure of the nontemplate strand near the 5! end of genes leads to a higher cytosine deamination rate. Up
to now, only the somatic hypermutation (SHM) pathway has been known to mediate localized and strand-specific
mutagenic processes associated with transcription in mammalia. The mutational patterns in SHM are induced by
cytosine deaminase, which just targets single-stranded DNA. This DNA conformation is induced by R-loops, which
preferentially occur at the 5! ends of genes. We predict that R-loops are extensively formed in the beginning of
transcribed regions in germ line cells.
[Supplemental material is available online at www.genome.org.]
Understanding the processes that lead to spontaneous DNA mu-
tations is important for studies of genome evolution and the
genesis of noninherited genetic diseases such as cancer. New mu-
tations arise as a result of numerous processes that damage DNA
and the unsuccessful repair of this damage by cellular repair
pathways. Besides a certain level of background activity of these
processes, mutagenic sources may additionally be influenced by
the DNA sequence, the DNA structure, or processes of cellular
metabolism like transcription and replication (Maki 2002). Up to
now, little is known about the in vivo properties of these addi-
tional sources and less is known about the relative contribution
of each source to the mutation patterns in the genome.
Replication, and to a lesser extent, transcription, have been
shown to affect nucleotide mutation rates in a variety of ge-
nomes. Hallmarks of these processes are particular strand asym-
metries. In bacteria, the replication of the genome from one
unique origin of replication promotes certain nucleotide substi-
tutions within the two strands, generating heterogeneities in the
base composition along the circular genome and strand asym-
metries between the leading and lagging strand (Lobry 1996;
Kano-Sueoka et al. 1999). In addition, transcription itself and
transcription-coupled repair (TCR) processes (Svejstrup 2002)
also lead to strand asymmetries between the template and non-
template strand (Rocha et al. 2006). In particular, transcription
can lead to an elevation of cytosine deamination rates on the
nontemplate strand (Beletskii and Bhagwat 1996, 1998).
In higher eukaryotes, processes coupled to replication and
transcription also affect the genomic sequence. In contrast to
bacteria, DNA replication in higher eukaryotes initiates from
multiple origins (Francino and Ochman 2000; Aladjem 2007).
On an evolutionary timescale, segments of DNA might be repli-
cated from the next 5! or 3! origin lowering or canceling strand
asymmetries of the replication process. In a similar fashion, tran-
scription occurs from both strands and from different origins.
Yet, the impact of transcription is easier to detect, since transcrip-
tion usually starts from well-defined transcription start sites and
proceeds only in one direction to synthesize the RNA message.
Moreover, most of the transcription start sites (TSSs) tend to be
conserved, even betweenmammals (Frith et al. 2006; Taylor et al.
2006). This stability over long periods of time enables the accu-
mulation of mutations associated with transcription, which can
be observed by analyzing genomic sequence data.
Biases in the nucleotide composition of single-stranded
DNA (ssDNA) have been used as evidence for biases in muta-
tional processes or selection. According to Chargaff’s second par-
ity rule, an asymmetry in the frequencies of complementary
nucleotides on ssDNA, such as an excess of T over A, implies that
mutation rates are not identical on the complementary strands
(Lobry 1996). Green et al. (2003) have observed an excess of G+T
over A+C on the nontemplate strand in human genes, which has
later been found to be correlated with transcription levels (Ma-
jewski 2003). To quantify violations of Chargaff’s second parity
rule, one introduces the TA skew = (T " A)/(T + A) and GC
skew = (G" C)/(G + C). Both skews are found to be positive in
mammalian nontemplate strands, but are close to zero in the 5!
flanking sequences of genes (Touchon et al. 2004).
Previous studies further revealed that the nucleotide com-
position varies along transcribed DNA (Louie et al. 2003;
Touchon et al. 2004). The TA and GC skews are found to be
maximal at the immediate downstream region from the 5! end of
genes; further nucleotide densities are observed to be dependent
on the distance from the 5! end and 3! end of introns (Touchon
et al. 2003; Aerts et al. 2004; Fujimori et al. 2005). Apart from
skews of complementary nucleotides, the GC content monotoni-
cally decreases with the increasing distance from the TSS in both
1Corresponding author.
E-mail paz.polak@molgen.mpg.de; fax 49-30-84131152.
Article published online before print. Article and publication date are at http://
www.genome.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gr.076570.108.
Letter
1216 Genome Research
www.genome.org
18:1216–1223 ©2008 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; ISSN 1088-9051/08; www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on April 23, 2009 - Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
directions (Saxonov et al. 2006). This regional behavior of the
nucleotide composition in genes and their flanking regions im-
ply corresponding regional behaviors of substitution processes.
Yet, it is not clear whether and howmutational mechanisms vary
along the transcripts.
The signatures of mutational processes associated with tran-
scription are particular strand asymmetries with respect to the
template/nontemplate strand. For instance, using 1.5 Mbp of or-
thologous regions in chimpanzee and human, Green et al. (2003)
calculated the rates of intronic nucleotide transitions, and found
out that in the nontemplate strand the purine transitions (A→G
and G→A) occurred at a higher rate than their complementary
pyrimidine transitions. Later, a similar bias of A→G vs. T→C was
reported in an analysis of single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in introns and fourfold degenerates (FFD) sites (Qu et al.
2006). This strand bias in substitution rates has been hypoth-
esized to be a result of TCR and of different misinsertion rates for
the four nucleotides (Green et al. 2003). Further on, Hwang and
Green (2004) carried out an analysis of context dependence of
mutation rates in 1.7-Mbp genomic regions across the phylogeny
of 19 mammalians species. Beside the known asymmetries of
complementary transition rates in transcribed regions, they also
found similar (but weaker) asymmetries in the transversion rates.
Some of these processes also showed signatures of neighbor de-
pendencies.
In this study we also use a comparative genomics approach
to investigate a nucleotide substitution pattern in association
with transcription. In contrast to previous studies, we especially
want to investigate the spatial variations in these substitution
patterns along the transcripts. The availability of genome-wide
human–chimpanzee–rhesus alignments enabled us to estimate
12 single nucleotide substitution frequencies as well as the
deamination rate of CpG dinucleotides surrounding the 5! and 3!
ends of genes. In order to be able to resolve variations of substi-
tution rates on a high spatial resolution, we had to keep the
number of parameters in our model small (Arndt and Hwa 2005)
and just included one neighbor-
dependent substitution process, the
CpG methylation deamination process
(CpG→CpA and CpG→TpG), which is
known to be the predominant substitu-
tion process in mammals (Arndt et al.
2003). In order to minimize the effects
due to selection, we analyzed only in-
tronic parts of genes and their 5! and 3!
flanking intergenic sequences.
We establish the regional patterns
(with respect to the TSS) of nucleotide
substitution rates in the human linage
since the human–chimpanzee diver-
gence. Our analysis reveals three types of
regional patterns of substitution rates.
The most pronounced behavior is a
sharp decrease of CpG deamination in
the proximity of the TSS. Further, we
show that in intronic regions most of
the substitutions rates are strand asym-
metric. This strand asymmetry is not ob-
served in intergenic regions upstream to
the TSS, showing that transcription-
coupled mechanisms are involved in
this breaking of the strand symmetry.
The first type of strand asymmetric pattern extends along the
whole transcript: We measure an excess of A→G over T→C, A→T
over T→A, C→G over G→C, and G→T over C→A on the non-
template strand consistently along the whole transcript (natu-
rally, the opposite asymmetries are found on the template
strand). The second type of asymmetry is an excess of C→T over
G→A transitions restricted to the immediate 1–2-kbp region
downstream from the TSS. This localized asymmetry is found to
be dependent both on the distance from the TSS and on local GC
content. We argue that the mechanisms that are involved in the
formation of local asymmetry might be coupled to transcription
initiation and be involved in the somatic hypermutation path-
way, which targets the first 1–2 kbp of genes. Finally, we show
that these regional patterns of nucleotide substitutions can lead
to the known regional patterns of nucleotide composition.
Results and Discussion
Analysis of nucleotide substitutions in the vicinity of genes
The main goal of our analysis is to investigate the dependence of
nucleotide substitution rates on transcription and the distance
from the TSS. To do so, one is tempted to estimate substitution
rates at different distances from the TSS on a single gene level.
However, the low divergence between human and chimpanzee
prevents us from getting reliable estimates of mutation rates in
small windows; in particular, because we wish to estimate 14
different mutation rates. To overcome this problem, we estimate
mutation rates in genome-wide pooled 200-bp long nonoverlap-
ping windows, which are located at fixed distances from indi-
vidual TSS (for details, see Fig. 1 and Methods). Such analysis is
possible with the availability of genome-wide human–
chimpanzee–rhesus alignments that cover about 85% of the hu-
man genome. In order to minimize the effects of selection, we
analyzed only the intronic parts of genes and their 5! and 3!
flanking intergenic sequences. Finally, we estimated the strand
Figure 1. Regions of analysis around the 5! end of genes. The substitution analysis was done in the
10,000-bp-long regions centered on the 5! end of gene (denoted by two vertical lines). This region of
analysis was further truncated if the next upstream gene was closer than 10,000 bp, or the 3! end of
the gene was closer than 5000 bp. Further, we excluded all exons. Bold lines depict the finally analyzed
sequences.
Transcription induces strand-specific mutations
Genome Research 1217
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on April 23, 2009 - Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
dependency by estimating substitution rates in the nontemplate
strand only.
Substitution frequencies have been estimated from pooled
triple alignments of genomic sequences from human, chimp,
and rhesus. We used a maximum likelihood approach that cor-
rectly handles effects due to back-mutations and is able to reli-
ably estimate substitution frequencies from given aligned se-
quences as described in the Methods section. A similar regional
analysis was also done in the surrounding regions of the 3! end of
genes.
CpG loss rate declines near the TSS
Our analysis revealed three types of regional substitution pat-
terns (Fig. 2). The strongest regional behavior is the reduction
of loss of CpG’s. In our framework, the cytosine in a CpG di-
nucleotide may undergo two mutual independent processes
to become a T. The first is the common C→T transition, irrespec-
tive of the neighboring bases; the second is the neighbor-
dependent CpG methylation deamination process CpG→TpG
(CpG→CpA on the reverse strand). The frequencies of the latter
processes are reduced by a factor of 15 near the TSSs. This de-
crease in the CpG loss rate occurs symmetrically down- and up-
stream of the TSS, and both processes, CpG→TpG and its reverse
complement substitution CpG→CpA, are affected in the same
way.
The rates of CpG-loss (Fig. 2) are anticorrelated with the
C+G density (Fig. 3). The high GC content near the TSS is related
to the fact that the majority of TSSs in human genes are part of
CpG Islands (CGIs) (Saxonov et al. 2006). CGIs are sequence
segments rich in C+G nucleotides and CpG dinucleotides with
respect to the other parts of the genome (Ioshikhes and Zhang
2000). The methylation status of CGIs is suggested to have an
important role in regulation: being unmethylated allows tran-
scription, but being methylated suppresses transcription (Bird
2002).
The observed reduction of the CpG methylation deamina-
tion rate near the TSS can therefore be explained by two mecha-
nisms. First, the lack of methylation in CGIs in germ line cells
(Weber et al. 2007) decreases the probability of C→T transitions
(in CpGs). Second, purifying selection might counteract the loss
of CpG in order to preserve the existence of a CGI for regulatory
processes in somatic cells (Majewski and Ott 2002). A loss of
CpGs due to mutations would lead eventually to the loss of the
CGI property of a gene promoter and change the gene expression
pattern (Jaenisch and Bird 2003).
An excess of C→T over G→A substitutions restricted
to the first 1–2 kbp downstream from the TSS
For the neighbor-independent single nucleotide substitutions,
we find much richer patterns by estimating and comparing the
complementary substitutions on the nontemplate strand. First,
reverse complement substitution processes do not occur at the
same rates on the nontemplate strand, i.e., the transcription pro-
cess singles out one strand breaking the symmetry between the
two strands in untranscribed regions. Second, this breaking of
the symmetry occurs only downstream from the TSS. Strikingly,
the first such asymmetry, an excess of the C→T over G→A, is
confined to the first 1–2-kbp-long region downstream from the
TSS (Fig. 2). For this localized asymmetry we observe an elevation
of the C→T transition rate by ∼20% in the first kilobase pair of
the transcript compared with the rate in promoter regions up-
stream of the TSS, whereas the G→A rate decreases by about the
same percentage in transcribed regions. The difference between
these two rates reaches up to 40% and the gap between these
rates is closed at a distance of ∼1.5 kbp to the TSS (Fig. 3). This
asymmetry is specific to the 5! end of genes, and it is not detected
in the vicinity of the 3! end (Supplemen-
tal Fig. S1), which confirms the localized
nature of this strand bias. The trend of
the localized asymmetry that we found
is opposite to the one that had been re-
ported by Green et al. (2003). This dis-
crepancy between the results may very
well be explained by the fact that, in
contrast to the previous study, we sur-
veyed the whole genome and included a
broader spectrum of transcripts into our
analysis (see below).
Global asymmetry: A→G exceed T→C
transitions along the transcript
In contrast to the above process, other
processes show a global asymmetry de-
fined as a bias in complementary
nucleotide substitutions that extends
along the whole transcript. There are
four pairs of nucleotide substitution pro-
cesses that show global asymmetries:
A→G/T→C, C→G/G→C, A→T/T→A,
and G→T/C→A. In Figure 2, it is shown
that the asymmetry in the substitution
frequencies extends from the TSS down
to the end of the analyzed region (5 kbp
downstream from the TSS). In order to
Figure 2. Substitution rates in introns and in intergenic regions in the vicinity of 5! and 3! ends of
human genes. The plots show the estimated 12 single-nucleotide substitution rates and the CpG
deamination rates in nonoverlapping 200-bp-long windows along the nontemplate strand. The dis-
tances of the windows’ centers from the 5! or 3! end are indicated on the X-axes. The estimation of
substitution frequencies has been performed using the nontemplate strand.
Polak and Arndt
1218 Genome Research
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on April 23, 2009 - Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
check whether the (global) asymmetries extend along the whole
transcript, we also analyzed the 10-kbp-long region centered on
the 3! end of genes (Fig. 1). Interestingly, these asymmetries ex-
tended not only until the 3! end, but, on average, also into the
1000-bp downstream region to the 3! end of genes (Fig. 1). This
extension is similar to the extension of the TA bias in the nucleo-
tide composition as far as 1000 downstream to the 3! end, which
reflects the fact that the termination position of the transcription
process is not always at the annotated 3! end of genes and might
continue several hundreds of bases further (Dye and Proudfoot
2001; Louie et al. 2003). The bias in the transition frequencies
A→G over T→C was also reported previously by Green et al.
(2003), who analyzed 1.5 Mbp of human chromosome 7. Our
genome-wide analysis reveals similar biases for three out of the
four transversions (Fig. 2; Supplemental Fig. S1), which confirms
a prediction from theoretical considerations (Touchon et al.
2003).
Surprisingly, we found opposite biases in the A→G/T→C
substitution frequencies in the 5! upstream regions compared
with those in 5! downstream regions (see Fig. 2), which might be
indicative of frequent antisense transcription of the reverse
strand, upstream of the 5! end of a gene on the forward strand.
This asymmetry eventually vanishes at about 10 kbp upstream of
the TSS (Supplemental Fig. S2).
The current single nucleotide substitution rates lead
to observed TA and GC skews
As was mentioned above, GC and TA skews are observed in hu-
man introns and have been suggested to be a result of a bias in
substitution rates. Using a genome evolution model (see Supple-
mental Methods), we show that the es-
timated nucleotide substitution rates in
human introns can lead to the observed
TA and GC skews in these regions
(Supplemental Fig. S3; Supplemental Re-
sults and Discussion). Since it takes a
long time to build up such skews, this
also implies that the molecular mecha-
nisms that shape the mutational pat-
terns in transcribed DNA are not recent
in primate evolution, but rather ancient.
The strand asymmetries are not
restricted to introns
The substitution patterns that were re-
ported so far are also found in nonin-
tronic parts of transcripts: in 5! UTR, the
3! UTR, and fourfold degenerate (FFD)
sites (see Supplemental Results and Dis-
cussion; Supplemental Figs. S4–S6). Pre-
sumably. these parts evolved under
stronger selection constraints than in-
trons. The existence of the local and
global asymmetries in different parts of
the transcripts, which are under differ-
ent levels of evolutionary constraints,
implies that the asymmetries are most
likely either invoked by a bias in the mo-
lecular mutational processes or as a re-
sult of selection acting on functional el-
ements, which are common to all differ-
ent parts of the transcript. Candidates for such functional
elements that are common to introns, UTR, and FFD sites would
be splicing elements that are supposed to be enriched in intronic
edges or in first introns (Chamary and Hurst 2004; Touchon et al.
2004). However, the strand asymmetries were also found exclud-
ing either intronic edges or first introns (see Fig. 3; Supplemental
Results and Discussion; Supplemental Fig. S7). In addition, in
introns the substitution patterns are formed both in nonrepeti-
tive parts and repeats, which are assumed to contain less func-
tional elements than any other parts of the transcripts (see
Fig. 3; Supplemental Results and Discussion; Supplemental Figs.
S8, S9).
Strand asymmetries are correlated with transcription
and transcription initiation in embryonic stem cells
So far, our results suggest that the substitution rates are shaped by
mutational molecular mechanisms. The asymmetry A→G vs.
T→C, was suggested to be the result of strand specificity of TCR
and a biases in misinsertion of A→G over T→C during replica-
tion, which is not attributed to transcribed/nontranscribed dif-
ferences of strands (Green et al. 2003). In similar fashion, TCR
and bias in misinsertion rates between complementary transver-
sions can lead to the asymmetries that are observed in Supple-
mental Figure S1, i.e., biases in misinsertions of C→G over G→C,
G→T over C→A, and A→T over T→A. However, the fact that TCR
acts on the whole transcript rules out its role in the restriction of
the C→T over G→A bias to the first 1000 bp. Therefore, we sug-
gest that other mutational mechanisms are responsible for this
bias. It is known that there are several mutagenic processes that
target ssDNA, which is a by-product of RNA polymerase activity.
Figure 3. Ratios between complementary transition rates and the GC content plotted against dis-
tance from the 5! end of genes calculated in 200-bp-long windows along the nontemplate strand,
combined with information from all genes and presented by six different genomic contexts. (Intronic)
Genes that were used in Figure 2; (introns w/o 200bp) the 200 bp in introns’ edges were excluded;
(GC-rich windows and AT-rich windows) DNA sequences with GC content of >50% and <41%,
respectively. Windows that contained less than 100 kbp-long DNA sequences were omitted (see
Supplemental Fig. S15 for the amount of sequence in each window).
Transcription induces strand-specific mutations
Genome Research 1219
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on April 23, 2009 - Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
Hence, higher frequencies of ssDNA in this region could lead to
higher transition rates of C→T in the beginning of a transcript,
rather than in the rest of the transcript.
Recent works show that RNA polymerase II (pol II) activity is
not homogenously distributed along transcripts (Kim et al. 2005;
Muse et al. 2007); moreover, in many genes there are marks of
transcription initiation but not of complete elongation. In about
80% of genes in embryonic stem cells (ESC), there is an initiation
of transcription, even though just 50% of the genes are fully
transcribed (Guenther et al. 2007). We used this recent data set,
in which genes were tested for their initiation and expression
states in embryonic stem cells. We divided the genes in this data
set into four groups according to their expression status in ESC
(denoted by exp+/!), and their initiation status (init+/!, see
Methods section). We calculated the substitution rates in the 5
kbp upstream and downstream regions of the 5" end of genes in
three groups, init+exp+, init+exp!, and init!exp! (the number
of genes in the last init!exp+ was too small for analysis). The
results show that the local excess of C→T over G→A is strongest
in genes that are classified as init+exp+, a weaker bias (half as
strong as for the init+exp+ group) was found in the group of
init+exp! genes. In the set of init!exp! genes, the local asym-
metry is actually absent (Fig. 4). Similar behavior is also observed
for the global asymmetry (the excess of A→G over T→C). Hence,
we concluded that initiation of transcription (in ESC) is corre-
lated with formation of the local and global asymmetries, al-
though these asymmetries are weaker in init+exp! than in
init+exp+ genes.
The average GC content near the TSS of genes in init+exp!
and init+exp+ sets is much higher than that of genes in the
init!exp! class (Fig. 4); this might imply that the local asym-
metry is related to high GC content in introns independent of
the distance from the TSS. In order to rule this out, we estimated
the substitution rates in DNA sequences with different GC con-
tent surrounding the 5" end of genes (see Fig. 3; Supplemental
Results and Discussion; Supplemental Figs. S10, S11). Our analy-
sis shows that the local strand asymmetry is dependent both on
the distance from the TSS and the GC content in the vicinity of
the TSS. Since both sets of genes, exp+init+ and exp+init!, have,
on average, a high GC content in promoter regions but different
levels of strand asymmetries, we suggest that GC content is in-
directly correlated with the asymmetry level due to higher tran-
scription activity of GC-rich promoters in germ line cells. Clearly,
a limitation of this analysis is that although it was carried out in
genes that are expressed in ESC, we cannot be sure that they are
also expressed in germ line cells, where mutations have to occur
in order to be passed on to the next generation.
Localization of mutations
Which mechanisms are responsible for the localization of cyto-
sine deamination in the nontranscribed strand near the TSS? One
possible process coupled to transcription is the activity of the
activation induced (cytosine) deamination (AID, currently
known as AICDA) enzyme as part of the somatic hypermutation
(SHM) pathway during B-cell development (Odegard and Schatz
2006). This enzyme induces both single nucleotide mutations
and rearrangement at the immunoglobulin gene loci. Especially,
it promotes cytosine deamination in ssDNA during transcription,
but just at 1–2 kbp downstream from the TSS (Odegard and
Schatz 2006). Its activity is thought to be focused on so-called
AID hotspots (Pham et al. 2003). How-
ever, our analysis showed that the rate of
C→T does not exceed G→A in AID-hot-
spots (Supplemental Fig. S12). Therefore,
we could not substantiate the involve-
ment of AID in the generation of the lo-
calized asymmetry on a genome-wide
scale (see Supplemental Text).
Although we could not directly as-
sociate DNA modifiers like AID with the
local asymmetry, the similarity between
the localization of the strand asymmetry
in substitution rates and the restrictions
of SHM might be the result of similar
mechanisms.
Possible mechanisms, which can el-
evate mutagenesis, are the ones that lead
to formation of a single-stranded DNA
(ssDNA) of the nontranscribed strand. A
ssDNA structure has been proposed to
occur in variable (V-) regions during
SHM in order to provide the substrate for
AID, which mutates only ssDNA. Fur-
ther, the nucleotides in ssDNA are sub-
jected to higher spontaneous DNA dam-
age than nucleotides in double-stranded
DNA (dsDNA). Cytosine in ssDNA is
more prone to deamination than in
dsDNA (Frederico et al. 1990; Beletskii
and Bhagwat 1996). Hence, if a localized
ssDNA of the nontranscribed strand is
formed near the TSS, it might explain
Figure 4. Correlation between strand asymmetry and transcription status of genes in embryonic
stem cells (ESC). The ratios between complementary transition rates and the GC content are calculated
in three gene classes (Guenther et al. 2007): genes that experienced initiation and transcription
(exp+init+); genes that experienced initiation but not complete transcription (exp!init+); genes that
experienced initiation but not complete transcription (exp!init!). The length and the nucleotides’
composition properties of the sequences that were used for substitution estimation in each window are
presented in Supplemental Figure S16. The estimation of substitution frequencies has been performed
using the nontemplate strand.
Polak and Arndt
1220 Genome Research
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on April 23, 2009 - Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
the higher rate of C→T transitions on this strand. Interestingly,
the observed excess of C→T over G→A in bacterial genomes has
been also suggested to be mediated by ssDNA on the nontran-
scribed strand (Francino and Ochman 2001), since the average
length of a bacterial gene in 1–2 kb of the induced range of the
asymmetry along bacterial genes is similar to the asymmetry pat-
tern we observed for human genes (Francino and Ochman 2001).
Hence, we propose that localized conformation of ssDNA near
the TSS can explain the observed strand asymmetry
There are a some mechanisms that have been suggested to
invoke ssDNA in V-regions. One of these mechanisms is the for-
mation of RNA/DNA hybrids (R-loops) on the template strand in
the first 1–2 kbp of the V-regions of immunoglobulin genes (Yu
et al. 2003, 2005; Huang et al. 2006). R-loops are formed on the
transcribed strand, leaving the nontranscribed strand in ssDNA
formation at higher frequency than its complementary strand (Li
and Manley 2005; Ronai et al. 2007). Using a biophysical model
(Carlon and Heim 2006) we calculated the differences between
the free-energy levels of RNA/DNA hybrids and DNA/DNA (i.e.,
dsDNA) structures in various distances of the TSS for genes in our
data set. According to this model, for most genes the RNA/DNA
hybrid in the first 200 bp downstream from the TSS is more stable
than DNA/DNA confirmation (Supplemental Fig. S13). More-
over, the averaged difference between the energies of these two
structures is peaked at the immediate 200-bp-long region down-
stream from the TSS (Supplemental Fig. S13). The predicted
higher stability can be attributed to higher GC content and the
GC skew near the TSS of human genes, since GpG dinucleotides
are the main contributors to the energetic difference between
RNA/DNA hybrids and DNA/DNA structures (Carlon and Heim
2006). It is important to note that until now it was not fully
understood what the conditions for R-loops formations were. A
couple of recent studies have suggested that R-loops are initiated
from 50-bp-long regions, which contain the motif GGGGC
TGGGG and comprise at least 50% Gs (Huang et al. 2007; Roy et
al. 2008). We found ∼300 genes that, in their first 1000 bp, con-
tain such regions. Estimating substitution rates in 1-kbp windows
along these genes, indeed, shows a higher degree of asymmetry
(Supplemental Fig. S14), but the small number of genes is not
enough to establish a significant association. A recent study sug-
gests that, on top of the higher stability of RNA/DNA compared
with the DNA/DNA structure, a capping enzyme can promote
formation of transcriptional R-loops in vitro (Kaneko et al. 2007).
Since the formation of a cap is a necessary process at early stages
of transcription, this finding implies that R-loops are indeed
found at higher frequencies near the TSS than in the rest of the
transcript.
Beside R-loops, the non-B DNA conformations, G-
quadruplexes (G4), also might be formed near the TSS of human
genes on the nontranscribed strand (Du et al. 2008). A formation
of G4 structure in the nontemplate strand and, in parallel, a
formation of R-loop on the template strand, is often called G-
loops and has been also observed in different situations (Du-
quette et al. 2004). It is not known when and where such struc-
tures are formed, but several DNA sequence motifs have been
suggested to have higher probability to formG-quadruplexes (Ya-
dav et al. 2008). Recent studies reveal an enrichment of such
motifs in promoter regions and in the first 500 bp of human
genes (Du et al. 2008). Therefore, these G4 conformations have
the potential to create a gradient of ssDNA of the nontemplate
strand along human transcripts.
In summary, we propose the following model for the gen-
eration of the localized substitution bias. We assume that the
nontranscribed strand at the start of genes is in ssDNA formation
at a higher frequency than in regions further downstream. There
are several mechanisms that may induce a localized formation of
ssDNA of the transcribed strand. These mechanisms include ei-
ther the higher occupation time of pol II near the TSS (Mikkelsen
et al. 2007) or the formation of G/R-loops. As a consequence of
these mechanisms, the transcribed strand near the TSS is pro-
tected either by RNA pol II complex or by the RNA/DNA hybrid;
whereas the nontranscribed strand is left in ssDNA formation,
which is prone to higher rates of cytosine deamination. This is
due to spontaneous chemical processes (Frederico et al. 1990) or
due to the enzymatic activity of DNA deaminases like AID or
APOBEC3 (Larson and Maizels 2004; Rosenberg et al. 2007).
These processes eventually can invoke the observed higher rate of
C→T transition on the nontranscribed strand.
Final remarks
Today it is assumed that >90% of the human genome is tran-
scribed (The ENCODE Project Consortium 2007). Therefore, our
results imply that the majority of the genome evolved under
mutational processes, which are not strand symmetric, in con-
trast to the current common assumption. As the number of se-
quenced genomes will increase, these mutational signatures
could also be used for detecting novel transcripts (Green et al.
2003; Glusman et al. 2006) and to a lesser extent, to identify
novel TSSs. The asymmetry in the mutation patterns can also
contribute to the understanding of the transcription process it-
self. The reversal of the global symmetry in regions upstream of
the TSS suggests frequent antisense transcription from the reverse
strand; the presence of the asymmetry on the forward strand
beyond the 3! end of genes is indicative of the continuation of
transcription beyond their annotated 3! ends. Moreover, taking
into account the present knowledge about repair and mutagenic
processes in humans, we suggest that the local mutational pat-
tern is a result of transcriptional-mediated ssDNA structure.
The ssDNA conformation has been suggested to be prone to
double-strand breaks and to mediate genomic rearrangements as
a consequence of the activity of the repair mechanisms that fix
these breaks (Li and Manley 2006; Aguilera and Gomez-Gonzalez
2008). Therefore, we suggest that transcription of the first 1–2 kb
of genes might be a novel mechanism for genome-wide instabil-
ity and a driver of rearrangements.
Finally, the substitution asymmetries can be considered as
phenotype derived, which, in this case, is gene expression, i.e.,
genes that are expressed are mutated by transcriptional-related
mechanisms. This raises the question as to whether these muta-
tional processes have some beneficial impact. Especially, we
think that the transcription-related mutational patterns observed
in this article are not limited to germ line cells and they can be
active in somatic cells (as well as stem cells). In particular, tran-
scription can be a major source of mutations in nondividing
cells. Recent studies show that mutational processes can promote
diversity of cells in somatic tissues and even yield a mechanism
for differentiation of cells, as has been suggested for neural tissues
(Muotri and Gage 2006).
Methods
Sequence data and annotation
Triple human–chimp–rhesus alignments were retrieved from En-
sembl database, version 41 from October 2006 (Hubbard et al.
Transcription induces strand-specific mutations
Genome Research 1221
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on April 23, 2009 - Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
2007). They are based on the releases Homo sapiens (41, 36c), Pan
troglodytes (41, 21), and Macaca mulatta (41, 10a), and were gen-
erated by MLAGAN (Brudno et al. 2003). The annotation for genes,
exons, and translatable exons are according to Ensembl version 41,
which uses the NCBI36 annotation of the human genome.
The position of the 5! end of a Ensembl gene, which is coded
on the forward (backward) strand, is defined as the lowest (high-
est) position among all 5! chromosomal locations of its tran-
scripts. To ensure a high quality of the TSS annotation, a gene is
only included into the analysis if one of the transcripts defining
the 5! end is also in the RefSeq transcript or peptide database
(Wheeler et al. 2006). We further included only the first (most 5!)
TSS if a gene has multiple TSSs. In this way we minimized the
effects of transcription on intergenic regions upstream of the 5!
ends of genes. In addition, genes that were located on sex chro-
mosomes were filtered out. After applying all of these filters, we
are left with 15,552 genes that are used for estimation of the
substitution rates.
For regional analysis of the 3! end of the gene, we chose
genes with transcripts that were longer than 50 kbp, in order to
minimize the effects of distance from the 5! end onmutation rates.
Regional analysis
The primary analysis was done on DNA sequences in the vicinity
of the 5! ends of genes. For each gene, we determined a region of
analysis, which was defined as the region 5000 bp upstream of
and downstream from the TSS. However, in order to avoid the
twofold analysis of one region, the upstream region was trun-
cated to the middle position between two genes if the next up-
stream gene was closer than 10,000 bp (Fig. 1). For genes shorter
than 5 kbp, the downstream region was also truncated and in-
cluded the sequence up to the 3! end of the gene (Fig. 1). A
similar procedure has been applied to determine sequences for
the regional analysis surrounding the 3! end of genes.
The next step involved retrieving the human–chimp–rhesus
triple alignments for each region of analysis. In order to reduce
effects of selection, we excluded all exons using the annotation
of the human genome. Masking out exonic sequences, we kept
the positions of intronic sequence segments relative to the TSS
unchanged (Fig. 1). The resulting sequences have been further
partioned into nonoverlapping 200-bp-long windows, where
the reference point was the 5! end of the gene (Fig. 1). For each
window, we extracted the appropriate triple alignment for all
genes and concatenated them to estimate substitution frequen-
cies as outlined below. The length of these triple-alignments in
different windows varies due to different restrictions on the gene
sets or sequence characteristics (Supplemental Fig. S15).
Substitution analysis
We measure the nucleotide substitution frequencies from mul-
tiple alignments. During the measurement process we do not
assume the stationarity of the nucleotide composition, the time
reversibility of the nucleotide substitution process, and most im-
portantly, that reverse complement substitution processes are
coupled. These three assumptions are often made during a phy-
logenetic analysis, but would foreclose our analysis. We therefore
use a recently introduced methodology, which does not make
these assumptions (Duret and Arndt 2008).
This method uses a maximum likelihood approach to esti-
mate substitution rates from a multiple alignment of contempo-
rary sequences from three or more species with known phyloge-
netic relationships. Substitution processes are assumed to be ho-
mogeneous in time along each branch in the phylogenetic tree,
but may vary from one branch to another. Our method is able to
reliably estimate the 14 frequencies (for the 12 neighbor-
independent substitutions and the two neighbor-dependent
CpGmethylation deamination processes) along all branches that
are not connected to the root node (Duret and Arndt 2008). In
our current setting, the root node would represent the last com-
mon ancestor of human and rhesus. Here, however, we will only
analyze the substitution frequencies along the terminal branch
that connect the last common ancestor of human and chimp
with contemporary humans.
All frequencies are measured per base pair and they estimate
the (fractional) number of nucleotide exchanges per base pair in
a given time interval, i.e., along a branch in the phylogenetic
tree. We may compute the corresponding substitution rates
(measured per base pair and time) by dividing these frequencies
by the physical time that passed along a branch, i.e., in our case,
the time period after the human–chimp split. However, since we
only compare various rates and are not interested in their abso-
lute values, we may just work with these frequencies.
In contrast to the work of Hwang and Green (2004) we do
not include more neighbor-dependent processes in order to keep
the number of parameters in our model low and to be able to per-
form our analysis on a fine spatial resolution along the transcripts.
Note that we showed previously that the inclusion of more neigh-
bor-dependent processes is likely not to be a significant enhance-
ment of the model (Arndt and Hwa 2005). We convinced ourselves
of that fact again and also included transversions on CpG sites for
testing purposes. The final results did not show significant devia-
tions from the simpler model (data not shown), and therefore we
used the model with 14 substitution frequencies.
Acknowledgments
We thank Nina F. Papavasiliou and David G. Schatz for the useful
discussions on AID activity and its sequence specificity.
References
Aerts, S., Thijs, G., Dabrowski, M., Moreau, Y., and De Moor, B. 2004.
Comprehensive analysis of the base composition around the
transcription start site in Metazoa. BMC Genomics 5: 34. doi:
10.1186/1471-2164-5-34.
Aguilera, A. and Gomez-Gonzalez, B. 2008. Genome instability: A
mechanistic view of its causes and consequences. Nat. Rev. Genet.
9: 204–217.
Aladjem, M.I. 2007. Replication in context: Dynamic regulation of DNA
replication patterns in metazoans. Nat. Rev. Genet. 8: 588–600.
Arndt, P.F. and Hwa, T. 2005. Identification and measurement of
neighbor-dependent nucleotide substitution processes. Bioinformatics
21: 2322–2328.
Arndt, P.F., Petrov, D.A., and Hwa, T. 2003. Distinct changes of genomic
biases in nucleotide substitution at the time of mammalian
radiation. Mol. Biol. Evol. 20: 1887–1896.
Beletskii, A. and Bhagwat, A.S. 1996. Transcription-induced mutations:
Increase in C to T mutations in the nontranscribed strand during
transcription in Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
93: 13919–13924.
Beletskii, A. and Bhagwat, A.S. 1998. Correlation between transcription
and C to T mutations in the non-transcribed DNA strand. Biol.
Chem. 379: 549–551.
Bird, A. 2002. DNA methylation patterns and epigenetic memory. Genes
& Dev. 16: 6–21.
Brudno, M., Do, C.B., Cooper, G.M., Kim, M.F., Davydov, E., Green,
E.D., Sidow, A., and Batzoglou, S. 2003. LAGAN and Multi-LAGAN:
Efficient tools for large-scale multiple alignment of genomic DNA.
Genome Res. 13: 721–731.
Carlon, E. and Heim, T. 2006. Thermodynamics of RNA/DNA
hybridization in high-density oligonucleotide microarrays. Phys. A:
Stat. Mech. Appl. 362: 433–449.
Chamary, J.-V. and Hurst, L.D. 2004. Similar rates but different modes
of sequence evolution in introns and at exonic silent sites in
rodents: Evidence for selectively driven codon usage. Mol. Biol. Evol.
Polak and Arndt
1222 Genome Research
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on April 23, 2009 - Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
21: 1014–1023.
Du, Z., Zhao, Y., and Li, N. 2008. Genome-wide analysis reveals
regulatory role of G4 DNA in gene transcription. Genome Res.
18: 233–241.
Duquette, M.L., Handa, P., Vincent, J.A., Taylor, A.F., and Maizels, N.
2004. Intracellular transcription of G-rich DNAs induces formation
of G-loops, novel structures containing G4 DNA. Genes & Dev.
18: 1618–1829.
Duret, L., and Arndt, P.F. 2008. The impact of recombination on
nucleotide substitutions in the human genome. PLoS Genet.
4: e1000071. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000071.
Dye, M.J. and Proudfoot, N.J. 2001. Multiple transcript cleavage
precedes polymerase release in termination by RNA polymerase II.
Cell 105: 669–681.
The ENCODE Project Consortium. 2007. Identification and analysis of
functional elements in 1% of the human genome by the ENCODE
pilot project. Nature 447: 799–816.
Francino, M.P. and Ochman, H. 2000. Strand symmetry around the
!-globin origin of replication in primates. Mol. Biol. Evol.
17: 416–422.
Francino, M.P. and Ochman, H. 2001. Deamination as the basis of
strand-asymmetric evolution in transcribed Escherichia coli
sequences. Mol. Biol. Evol. 18: 1147–1150.
Frederico, L.A., Kunkel, T.A., and Shaw, B.R. 1990. A sensitive genetic
assay for the detection of cytosine deamination: Determination of
rate constants and the activation energy. Biochemistry
29: 2532–2537.
Frith, M.C., Ponjavic, J., Fredman, D., Kai, C., Kawai, J., Carninci, P.,
Hayshizaki, Y., and Sandelin, A. 2006. Evolutionary turnover of
mammalian transcription start sites. Genome Res. 16: 713–722.
Fujimori, S., Washio, T., and Tomita, M. 2005. GC-compositional strand
bias around transcription start sites in plants and fungi. BMC
Genomics 6: 26. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-6-26.
Glusman, G., Qin, S., El-Gewely, M.R., Siegel, A.F., Roach, J.C., Hood, L.,
and Smit, A.F.A. 2006. A third approach to gene prediction suggests
thousands of additional human transcribed regions. PLoS Comput.
Biol. 2: e18. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020018.
Green, P., Ewing, B., Miller, W., Thomas, P.J., and Green, E.D. 2003.
Transcription-associated mutational asymmetry in mammalian
evolution. Nat. Genet. 33: 514–517.
Guenther, M.G., Levine, S.S., Boyer, L.A., Jaenisch, R., and Young, R.A.
2007. A chromatin landmark and transcription initiation at most
promoters in human cells. Cell 130: 77–88.
Huang, F.-T., Yu, K., Hsieh, C.-L., and Lieber, M.R. 2006. Downstream
boundary of chromosomal R-loops at murine switch regions:
Implications for the mechanism of class switch recombination. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. 103: 5030–5035.
Huang, F.-T., Yu, K., Balter, B.B., Selsing, E., Oruc, Z., Khamlichi, A.A.,
Hsieh, C.-L., and Lieber, M.R. 2007. Sequence dependence of
chromosomal R-loops at the immunoglobulin heavy-chain Sµ class
switch region. Mol. Cell. Biol. 27: 5921–5932.
Hubbard, T.J.P., Aken, B.L., Beal, K., Ballester, B., Caccamo, M., Chen,
Y., Clarke, L., Coates, G., Cunningham, F., Cutts, T., et al. 2007.
Ensembl 2007. Nucleic Acids Res. 35: D610–D617.
Hwang, D.G. and Green, P. 2004. Inaugural article: Bayesian Markov
chain Monte Carlo sequence analysis reveals varying neutral
substitution patterns in mammalian evolution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
101: 13994–14001.
Ioshikhes, I.P. and Zhang, M.Q. 2000. Large-scale human promoter
mapping using CpG islands. Nat. Genet. 26: 61–63.
Jaenisch, R. and Bird, A. 2003. Epigenetic regulation of gene expression:
How the genome integrates intrinsic and environmental signals. Nat.
Genet. 33: 245–254.
Kaneko, S., Chu, C., Shatkin, A.J., and Manley, J.L. 2007. Human
capping enzyme promotes formation of transcriptional R loops in
vitro. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 104: 17620–17625.
Kano-Sueoka, T., Lobry, J.R., and Sueoka, N. 1999. Intra-strand biases in
bacteriophage T4 genome. Gene 238: 59–64.
Kim, T.H., Barrera, L.O., Zheng, M., Qu, C., Singer, M.A., Richmond,
T.A., Wu, Y., Green, R.D., and Ren, B. 2005. A high-resolution map
of active promoters in the human genome. Nature 436: 876–880.
Larson, E. and Maizels, N. 2004. Transcription-coupled mutagenesis by
the DNA deaminase AID. Genome Biol. 5: 211.
http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/3/211.
Li, X. and Manley, J.L. 2005. Inactivation of the SR protein splicing
factor ASF/SF2 results in genomic instability. Cell 122: 365–378.
Li, X. and Manley, J.L. 2006. Cotranscriptional processes and their
influence on genome stability. Genes & Dev. 20: 1838–1847.
Lobry, J.R. 1996. Asymmetric substitution patterns in the two DNA
strands of bacteria. Mol. Biol. Evol. 13: 660–665.
Louie, E., Ott, J., and Majewski, J. 2003. Nucleotide frequency variation
across human genes. Genome Res. 13: 2594–2601.
Majewski, J. 2003. Dependence of mutational asymmetry on
gene-expression levels in the human genome. Am. J. Hum. Genet.
73: 688–692.
Majewski, J. and Ott, J. 2002. Distribution and characterization of
regulatory elements in the human genome. Genome Res.
12: 1827–1836.
Maki, H. 2002. Origins of spontaneous mutations: Specificity and
directionality of base-substitution, frameshift, and
sequence-substitution mutageneses. Annu. Rev. Genet. 36: 279–303.
Mikkelsen, T.S., Ku, M., Jaffe, D.B., Issac, B., Lieberman, E., Giannoukos,
G., Alvarez, P., Brockman, W., Kim, T.-K., Koche, R.P., et al. 2007.
Genome-wide maps of chromatin state in pluripotent and
lineage-committed cells. Nature 448: 553–560.
Muotri, A.R. and Gage, F.H. 2006. Generation of neuronal variability
and complexity. Nature 441: 1087–1093.
Muse, G.W., Gilchrist, D.A., Nechaev, S., Shah, R., Parker, J.S., Grissom,
S.F., Zeitlinger, J., and Adelman, K. 2007. RNA polymerase is poised
for activation across the genome. Nat. Genet. 39: 1507–1511.
Odegard, V.H. and Schatz, D.G. 2006. Targeting of somatic
hypermutation. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6: 573–583.
Pham, P., Bransteitter, R., Petruska, J., and Goodman, M.F. 2003.
Processive AID-catalysed cytosine deamination on single-stranded
DNA simulates somatic hypermutation. Nature 424: 103–107.
Qu, H.-Q., Lawrence, S., Guo, F., Majewski, J., and Polychronakos, C.
2006. Strand bias in complementary single-nucleotide
polymorphisms of transcribed human sequences: Evidence for
functional effects of synonymous polymorphisms. BMC Genomics
7: 213. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-7-213.
Rocha, E.P.C., Touchon, M., and Feil, E.J. 2006. Similar compositional
biases are caused by very different mutational effects. Genome Res.
16: 1537–1547.
Ronai, D., Iglesias-Ussel, M.D., Fan, M., Li, Z., Martin, A., and Scharff,
M.D. 2007. Detection of chromatin-associated single-stranded DNA
in regions targeted for somatic hypermutation. J. Environ. Monit.
204: 181–190.
Rosenberg, B.R. and Papavasiliou, F.N. 2007. Beyond SHM and CSR:
AID and related cytidine deaminases in the host response to viral
infection. Adv. Immunol. 94: 215–244.
Rosenberg, B.R., Papavasiliou, F.N., Frederick, W.A., and Tasuku, H.
2007. Beyond SHM and CSR: AID and related cytidine deaminases in
the host response to viral infection. In Advances in immunology, pp.
215–244. Academic Press, New York.
Roy, D., Yu, K., and Lieber, M.R. 2008. Mechanism of R-loop formation
at immunoglobulin class switch sequences. Mol. Cell. Biol. 28: 50–60.
Saxonov, S., Berg, P., and Brutlag, D.L. 2006. A genome-wide analysis of
CpG dinucleotides in the human genome distinguishes two distinct
classes of promoters. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 103: 1412–1417.
Svejstrup, J.Q. 2002. Mechanisms of transcription-coupled DNA repair.
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 3: 21–29.
Taylor, M.S., Kai, C., Kawai, J., Carninci, P., Hayashizaki, Y., and
Semple, C.A.M. 2006. Heterotachy in mammalian promoter
evolution. PLoS Genet. 2: e30. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.0020030.
Touchon, M., Nicolay, S., Arneodo, A., d’Aubenton-Carafa, Y., and
Thermes, C. 2003. Transcription-coupled TA and GC strand
asymmetries in the human genome. FEBS Lett. 555: 579–582.
Touchon, M., Arneodo, A., d’Aubenton-Carafa, Y., and Thermes, C.
2004. Transcription-coupled and splicing-coupled strand
asymmetries in eukaryotic genomes. Nucleic Acids Res.
32: 4969–4978.
Weber, M., Hellmann, I., Stadler, M.B., Ramos, L., Paabo, S., Rebhan,
M., and Schubeler, D. 2007. Distribution, silencing potential and
evolutionary impact of promoter DNA methylation in the human
genome. Nat. Genet. 39: 457–466.
Wheeler, D.L., Barrett, T., Benson, D.A., Bryant, S.H., Canese, K.,
Chetvernin, V., Church, D.M., DiCuccio, M., Edgar, R., Federhen, S.,
et al. 2006. Database resources of the National Center for
Biotechnology Information. Nucleic Acids Res. 34: D173–D180.
Yadav, V.K., Abraham, J.K., Mani, P., Kulshrestha, R., and Chowdhury,
S. 2008. QuadBase: Genome-wide database of G4 DNA occurrence
and conservation in human, chimpanzee, mouse and rat promoters
and 146 microbes. Nucleic Acids Res. 36: D381–D385.
Yu, K., Chedin, F., Hsieh, C.L., Wilson, T.E., and Lieber, M.R. 2003.
R-loops at immunoglobulin class switch regions in the chromosomes
of stimulated B cells. Nat. Immunol. 4: 442–451.
Yu, K., Roy, D., Bayramyan, M., Haworth, I.S., and Lieber, M.R. 2005.
Fine-structure analysis of activation-induced deaminase accessibility
to class switch region R-loops. Mol. Cell. Biol. 25: 1730–1736.
Received January 29, 2008; accepted in revised form April 16, 2008.
Transcription induces strand-specific mutations
Genome Research 1223
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on April 23, 2009 - Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
