Analytic models for a rapidly spinning spherical satellite charging in
sunlight
Maurice Tautz
AER/Radex Inc., Lexington, Massachusetts, USA
Shu T. Lai
Space Vehicles Directorate, Air Force Research Laboratory, Hanscom Air Force Base, Massachusetts, USA
Received 14 September 2004; revised 24 March 2005; accepted 7 April 2005; published 19 July 2005.
[1] We present elementary analytic models for a fast-spinning, dielectric-coated, spherical
spacecraft charging in sunlight. The models are based on a multipole expansion of
Laplacian potentials external to the spacecraft surface. We assume azimuthal symmetry
about the spin axis, and the spin period must be short compared with surface differential
charging times. There are three parameters in the models: the monopole potential, the
relative strength of the dipole/quadrupole components with respect to the monopole, and a
mixing angle. The combination of monopole potentials along with the dipole or
quadrupole contributions produce potential barriers which form at the satellite surface.
These barriers can act to block escaping photoelectrons and lead to current balance,
allowing sunlight charging to high negative levels. The sunlit side charges less
(negatively) than the shade side and the ratio of Sun to shade potentials is near its
threshold value for high-level charging. We have calculated more general cases with
various values of Sun angle relative to the spin axis by combining the dipole and
quadrupole components. The potential barrier shape and area vary for different cases and
the maximum barrier approximately follows the Sun angle. We stress that for physical
interpretation of data obtained on board, one should take into account the potential
distribution and where the instrument is located.
Citation: Tautz, M., and S. T. Lai (2005), Analytic models for a rapidly spinning spherical satellite charging in sunlight, J. Geophys.
Res., 110, A07220, doi:10.1029/2004JA010787.
1. Introduction
[2] Spacecraft charging occurs when there is build up of
charge on exposed external surfaces of a satellite due to
interaction with the ambient space environment. There are
two main types of charging: absolute charging, which
occurs when the entire spacecraft potential relative to the
space plasma is changed, and differential charging, where
parts of the spacecraft go to different potentials relative to
each other. The result can be degradation of surface prop-
erties and disruption of spacecraft operations. The space-
craft charging phenomena is a key issue of space physics,
since it is both a consequence of the space environment and
an important consideration for space plasma characteriza-
tion from a charged satellite. We develop here simple
analytic models of daylight differential charging which
enable one to capture the first-order features of the charging
of fast spinning satellites in sunlight.
[3] It is known that a satellite in sunlight can charge to
substantial negative voltages, even though the photoelectron
current (positive) is typically much larger than the ambient
currents in space. This effect occurs because photoelectrons
escaping from the satellite surface can be blocked by local
potential barriers. The formation of such a barrier is a
multidimensional effect, where shaded surfaces build up
to high negative potentials and then wrap around to sup-
press the escape of low-energy electrons elsewhere on the
satellite. When the outgoing flux of photoelectrons is
reduced in this way, current balance on the satellite can
be readily achieved. In this paper, we consider charging
models which are based on blocked photoelectron currents.
[4] For a real spacecraft with various surface elements,
there will be approximate azimuthal symmetry if the satellite
is rapidly rotating so that it experiences only time-averaged
photoemission. By rapidmotion,wemean that the differential
charging time is long compared with the spin period. Many
space research satellites at geosynchronous altitudes feature
rapid spinning and dielectric surfaces. For example, the
spacecraft potential of the Los Alamos National Laboratory
(LANL) geosynchronous satellites is determined based on the
spin-averaged energy spectra for ions and electrons (M.F.
Thomsen, personal communication, 2002).
[5] The existence of potential barriers, though never
explicitly measured, has been inferred from the electron
energy spectra observed at a spot on the surface on the ATS-
5 satellite [Olsen, 1980; Olsen et al., 1981] and on ISEE 1
[Olsen and Whipple, 1988] previously. Potential barriers
JOURNAL OF GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH, VOL. 110, A07220, doi:10.1029/2004JA010787, 2005
Copyright 2005 by the American Geophysical Union.
0148-0227/05/2004JA010787$09.00
A07220 1 of 9
were also of concern for the Geotail and Cluster satellites
[Zhao et al., 1996; Thiebault et al., 2004]. We remark that
the distribution of the satellite surface potential has not been
measured on the LANL satellite or any other spacecraft. For
example, the SCATHA [Stevens and Vampola, 1978] satel-
lite potential was measured on the ends of two booms [Lai,
1994], on four very small pieces of adjacent surfaces, and
by means of the ion spectrum measured at a spot. Such
spotty measurements were insufficient to map the potential
distribution. At the present, there is no in-flight measure-
ment available for comparison with models of satellite
potential distributions. Such measurements can be done on
future satellites if properly equipped.
[6] There are benefits for modeling potential distributions.
For example, in considering current balance in sunlight, one
needs to knowhowmuch of the photoelectron current emitted
from the spacecraft surfaces is blocked by potential barriers.
Current balance determines the equilibrium potential of
spacecraft surfaces. Since photoelectrons are of low energy
(temperature1.2 eV), they are sensitive to potential barriers.
In general, the potential height, shape, and spatial distribution
of barriers are important factors affecting the escape of
photoelectrons. If these factors are known, one can even
calculate the trajectories of the photoelectrons reflecting back
from, or escaping through, the barriers. If most of the
photoelectron current escapes, it would mostly likely exceed
the ambient current and control the charging of the surfaces.
For geophysical applications, the researchers often need to
estimate the effect of charging on the instruments which are
located on, or are protruding from, satellite surfaces. The
models feature a potential barrier in the region receiving
sunlight at or near normal incident angle. The effects on the
instrument can be very different depending on where the
instruments are in the potential distribution. Therefore there is
a need to better model and understand simple potential
distributions on spacecraft.
[7] The analytic models that are considered assume
azimuthal symmetry around the spin axis and Laplacian
potentials. The potentials exterior to a spherical satellite with
azimuthal symmetry can be expanded in a series of multipole
terms. Here we keep the three lowest-order terms: the
monopole, dipole, and the quadrupole. There are two special
combinations of interest: the monopole-dipole model and the
monopole-quadrupole model. The monopole-dipole model,
where the satellite is nonrotating, has been treated by Besse
and Rubin [1980], Mandell et al. [1978], and Higgins
[1979]. The monopole-quadrupole model has been treated
by Tautz [2003]. In the monopole-dipole model we can
interpret the Sun as shining on a spin axis pole, and in the
monopole-quadrupole model the Sun is shining at the belly
band of the satellite. In this paper, we discuss the above
models in relation to the more general case, where the Sun
direction angle with respect to the spin axis is arbitrary.
[8] The formation of a potential barrier is the main driver
for daylight charging, since it can block escaping photo-
electrons and allow negative charging even on sunlit
surfaces. Analytic models, although giving only a simplified
representation of reality, are relevant to spacecraft charging
because they help understand the physics, provide first
estimates, and describe limit cases. The analytic monopole-
dipole-quadrupole models given here are based on barriers
that form from linear combinations of azimuthally symmetric
Laplacian potentials. The resulting field surrounding the
spacecraft represents the approximate shape of the charging
response in daylight of a fast-spinning, roughly spherical,
mostly nonconducting satellite in a low-density space plasma
environment. Any satellite in these conditions would
approach the models.
[9] There are three parameters in the analytic models. The
first parameter, K, is the monopole potential. The second
parameter, A, is the dipole/quadrupole strength relative to
the monopole. The third parameter, q, is the mixing angle.
The basic equations of the models and their parameters are
described in section 2. In section 3, numerical solutions are
outlined and results are given in (A, q) space. The solutions
are depicted by color contour plots of the potentials in the
physical space surrounding the satellite for several mixing
angles. In section 4, we discuss real sunlight charging in
space and make a brief reference to experimental results.
Section 5 contains summary remarks.
2. Description of the Models
[10] For a dielectric covered satellite rotating in sunlight,
the characteristic time for differential charging of a surface
area element can be estimated from the equation JDt = CDV,
where C is the capacitance per unit area, DV is the charging
voltage, and J is the driving photoelectron current density.
The value of C depends on the surface material properties:
C  o/d, where  is the relative dielectric constant and d is
the thickness. Given  = 2.0 (Teflon) and a thickness of
104 m, we get C = 0.2 mf.m2. If we put in some typical
values (DV = 3 kV, J = 105 A m2), we find Dt  60 s.
This number could vary by an order of magnitude, depend-
ing on the surface conditions. If the spin period is much
longer than Dt (slow motion), the surface can react in time
to follow the Sun. If the spin period is short compared with
Dt (rapid motion), the surface has time to react only to a
rotation averaged solar illumination.
[11] Plasma potentials are obtained from Poisson’s equa-
tion, which in dimensionless form is r2c = r/l2, where c =
ef/kT, T is temperature, r is the sum of the normalized ion
and electron densities, and l is the Debye length. If l is a
few meters to kilometers in length, as is often the case in
geosynchronous orbits, the ambient density term may be
neglected and Laplace’s vacuum equation used. Even when
solving Poisson’s equation in the photoelectron barrier
region, the space charge has only a small effect for high-
voltage differential charging (as indicated by Mandell et al.
[1978]) and may be omitted. We use Laplacian potentials
throughout this paper.
[12] Consider a dielectric covered spherical satellite that is
spinning rapidly in sunlight so that only time-averaged
rotational effects are important. For this case, there is approx-
imate azimuthal symmetry around the spin axis. If the
ambient charge density is low, which often occurs at geosyn-
chronous altitudes, the potentials outside such a satellite are
given approximately by a solution to Laplace’s equation. In
spherical coordinates, the azimuthally symmetric exterior
Laplacian potentials are of the form (see Schwartz [1972]):
V r; tð Þ ¼
X1
n¼0
Bn
Pn tð Þ
rnþ1
; ð1Þ
A07220 TAUTZ AND LAI: SPINNING SATELLITE CHARGING IN SUNLIGHT
2 of 9
A07220
where r is the radius and t is the angle from the north pole.
The sum is over n = 0, 1, 2. . . and Pn(t) is the nth-order
Legendre polynomial. The constant coefficients Bn depend
on the exterior conditions. For convenience, we can factor
out the first term so that
V r; tð Þ ¼ K
r
X1
n¼0
AnPn tð Þ
rn
; ð2Þ
where K = B0 is the monopole potential and the coefficients
An = Bn/K give the strength relative to the monopole. In this
paper we consider the first three terms in the expansion,
i.e., A0(=1), A1, A2 and their corresponding Legendre
polynomials:
P0 tð Þ ¼ 1; P1 tð Þ ¼ cos tð Þ; P2 tð Þ ¼ 3 cos
2 tð Þ  1
2
: ð3Þ
There are two cases of special interest:
A1 = A, A2 = 0: the monopole-dipole solution.
A1 = 0, A2 = A: the monopole-quadrupole solution.
Note that the minus sign in the monopole-dipole case is
arbitrary: it puts the Sun direction at the north spin pole
instead of the south. In the monopole-quadrupole case, the
Sun is considered to be at the belly band [Tautz, 2003].
[13] The K parameter in the models depends on the
balance of the incoming and outgoing satellite surface
currents and for negative charging is less than zero. The A
parameter, which gives the strength of the nonmonopole
contribution to the expansion, is also set by current balance.
Thus in sunlight a potential barrier forms just outside the
sphere surface, which, for a certain A value, suppresses
escaping photoelectrons so that a balance can be made with
the other currents to the satellite. Since the currents are here
not assumed to be known, K and A are free parameters of
the models.
[14] We now wish to consider the more general case
where the Sun angle lies somewhere between the directions
given in the above two models. To this end, we introduce
the parameterization
A1 ¼ A cos q ð4Þ
A2 ¼ A sin q; ð5Þ
where q is a mixing angle measured with respect to the spin
axis. The minus sign is again arbitrary and agrees with
previous treatments. This parameterization allows for a
continuous Sun modulation of the solutions and is chosen
so that we recover the special cases
q = 0 ! the monopole-dipole solution (Sun at north
pole)
q = 90 ! the monopole-quadrupole solution (Sun at
belly-band)
q = 180! the reversed monopole-dipole solution (Sun
at south pole).
Using the above A, q parameterization, the expression for V
becomes
V r; tð Þ ¼ K
r
1þ A  cos qP1 tð Þ
r
þ sin qP2 tð Þ
r2
  
: ð6Þ
Since the above potentials scale with K, we can analyze the
problem mainly in terms of A and q and employ the
normalized potentials V(r, t)/K.
[15] Using the reflection symmetries of the Legendre
polynomials (P1(180  t) = P1(t) and P2(180  t) =
P2(t)), we find
V r; 180  tð Þ ¼ K
r
1þ A cos qP1 tð Þ
r
þ sin qP2 tð Þ
r2
  
; ð7Þ
which differs from V(r, t) only by the sign in the cosine
term. If we make the further parameter transformation q !
180  q, we get back V(r, t). This shows that models
related by the q transformation have reflection symmetry
about the belly band. Since the angle q = 0 maps into 180,
the monopole-dipole and reversed monopole-dipole models
are essentially the same, except that the north and south
poles are switched.
[16] If we assume a unit radius sphere, we have on the
surface
V 1; tð Þ ¼ K 1þ A  cos qP1 tð Þ þ sin qP2 tð Þð Þ½  ð8Þ
and we get by substitution the north, middle, and south
surface potentials
V 1; 0ð Þ ¼ VN ¼ K 1þ A  cos qþ sin qð Þð Þ
V 1; 90ð Þ ¼ VM ¼ K 1 A sin qð Þ=2ð Þ
V 1; 180ð Þ ¼ VS ¼ K 1þ A cos qþ sin qð Þð Þ
ð9Þ
For the axis aligned with the Sun (q = 0, 180), the sine is
zero and we have VM = K. For the Sun direction orthogonal
to the spin axis (q = 90), the cosine is zero and we have
VS = VN. Other values of the surface potentials for the
monopole-dipole and monopole-quadrupole special cases
are summarized in Appendix A. Under the q transformation,
VS ! VN, VN ! VS, and VM ! VM. The above relations can
be inverted to yield back K, A, and q:
K ¼ VN þ VS þ 4VMð Þ=6 ð90Þ
A ¼ 1 VN þ VS
K
þ V
2
N þ V 2S
2K2
 1=2
ð10Þ
q ¼ cos1 VS  VN
2KA
 
: ð11Þ
Thus the three measured potentials VS, VM, and VN could
be used to estimate the model parameters K, A, and q.
Two surface potential ratios of physical interest are
(north-to-south):
VN
VS
¼ 1þ A sin q cos qð Þ
1þ A sin qþ cos qð Þ : ð12Þ
and (middle-to-south):
VM
VS
¼ 1 A sin qð Þ=2
1þ A sin qþ cos qð Þ : ð13Þ
A07220 TAUTZ AND LAI: SPINNING SATELLITE CHARGING IN SUNLIGHT
3 of 9
A07220
These ratios compare approximate shade and sunlit side
charging levels and are independent of K.
3. Numerical Solution of the Models
[17] For substantial negative charging to occur in sun-
light, we expect a potential barrier to form just outside the
surface, in order to trap escaping photoelectrons. Such a
barrier exists if
dV r; tð Þ=dr ¼ 0 ð14Þ
has a solution. Using the previous expression for V(r, t), we
get
K
r2
1 2 cos qAP1 tð Þ
r
þ 3 sin qAP2 tð Þ
r2
 
¼ 0; ð15Þ
which gives a quadratic equation for r:
r2  2 cos qAP1 tð Þr þ 3 sin qAP2 tð Þ ¼ 0: ð16Þ
The solution rb for the barrier radius is thus
rb A; q; tð Þ ¼ cos qAP1 tð Þ þ cos qAP1 tð Þð Þ2  3 sin qAP2 tð Þ
h i1=2
:
ð17Þ
Since rb is a function of the angle t, we can find the value of
t = tB(A, q) that makes the barrier radius a maximum, rB, and
which can be used to define the barrier angle. At such a t
value, if rB > 1.0, then the potential barrier lies outside the
surface. The angles in the problem are shown in Figure 1.
[18] A barrier forms only for certain values above a
threshold depending on A and q. The value of the threshold
can be determined from the condition rB = 1.0. Here we
have obtained rB at each A and q by solving numerically the
equation
rB ¼ rb A; q; tB A; qð Þð Þ: ð18Þ
In the analysis, tB was initially found by sweeping through
the range of t and saving the angle giving the maximum rB.
Subsequently, this method was augmented by an analytic
calculation (see Appendix B). We note that tB is not always
aligned with the mixing angle q direction. This alignment is
true for the poles and at the belly band but not for the
between angles. The angle tB can be thought of as a crude
indicator of the Sun direction. Since there is an approximate
correspondence between tB and q, we can interpret the
mixing angle q as roughly pointing toward the Sun.
[19] In Figure 2 we have plotted the rB results in (A, q)
space. The contour line with rB = 1.0 represents the
threshold boundary for barrier formation. Points to the right
of this line can charge. One can see that there is structure to
the thresholds. A minimum threshold A value occurs with
the Sun at the spin poles (q = 0, 180) and a lesser
minimum at the belly band (q = 90), while maxima are
found at about q = 25 and 155 degrees.
[20] The height of the potential barrier was taken as
VB ¼ V rB; tBð Þ  V 1; tBð Þ; ð19Þ
and a plot of VB in (A, q) space is given in Figure 3. Since
the potential is proportional to K, it is convenient to plot the
normalized quantity VB/K. Note that at the threshold, VB = 0
and hence this contour line follows the rB threshold line
given in Figure 2.
[21] In order to get a representation of the Sun to shade
charging ratio, we introduce a variable:
VSS ¼ Vsun=Vshade; ð20Þ
Figure 1. Angles in the sunlight charging models. One
recovers the monopole-dipole model if q = 0 and the
monopole-quadrupole model if q = 90.
Figure 2. The radius rB of the maximum potential barrier
versus A and theta. The value of rB is in units of the satellite
radius. Here q = 0 corresponds to the spin axis being
parallel to sunlight, while q = 90 corresponds to sunlight
shining on the belly band. At q = 0, rB starts at unity when
the A reaches the threshold value of 0.5. At q = 90, rB starts
at unity when A reaches the threshold at 0.667.
A07220 TAUTZ AND LAI: SPINNING SATELLITE CHARGING IN SUNLIGHT
4 of 9
A07220
where normalized Vshade gives the largest charging level
away from the Sun
Vshade ¼ Max VS=K; VN=Kð Þ ð21Þ
and normalized Vsun gives the charging level underneath the
potential barrier
Vsun ¼ V 1; tBð Þ=K: ð22Þ
The VSS ratio allows for a smooth transformation from VN/VS
at q = 0 to VM/VS at q = 90 and to VS/VN at q = 180. A plot
of VSS is given in Figure 4. It can be seen that the ratio is
0.33 at the spin pole thresholds and 0.4 at the belly band. The
symmetry about q = 90 is evident.
[22] Figures 5a–5f show the model solutions for various
mixing angles in the physical space surrounding the sphere.
The contour plots show a Y = 0 slice of data expressed in
X, Y, Z coordinates, which are normalized to the sphere
radius. All potentials have been normalized to K. The A
parameter has been selected so that the barrier potential ratio
VB/K  0.01. This sets up a barrier of 10 V, given a
monopole potential of 1000 V. The plots are given for six
angles q = 0, 30, 45, 60, 90, and 180 degrees. In the figures,
the mixing angle is denoted by a radial white line. One can
see that an azimuthally symmetric potential barrier approx-
imately follows the q angle as it goes from the north spin pole
to the south. Figures 5a, 5e, and 5f show the monopole-
dipole, monopole-quadrupole, and reversed monopole-
dipole systems. The pair of Figures 5a and 5f illustrate the
model reflection symmetry with respect to the belly band,
for systems related by the mixing angles q and 180  q.
4. Real Sunlight Charging
[23] Photoemission currents (positive) usually dominate
over other ambient currents in the magnetosphere. There-
fore by using straightforward current balance, we might
expect charging to positive levels. Yet negative spacecraft
charging is reported not only in eclipse but also sometimes
in sunlight. A bootstrap mechanism for sunlight charging is
known. The shaded surfaces charge up and the fields wrap
around the satellite and set up a potential barrier over the
sunlit surfaces. Photoelectrons emitted from the sunlit
surfaces encounter the radial barriers and a fraction is
returned. The barrier height adjusts until the total net current
to the satellite goes to zero.
[24] In this paper we keep only the first three terms in the
potential expansion so that the treatment is approximate,
even in the simple cases of mixing (q = 0, 90). It is
impossible within this framework to give a self-consistent
treatment of the photoemission dynamics. To do this would
require solving Poisson’s equation using the electron space
charge density and tracking the photoelectrons to determine
the net current. In order to trap the outgoing electrons, an
area with significant photoemission must have a potential
barrier on top of it. A real satellite would be exposed to
180 degrees of sunlight, whereas the barrier regions in our
simplified models can be much smaller than this. This
situation cannot be self-consistent because all photoelec-
trons outside of this region would escape, giving a reduced
potential. On the other hand, the solar flux projected on a
spherical surface decreases by the cosine of the angle of
incidence and the photoemission yield will also go down
with angle of incidence due to reflection at the surface
so that the effective area of exposure is reduced from
180 degrees (see below). Also, in the models, the width
and height of the barrier tend to grow larger as the A
parameter is increased from threshold, leading to more
trapped photoelectrons. The above remarks are in the right
direction, but we cannot expect that the real potential
Figure 3. Barrier potential VB/K versus A and q. At q = 0,
the barrier potential starts at zero when the A reaches the
threshold value of 0.5. At q = 90, the barrier potential starts
at zero when A reaches the threshold at 0.667.
Figure 4. Sun to shade potential ratio VSS versus A and
theta. At q = 0, the ratio equals about 0.33 when A equals
0.5, the threshold value. At q = 90, the ratio equals 0.4
when A reaches the threshold at 0.667. The first line gives
values along the threshold boundary curve seen in Figures 2
and 3.
A07220 TAUTZ AND LAI: SPINNING SATELLITE CHARGING IN SUNLIGHT
5 of 9
A07220
profile, self-consistent with photoemission dynamics, to be
obtained by our approximate models.
[25] Laboratory measurements show that photoelectrons
are approximately Maxwellian with a few eV in energy
[Hinteregger et al., 1959; Feurenbacher and Fitton, 1972;
Wrenn and Heikkila, 1973;Whipple, 1981]. The fraction f of
photoelectron flux escaping a linear barrier of height B > 0
scales as
f / exp B=Tph
 	
; ð23Þ
where Tph is the photoelectron temperature. In order to
significantly reduce the outgoing photoemission current, B
needs to be a few times Tph, but since Tph at geosynchro-
nous altitudes is typically small (1.2 eV) [Whipple, 1981;
Lai et al., 1986], B would need to be only of order 10 V to
suppress most of the photoemission flux emerging below
the barrier.
[26] Photoemission can occur on surfaces instantaneously
exposed to sunlight. For a spinning satellite the shaded areas
could be characterized by s = t  q >= 90, where s is the
Sun angle of incidence (see Figure 1). This is because on a
sphere, area element normals have a cos(s) projection in the
light direction. For example, in the monopole-quadrupole
case, where the Sun is at the belly band, this criterion
strictly includes just the north and south spin poles. How-
ever, there is another important effect to consider, the
surface reflectance increases with the incident angle. As
Figure 5. (a) Normalized potentials for the case q = 0, VB/K = 0.01. Y = 0. This is a monopole-dipole
case. The spin axis is vertical and parallel to the sunlight direction. High negative potentials appear on the
shadowed side. (b) Normalized potentials for the case q = 30, VB/K = 0.01. Y = 0. The spin axis is
vertical. The sunlight direction is along the 30 line. (c) Normalized potentials for the case q = 45,
VB/K = 0.01, Y = 0. The spin axis is vertical. The sunlight direction is along the 45 line.
(d) Normalized potentials for the case q = 60, VB/K = 0.01. Y = 0. The spin axis is vertical and the
sunlight direction is along the 60 line. Note the symmetry about the spin axis but not with respect to the
sun direction. (e) Normalized potentials for the case q = 90, VB/K = 0.01. Y = 0. This is the monopole-
quadrupole case. The spin axis is vertical and perpendicular to the sunlight direction. The symmetry with
respect to the sunlight direction is apparent. (f) Normalized potentials for the case q = 180, VB/K = 0.01.
Y = 0. This is a reverse monopole-dipole case similar to that in Figure 5a but with the spin and the
sunlight direction antiparallel to each other.
A07220 TAUTZ AND LAI: SPINNING SATELLITE CHARGING IN SUNLIGHT
6 of 9
A07220
an effect of this property, the photoemission per unit area
further diminishes. The photoelectron current as a function
of the reflectance R [see, e.g., Samson, 1967] is given by
Iph Rð Þ ¼ Iph 0ð Þ 1 R s;wð Þ½ ; ð24Þ
where w is the light frequency. The reflectance R(s) is a
minimum at normal incidence and maximum to unity at
grazing incidence (s = 90) (for typical graphs, see Powell
[1970] and Lai et al. [1986]). The photoemission currents
are thus expected to decrease with incident angle by the
factor
g ¼ cos sð Þ 1 R s;wð Þ
1 R 0;wð Þ
 
; ð25Þ
and hence there is a corresponding increase in the effective
shaded area.
[27] The emerging low-energy photoelectrons are steered
toward the barrier region by the local fields. In high-level
charging, the barrier potential B = VB from the models is
small compared with other potentials in the problem (K can
be in the kV range), and the model tends to be near the
threshold limit at VB/K = 0.0. This can be seen by looking at
Figures 2 and 3. The Sun-to-shade potential ratio VSS is a
maximum at the threshold values, which can be seen in
Figure 4. The threshold limits of VSS are 0.33 in the
monopole-dipole cases (q = 0, 180), 0.4 for the mono-
pole-quadrupole case (q = 90), and intermediate Sun angles
can have lower values.
[28] Thus if we know the approximate angle q, we can
estimate the Sun-to-shade charging ratio from the model.
The ratio will be less than or equal to the threshold. If the
satellite is covered mainly by dielectrics, and there is
minimal current transport between shade and Sun sides,
this ratio corresponds approximately to measured sunlight
to eclipse charging ratios. As a footnote, we emphasize
again that the spacecraft surfaces are assumed to be insu-
lating or not connected because uniform charging without
barriers in sunlight would not enable high-level negative-
voltage charging in sunlight to occur. Sunlight to eclipse
charging ratios of 0.33 approximately have been observed
(S. T. Lai and M. Tautz, High-level spacecraft charging in
eclipse at geosynchronous altitudes: A statistical study,
submitted mansucript, 2005) in the Los Alamos National
Laboratory (LANL) satellite data. The LANL satellites have
geosynchronous orbits and their spin period is 10 s [Bame
et al., 1993]. The data for over 10 flight years and from five
different satellites was looked at. Statistical plots of charg-
ing potentials in eclipse and in sunlight were accumulated
versus electron temperature and the ratios calculated
(Figure 6). In this figure, we have plotted the spacecraft
potential versus the ambient electron temperature. The
potential was obtained by identifying the peak in the ion
energy distribution as the spacecraft potential (negative
voltage). The measurements were in discrete energy chan-
nels. The discreteness manifest as the quantized behavior of
the spacecraft potential in Figure 6. The centroid of all the
data on the same quantized level is shown as a triangle. The
ambient electron temperature was obtained by means of
the moments of the electron distribution function. There
are two branches in Figure 6, corresponding to charging in
eclipse (upper curve) and in sunlight. The sunlight curve is
smooth because the LANL team, having noticed the
approximate dependence of spacecraft potential on the
electron temperature, interpolated the sunlit branch to form
a smooth curve. For our purpose, the details of the treat-
ments of ion peaks and temperature moments are unnec-
essary; the reader interested in details is referred to Bame
et al. [1993] and Thomsen et al. [1999]. Because the
LANL satellites point toward the Earth center, the Sun
angle on entering eclipse is similar to that of the mono-
pole-dipole configuration which has a threshold VSS value
of 0.33. This shows that the simple models presented here
have relevance to real charging cases in the fast spin limit.
[29] In a real physical charging case, the surface will not
be exactly spherical and, indeed, if the surface is not smooth
enough, the distance and shape of the barrier will be greatly
affected by the surface geometry. In a real case, there also
would not be exact azimuthal symmetry, although our
approximation of symmetric potential tends to improve at
higher spin rates. The surface materials of a real satellite
may be quite varied and contain a mixture of dielectrics and
conductors, with complicated electrical connections.
5. Summary and Conclusion
[30] When the ambient density is low, the potentials
exterior to a spacecraft are given approximately by solutions
Figure 6. Plot of spacecraft potential versus ambient
electron temperature obtained on Satellite LANL 1990-095,
13–19 September 1993–2001. The upper branch is for
charging in eclipse and the lower branch in sunlight. Ratio
of sunlight charging to eclipse charging is nearly 0.33. The
spacecraft potential data appear quantized because of the
way the instrument was designed. Each triangle represents
the centroid of the data at the same quantized level. The
sunlit data are not quantized because the LANL team has
interpolated them to form a smooth curve.
A07220 TAUTZ AND LAI: SPINNING SATELLITE CHARGING IN SUNLIGHT
7 of 9
A07220
to the Laplace equation. A rapidly spinning satellite has
approximate azimuthal symmetry around the spin axis, due
to revolution time averaging. An azimuthally symmetric
dielectric sphere will have a Laplace solution for the
exterior potentials given in terms of a multipole expansion.
The monopole-dipole combination represents a satellite
with the spin axis pointed at the Sun and the monopole-
quadrupole solution corresponds to a satellite with the Sun
at right angles to the spin axis. In the general case, the Sun
direction will make an arbitrary angle with respect to the
spin axis and the potentials will be given by a combination
of the above models.
[31] To build a model based on the general Sun orienta-
tion, the Laplace potential expansion coefficients were
taken as a Sun direction modulation factor times an ampli-
tude giving the relative strength of the dipole/quadrupole
terms. For parameter values above threshold, the models
will set up a potential barrier near to the Sun direction. The
barrier height, which is a function of the model parameters,
acts to suppress photoemission and ultimately to allow
current balance on the satellite. The ratio of the sunlight-
to-shade potentials on the satellite surface is predicted to be
less than or equal to the threshold.
[32] The models will give a better representation of
barrier-dominated daylight charging of spherical satellites
as long as the following approximations are satisfied: there
is azimuthal symmetry about the spin axes, the surface is
covered uniformly with dielectric, and internal electrical
connections may be ignored. The smoother the surfaces and
the higher the spin rate, the better the approximation will be.
The overall approximations are that ambient density is low
enough that Laplace potentials may be used and that
multipole terms higher than the quadrupole are not consid-
ered in the potential expansion. Self-consistent photoemis-
sion dynamics is not addressed by the models.
[33] For satellite applications, the distribution of poten-
tials on a spacecraft affects the current flow of low-energy
electrons, such as photoelectrons, to and from surfaces and
onboard instruments. Besides differential charging affecting
current balance, the interpretation of scientific data obtained
on board often requires the knowledge of potential distri-
bution and current flows in the vicinity of the intruments.
As an example, an instrument located near the belly band in
Figure 5a would experience different voltages and current
flows from one in Figure 5e.
[34] As an improvement to previous models of potential
distribution for geophysical applications, we stress that it
is important to pay attention to the sunlight direction, the
spin rate, and the capacitance charging time of the
surfaces. We have studied the interesting case of high
spin rate and long capacitance charging time. The models
depend only on the monopole potential, K, the relative
strength of the dipole/quarupole components, A, and the
approximate Sun angle, q.
[35] In the limit of spin axis being parallel to the sunlight
direction (q = 0), one recovers the monopole-dipole result:
the ratio of potentials of the sunlit side and the shadowed
side equals 0.33 at the charging threshold (A = 0.5). When
the spin axis is perpendicular to the sunlight direction (q =
90), the monopole-quadrupole system results: the ratio of
the sunlit and shaded potentials equals 0.4 at the charging
thresold (A = 0.667). Near the thresholds, the barrier height
can be small compared with the monopole potentials, K, but
is large enough to block emerging low-energy photoelec-
trons. We have calculated more general cases with various q
angles by combining the dipole and quadrupole terms. The
barriers are azimuthally symmetric, but their shape and area
vary for different q angles and the location of the maximum
barrier tends to follow q. We stress that for physical
interpretation of data obtained on board, one should take
into account the potential distribution and where the instru-
ment is located. We hope that the analytical formulation in
this paper will be useful for guiding or helping the devel-
opment of future numerical computational models of charg-
ing of rapidly spinning dielectric satellites in sunlight.
Appendix A: Special Case Parameters
[36] We collect here, for easy reference, parameters for
the monople-dipole and the monopole-quadrupole models.
The notation is the same as in sections 2 and 3.
[37] For the monopole-dipole model q = 0:
VN ¼ K 1 Að Þ
VM ¼ K
VS ¼ K 1þ Að Þ
VSS ¼ VN=VS :
The barrier radius is rb(t) = 2A P1(t) with a maximum at t =
tB = 0, rB = 2A.
At the charging threshold:
A ¼ 1=2 : Vn ¼ K=2; Vm ¼ K; VS ¼ 3=2K:
For the monopole-quadrupole model q = 90;
VN ¼ K 1þ Að Þ
VM ¼ K 1 A=2ð Þ
VS ¼ K 1þ Að Þ
VSS ¼ VM=VS ¼ VM=VN :
The barrier radius is rb(t) =
p
(3AP2(t)) with a
maximum at t = tB = 90, rB =
p
(3/2 A).
At the charging threshold:
A ¼ 2=3 : VN ¼ 5=3K; VM ¼ 2=3K; VS ¼ 5=3K
For the reversed monopole-dipole model q = 180;
replace A by A in the q = 0 potential equations. The
maximum radius is the same because tB = 180.
Appendix B: Calculating the Barrier Angle
tB(A, Q).
[38] To find the angle giving the maximum barrier
radius,we use the condition
d rb A; q; tð Þ
dt
¼ 0; ðB1Þ
A07220 TAUTZ AND LAI: SPINNING SATELLITE CHARGING IN SUNLIGHT
8 of 9
A07220
where rb(A, q, t) is given in section 3. This leads to the
equation
sin t A
1
þ 0:5 f tð Þð Þ1=2a cos t
h i
¼ 0; ðB2Þ
where we define
f tð Þ ¼ A1P1 tð Þð Þ2  3A2P2 tð Þ ðB3Þ
and
a ¼ 2A21 þ 9A2: ðB4Þ
Here A1, A2 are the same as in section 2 and the P1(t), P2(t)
are Legendre polynomials. We let x = cos t and solve the
bracket part of equation (B2) for x, giving
x ¼ 6A2g
2ð Þ
1þ 2g2a
 1=2
; ðB5Þ
where we have further defined
g ¼ A1=a: ðB6Þ
If we can find a real x that satisfies x < 1, then we have the
solution
tB A; qð Þ ¼ cos1 x; ðB7Þ
or else if there is no solution for x, then from equation (B2)
we take sin t = 0 which gives t = 0, 180 depending on the
quadrant.
[39] Acknowledgments. The Los Alamos Magnetospheric Plasma
Analyzer (MPA) measurements were obtained from the CDAWeb data
service at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. We thank M. F. Thomsen
for permission to use the MPA data. We also thank Shawn Young for
reading the revised manuscript. The work of Maurice Tautz was done done
under contract F19628-00-C-0089.
[40] Shadia Rifai Habbal thanks Jean-Francois Roussel and another
referee for their assistance in evaluating this paper.
References
Bame, S. J., et al. (1993), Magnetospheric plasma analyzer for satellites
with constrained resources, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 64(4), 1026–1033.
Besse, A., and A. Rubin (1980), A simple analysis of spacecraft charging
involving blocked photoelectron currents, J. Geophys. Res., 85(A5),
2324–2328.
Feurenbacher, B., and B. Fitton (1972), Experimental investigation of
photoemission from satellite surface materials, J. Appl. Phys., 43,
1563–1572.
Higgins, D. (1979), An analytic model of multi-dimensional spacecraft
charging fields and potentials, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 26(6), 5162–5167.
Hinteregger, H. E., K. R. Damon, and L. A. Hall (1959), Analysis of
photoelectrons from solar extreme ultraviolet, J. Geophys. Res., 64,
961–964.
Lai, S. T. (1994), An improved Langmuir probe formula for modeling
satellite interactions with near-geostationary environment, J. Geophy.
Res., 99(A1), 459–467.
Lai, S. T., H. A. Cohen, T. L. Aggson, and W. J. McNeil (1986), Charging
of booms on a satellite rotating in sunlight, J. Geophys. Res., 91(A11),
12,137–12,141.
Mandell, M., I. Katz, G. Schnuelle, P. Steen, and J. Roche (1978), The
decrease in effective photo-currents due to saddle points in electrostatic
potentials near differentially charged spacecraft, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci,
26(6), 1313–1317.
Olsen, R. C. (1980), Differential and active charging results from the ATS
spacecraft, Ph.D. thesis, Univ. of Calif., San Diego, La Jolla, Calif.
Olsen, R. C., C. E. McElwain, and E. C. Whipple (1981), Observations of
differential charging effects on ATS-6, J. Geophys. Res., 86(A8), 6809–
6819.
Olsen, R. C., and E. C. Whipple (1988), An unusual charging event on
ISEE 1, J. Geophys. Res., 93(A6), 5568–5578.
Powell, C. J. (1970), Analysis of optical and inelastic electronscattering
data. III Reflectance data for beryllium, germanium, antimony, and bis-
muth, J. Opt. Soc. Am., 60(2), 214–220.
Samson, J. A. R. (1967), Techniques of Ultraviolet Spectroscopy, John
Wiley, Hoboken, N. J.
Schwartz, M. (1972), Principles of Electrodynamics, McGraw-Hill, New
York.
Stevens, J. R., and A. L. Vampola (Eds.) (1978), Description of the space
test program P78-2 spacecraft and payloads, Rep. SAMSO-TR-78-24.,
ADA-06-1324, Air Force Sys. Command, Los Angeles, Calif.
Tautz, M. (2003), Analytic models for sunlight charging of a rapidly spin-
ning satellite, AFGL-TR-2003-1557, ADA416912, Air Force Res. Lab.,
Hanscom Air Force Base, Mass.
Thiebault, B., A. Hilgers, E. Sasot, H. Laakso, O. Escoubet, V. Genot, and
J. Forest (2004), Potential barrier in the electrostatic sheath around a
magnetospheric spacecraft, J. Geophys. Res. , 109 , A12207,
doi:10.1029/2004JA010398.
Thomsen, M. F., E. Noveroske, J. E. Borovsky, and D. J. McComas (1999),
Calculation of moments from measurements by the Los Alamos Magne-
tospheric plasma analyzer, Rep. LA-13566-MS, Los Alamos Natl. Lab.,
Los Alamos, N. M.
Whipple, E. C. (1981), Potentials of surfaces in space, Rep. Progr. Phys.,
44, 1197–1250.
Wrenn, G. L., and W. L. Heikkila (1973), Photoelectrons emitted from ISIS
spacecraft, in Photons and Particle Interactions With Surfaces in Spaces,
edited by R. J. L. Grard, pp. 221–230, Springer, New York.
Zhao, H., R. Schmidt, C. P. Escoubet, K. Torkar, and W. Riedler (1996),
Self-consistent determination of the electronic potential barrier due to the
photoelectron sheath near a spacecraft, J. Geophy. Res., 101, 15,653–
15,659.

S. T. Lai, Space Vehicles Directorate, Air Force Research Laboratory,
Hanscom Air Force Base, MA 01731-3010, USA. (shu.lai@hanscom.af.
mil)
M. Tautz, AER/Radex Inc., Lexington, MA 02421, USA.
A07220 TAUTZ AND LAI: SPINNING SATELLITE CHARGING IN SUNLIGHT
9 of 9
A07220
