Gender Differences in UVB-Induced Skin Carcinogenesis,
Inflammation, and DNA Damage
Jennifer M. Thomas-Ahner,
1
Brian C. Wulff,
1
Kathleen L. Tober,
1
Donna F. Kusewitt,
2
Judy A. Riggenbach,
1
and Tatiana M. Oberyszyn
1
Departments of 1Pathology and 2Veterinary Biosciences, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio
Abstract
The American Cancer Society reports the incidence of
squamous cell carcinoma in males to be thrice the incidence
in females. This increased squamous cell carcinoma incidence
has been attributed to men accumulating more sun exposure
and using less sun protection than women. To date, there have
been no controlled studies examining the effect of gender on
skin tumor development following equal doses of UVB. Gender
differences in UVB-induced skin carcinogenesis were exam-
ined using the Skh-1 mouse model. After chronic exposure to
equal doses of UVB, male mice developed tumors earlier and
had more tumors than female mice; tumors in male mice
tended to be larger, and the total tumor burden was greater
than in females. In addition, tumors in males were of more
advanced histologic grade compared with those of female
mice. To evaluate the contribution of differences in inflam-
mation and DNA damage to differences in skin carcinogenesis,
male and female Skh-1 mice were exposed once to 2,240 J/m2
UVB and examined 48 h after exposure. Surprisingly, male
mice developed less of an inflammatory response, as
determined by skin fold thickness and myeloperoxidase
activity, compared with females. Interestingly, male mice
showed more cutaneous oxidative DNA damage than the
females and lower antioxidant levels. These results show a
gender bias in skin carcinogenesis and suggest that the gender
difference in tumor development is more influenced by the
extent of oxidative DNA damage and antioxidant capacities
than by inflammatory response. [Cancer Res 2007;67(7):3468–74]
Introduction
Epidemiologic studies have reported the development of
significantly more nonmelanoma skin cancers in men than women
(1–4), with the American Cancer Society reporting approximately
twice the incidence of nonmelanoma skin cancer development
in men compared with women.3 It is currently believed that
lifestyle plays a major role in this gender disparity, as males tend
to spend more time out in the sun and use less sun protection
(5, 6). However, no studies have determined if gender differences in
skin tumor development are still observed when males and females
receive equivalent cumulative UV radiation exposure. Many studies
have shown that chronic exposure to UV radiation leads to the
development of nonmelanoma skin cancer (reviewed in ref. 7).
Nonmelanoma skin cancer includes basal cell carcinoma and
squamous cell carcinoma, which comprise approximately half of all
diagnosed cancers in the United States.3 The incidence of basal cell
carcinoma is 2-fold greater and the incidence of squamous cell
carcinoma is 3-fold greater in males than females.3 Occupational
exposure to UV light shows a strong relationship between
cumulative sunlight exposure and squamous cell carcinoma risk
(8). The UV light B (UVB, 280–320 nm) portion of the solar
spectrum contributes 75% of the skin cancer risk, compared with
25% for UV light A (UVA, 320–400 nm) and 0% for UV light C (UVC,
200–280 nm; ref. 9).
Exposure to UVB induces cutaneous inflammation. A single
exposure to UVB can result in an acute inflammatory response,
which is characterized by erythema (redness) and edema (swelling)
due to increased vascular flow and vascular permeability (reviewed
in refs. 10, 11). Increases in vascular flow and permeability, in turn,
aid in the recruitment and infiltration of inflammatory cells,
including neutrophils and monocytes, into the skin (12, 13).
Adhesion molecules expressed on vascular endothelial cells are
altered to increase adhesion of the inflammatory cells enhancing
their infiltration into the skin (13). Neutrophils are the first
inflammatory cells recruited to UVB-exposed skin. The activity of
myeloperoxidase, an enzyme released by activated neutrophils, is
increased during cutaneous inflammation and induces the
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS; refs. 14, 15). Although
these responses are normal and transient, chronic cutaneous
inflammation due to repeated UVB exposures can have negative
consequences. Our laboratory and others have previously shown a
clear link between UVB-induced inflammation and the develop-
ment of skin tumors (15–20). Inhibition of this inflammatory
response via the topical application of the anti-inflammatory drug,
celecoxib, inhibited the acute inflammatory response after a single
UVB exposure and decreased tumor formation after chronic
exposure (19, 20).
In addition to inducing inflammation in the skin, exposure to
UVB results in the formation of both direct and indirect DNA
damage. Direct damage includes the formation of cyclobutane
pyrimidine dimers (CPD) and (6-4) photoproducts. Exposure to
UVB also indirectly induces oxidative DNA damage, in part through
the generation of ROS by infiltrating inflammatory cells, including
neutrophils and macrophages, and by activated keratinocytes.
There is substantial evidence for the role of ROS in skin
carcinogenesis (reviewed in ref. 21). The most common type of
DNA damage caused by ROS is the formation of 8-oxo-
deoxyguanosine (8-oxo-dG) adducts (reviewed in ref. 22); thus,
8-oxo-dG adducts are a well-recognized marker for DNA damage
caused by oxidative stress (23). ROS induces oxidative damage
when the complex antioxidant mechanisms are overwhelmed (24).
Requests for reprints: Tatiana M. Oberyszyn, Ohio State University, 129 Hamilton
Hall, 1645 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210. Phone: 614-293-9803; Fax: 614-293-9805;
E-mail: oberyszyn.1@osu.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-3798 3 ACS American Cancer Society. www.cancer.org; 2006.
Cancer Res 2007; 67: (7). April 1, 2007 3468 www.aacrjournals.org
Research Article
Failure to adequately repair DNA lesions, both direct and indirect,
can result in the formation of skin cancers (25).
Gender differences have been reported in the development of a
number of diseases. For example, recent studies suggest that
women may be more susceptible to tobacco-induced lung cancer
(26). There have also been reported gender differences in the
development of chronic myeloid leukemia (27), colon cancer (28),
multiple sclerosis (29), and diabetic cardiomyopathy (30). A report
of the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results program of the
National Cancer Institute revealed the cancer incidence for all sites
to be greater in males compared with females, and the cancer
mortality rate is similarly higher in males (31). Although there have
been epidemiologic reports of gender differences in the develop-
ment of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma,3 to date there have
been no controlled murine studies examining this difference. The
current study used a well-established Skh-1 murine model to
compare gender differences in UVB-induced inflammation and
skin carcinogenesis in males and females exposed to equal doses of
UVB and revealed a significant difference between the sexes in
tumor susceptibility.
Materials and Methods
Animal Treatments
Male and female outbred Skh-1 mice (Charles River Laboratories,
Wilmington, MA) were housed in the vivarium at Ohio State University
according to the requirements established by the American Association for
Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care. Procedures were approved by the
appropriate Institutional Animal Care Utilization Committee before the
initiation of any studies. Irradiated mice were exposed to UVB dorsally with
Phillips FS40UVB lamps (American Ultraviolet Company, Lebanon, IN)
fitted with Kodacel filters (Eastman Kodak, Rochester, NY) to ensure the
emission of UVB light (290–320 nm). The UVB dose was determined by a
UVX radiometer (UVB, Inc., Upland, CA). Both male and female mice were
housed six animals per cage, and there was no evidence of dorsal wounds
caused by fighting.
The chronic UVB study was conducted to examine gender differences in
skin carcinogenesis when animals were exposed to equal doses of UVB.
Mice (n = 6 per group) were irradiated thrice weekly with 2,240 J/m2,
previously determined to be 1 minimal erythemic dose (MED) for female
Skh-1 mice, for 16 weeks then sacrificed after week 25. Digital calipers were
used to measure tumors >1 mm in diameter at weekly intervals; the first
measurable tumors appeared in week 6. The time to first tumor was
determined to be the time of the first observation of a measurable tumor.
Immediately after sacrifice, 0.5 cm2 skin sections and multiple tumors were
harvested and fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin.
Acute UVB studies were conducted to compare gender differences in
the cutaneous inflammatory response and in levels of epidermal DNA
damage. Male and female mice were exposed to 2,240 J/m2 UVB and
sacrificed 48 h after exposure. This UVB dose and time point were based
on previous studies in our laboratory, demonstrating the peak of the
inflammatory response to occur 48 h after exposure in both males
and females (data not shown). Additionally, in a dose response study of
males and females with a single UVB exposure ranging from 0 to 4,480 J/m2,
the experimentally determined MED for both males and females was
2,240 J/m2 (data not shown). Immediately following sacrifice, dorsal
skin fold thickness was measured to assess edema, 10-mm punch biopsies
were collected to determine myeloperoxidase levels, 0.5 cm2 skin sections
were harvested and fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for immuno-
histochemical analysis, and the remaining dorsal skin was collected and
snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for antioxidant analysis.
Quantitation of Tissue Myeloperoxidase Levels
Myeloperoxidase, an enzyme that converts hydrogen peroxide to
hypochlorous acid, is released by activated neutrophils during inflamma-
tory events. The levels of myeloperoxidase in cutaneous tissue were
determined biochemically and used as a measure of activated neutrophil
infiltration, as previously described (19).
Immunohistochemical Techniques
Immediately after sacrifice, 0.5 cm2 skin sections and three tumors from
each mouse were placed in 10% neutral buffered formalin (2 h for skin; 4
h for tumors), washed with PBS, processed, and then embedded in paraffin
blocks. Tissue sections (5 Am) were cut and mounted onto Superfrost Plus
microscope slides (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA). The tissues were then
deparaffinized using Clear-Rite 3 (Richard-Allan Scientific, Kalamazoo, MI)
and rehydrated in a graded series of alcohols.
Immunohistochemical detection of epidermal CPDs. For CPD
detection, rehydrated sections were incubated in 3% H2O2 in 100%
methanol for 10 min at room temperature, at 37jC for 10 min in 0.125%
trypsin, and in 1 N HCl for 30 min at room temperature, with dH2O rinses
before and after each step. Sections were then incubated with M.O.M.
(Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) reagents, according to kit instruc-
tions using an antithymine dimer antibody (1:50, Kamiya Biomedical Co.,
Seattle, WA), followed by ABC reagent (Vector Laboratories) for 30 min at
room temperature. Finally, sections were incubated with diaminobenzadine
(DAB) solution (Vector Laboratories) for 30 s, rinsed with dH2O, counter-
stained with hematoxylin 2 (Richard-Allan), dehydrated, and mounted. This
protocol was modified from that previously reported (32). CPD-stained
sections were analyzed by counting the number of positive and total nuclei
in the epidermis from each animal in 10 fields (60). The data were
expressed as the percentage of positive cells per field.
8-Oxo-dG adduct detection. For 8-oxo-dG adduct detection, sections
were baked at 60jC for 30 min before rehydration. After rehydration,
sections were rinsed in dH2O, then PBS. Antigen retrieval was done for
20 min in 10 mmol/L sodium citrate buffer (pH 6.0) in a steamer, followed
by 20 additional minutes of cooling in the antigen retrieval solution at room
temperature. Sections were incubated in RNase solution [1 Ag/mL RNase in
RNase buffer (10 mmol/L Tris, 1 mmol/L EDTA, 0.4 mol/L NaCl, pH 7.5)]
with a PBS rinse before and after the incubation. The sections were then
blocked in 10% normal rabbit serum (Vector Laboratories) for 1 h at room
temperature, incubated with avidin (blocking kit from Vector Laboratories)
for 10 min at room temperature, rinsed in PBS, incubated with biotin
(blocking kit from Vector Laboratories) for 10 min at room temperature,
and finally rinsed again in PBS. The sections were incubated overnight at
4jC with anti-8-oxo-dG antibody (0.75 AL/mL in 10% normal rabbit serum,
Alpha Diagnostics International, San Antonio, TX). The next day, sections
were rinsed with PBS and incubated in biotinylated rabbit anti-goat IgG
(0.255 Ag/mL in 10% normal rabbit serum, Vector Laboratories) for 1 h at
room temperature. Sections were rinsed in PBS, incubated in ABC for
30 min at room temperature, and rinsed in PBS. Sections were finally
incubated in DAB for 1 min, rinsed in dH2O, counterstained with
hematoxylin 2, dehydrated, and mounted. Sections stained for 8-oxo-dG
were analyzed by counting the number of positive and total nuclei in the
epidermis from each animal in 10 fields (60). The data were expressed as
the percentage of positive cells per field.
Tumor grading. After sacrifice, three random tumors per irradiated
animal were harvested for histologic grading. H&E-stained tissue sections of
tumors isolated from UVB-irradiated male and female mice were graded in
a blinded manner by a board-certified veterinary pathologist (D.F.K.).
Grades were assigned as follows: hyperplasia, papilloma (grades 1–3),
microinvasive squamous cell carcinoma (grades 1–3), or fully invasive
squamous cell carcinoma. Papillomas were exophytic tumors that showed
no evidence of stromal invasion, whereas squamous cell carcinomas had a
more endophytic appearance, with stromal invasion evidenced by loss of
basement membrane continuity and development of an inflammatory
stromal response. A grade 1 papilloma was composed primarily of
epithelium without a pronounced papillary pattern; a grade 2 papilloma
was a well-differentiated papillary mass; a grade 3 papilloma was similar to
a grade 2 papilloma, except that a few finger-like projections of atypical cells
at the base of the mass were present. Microinvasive squamous cell
carcinomas were subcategorized by depth of penetration into the dermis.
Gender Differences in UVB-Exposed Skin
www.aacrjournals.org 3469 Cancer Res 2007; 67: (7). April 1, 2007
Only tumors that invaded the panniculus carnosus were classified as fully
invasive squamous cell carcinomas. Hyperplasia and all grades of papilloma
were considered benign, whereas squamous cell carcinoma and all grades of
microinvasive squamous cell carcinoma were considered malignant.
Antioxidant Assay
The antioxidant assay (antioxidant assay, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO)
was conducted to quantitatively determine the cumulative antioxidant
capacity of male and female unirradiated and UVB-exposed skin. Frozen
tissue was ground to a powder with a mortar and pestle then 1 cold assay
buffer was added (20 mg tissue/100 AL 1 assay buffer). The samples were
homogenized, centrifuged at 12,000  g for 15 min at 4jC, and the
supernatant was analyzed according to kit instructions. In this assay,
metmyoglobin and hydrogen peroxide form a ferryl myoglobin radical,
which oxidizes ABTS [2,2¶-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-sulfonic acid)]
to produce a radical cation (ABTS+). ABTS+ is a soluble chromagen that
can be monitored spectrophotometrically. Antioxidants suppress the
formation of the radical cation in a concentration-dependent manner.
Trolox is a water-soluble vitamin E analogue that serves as the standard
antioxidant. The antioxidant activity relative to the concentration of the
Trolox standard was determined for each sample.
Statistical Analysis
For time to first tumor, Kaplan-Meier estimates of the survival function
were generated for both males and females, and the median survival times
with 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) were calculated. The log-rank test
was used to compare overall survival between genders.
The number of tumors for all weeks after cessation of UVB exposure was
modeled using repeated measures Poisson regression. From the model, the
estimated weekly increase in the number of tumors as well as the difference
in tumor count between genders was estimated with 95% CI. Both the
average tumor size and total tumor area were first log-transformed, and
then random effects models were applied to the log-transformed data to
estimate trends over time as well as differences between genders. Two-
sample t tests were used to compare skin fold thickness, myeloperoxidase,
DNA damage, and antioxidant activity between genders.
For all comparisons, a two-sided a = 0.05 level of significance was used.
Tumor data analyses were done using SAS 9.1 (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC).
Analyses of skin fold thickness, myeloperoxidase, DNA damage, and
antioxidant activity were done using Microsoft Office Excel 2003 (Microsoft
Corporation, Redmond, WA).
Results
Male gender bias in UVB-induced skin carcinogenesis.
Exposing male and female mice to an equal dose of UVB resulted
in a significantly worse tumor prognosis for male mice compared
with female mice. The time to the first tumor was significantly
shorter in the males compared with the females, with a median time
of 10 weeks to first tumor in males (95% CI, 9–12%) and 12 weeks in
females (95% CI, 12–13%; P = 0.0199; Fig. 1A). All mice developed
tumors by week 16, after which UVB exposure was stopped.
Figure 1. Enhanced UVB-induced skin carcinogenesis in male Skh-1 mice compared with female mice. Male and female Skh-1 mice were exposed to 2,240 J/m2 UVB
thrice per week for 16 wk, and tumors >1 mm in diameter were assessed weekly from first appearance at week 6 until week 25. A, Kaplan-Meier survival analysis
of time to first tumor shows significantly earlier tumor development in male mice compared with female mice. Points, after the cessation of UVB exposure, average
tumor number (B), average tumor area (C ), and average sum of tumor area (D ) per mouse.
Cancer Research
Cancer Res 2007; 67: (7). April 1, 2007 3470 www.aacrjournals.org
Based on the tumor count model, male mice had f50% more
tumors than the female mice at all time points after the cessation
of UVB exposure at week 16 (estimated ratio of male tumors to
female tumors = 1.53; P = 0.0026; Fig. 1B). In addition, the average
tumor count increased by 15% each week for both males and
females after the cessation of UVB exposure. For each mouse, both
the average tumor size and total tumor area were calculated.
Figure 1C shows the average tumor size for both males and
females. Note that there was no significant difference in tumor size
between males and females at week 17 (P = 0.93), 1 week after
cessation of UVB exposure. However, by week 25, males had, on
average, 43% larger tumors than females (P = 0.0592). The rate of
tumor growth was 17% per week in males (95% CI, 13–20%), which
was significantly greater than the 11% increase per week in females
(95% CI, 8–15%; P = 0.0367). The total tumor area per mouse is a
measure of the total tumor burden per mouse, taking both tumor
number and individual tumor area into account (Fig. 1D). Overall,
male mice had nearly twice the total tumor area compared with
females at all time points after the cessation of UVB exposure (ratio
of male tumor area to female tumor area, 1.98; P = 0.0177).
Histologic sections from three tumors per UVB-exposed animal
were examined for histologic grade (Fig. 2). Of the tumors graded,
38.5% of the male tumors were malignant compared with 18.2% in
females. Therefore, 81.8% of the female tumors and 61.5% of the
male tumors were benign. Additionally, the percentage of tumors
that were fully invasive squamous cell carcinomas in the male mice
(14.6%) was greater than in the female mice (2.9%). In both males
and females, the grade 2 papilloma was the most commonly
diagnosed tumor; however, this tumor type constituted a larger
fraction of the tumors in female than in male mice. Overall, male
mice had a higher proportion of microinvasive squamous cell
carcinomas than female mice. Taken together, these findings
suggest that tumor progression was accelerated in male mice
compared with female mice. This suggestion is consistent with the
trend for larger tumors in the male compared with the female mice.
Effect of a single acute UVB dose on cutaneous inflamma-
tion. Male and female mice were exposed once to 2,240 J/m2 UVB
and sacrificed for analysis 48 h after exposure to evaluate gender
differences in the acute cutaneous inflammatory response. The
cutaneous inflammatory response was evaluated by differences in
skin fold thickness, as a measure of edema, and myeloperoxidase
activity, as a measure of neutrophil infiltration (33). Exposure to
this dose of UVB induced a significant change in skin fold thickness
from baseline measurements in both males (0.15 mm increase,
P = 0.007) and females (0.78 mm increase, P = 0.0009; Fig. 3A).
However, females had a 5-fold greater increase in skin fold thickness
compared with males (P = 0.00045). Exposure to UVB also induced
a significant increase in myeloperoxidase activity compared with
unexposed mice in both males (P = 0.001) and females (P = 0.0004;
Fig. 3B). Females exposed to UVB had thrice the myeloperoxidase
activity of exposed males (P = 0.0004). Neutrophil infiltration
patterns in the dermis of these unirradiated and irradiated mice,
as determined immunohistochemically, matched the patterns of
myeloperoxidase activity (data not shown).
Acute UVB-induced DNA damage. DNA damage was assessed
by immunohistochemical analysis of two differentmarkers 48 h after
exposure: CPDs as a measure of direct UVB-induced DNA damage
and 8-oxo-dG adducts as a marker of indirect UVB-induced DNA
damage (Fig. 4A). There was no detectable CPD staining in
unirradiated skin and a significant increase in percentage of
positively staining nuclei in both the male (P = 0.00023) and female
Figure 2. More histologically advanced tumors on male mice compared with
female mice. Male and female Skh-1 mice were exposed to 2,240 J/m2 for 16 wk
and sacrificed for analysis of pathologic grade at week 25. Three tumors per
animal were graded in a blinded manner by a board-certified veterinary
pathologist. Columns, percentage of tumors per histologic grade per gender.
Figure 3. Gender differences in acute UVB-induced inflammation. Male and
female Skh-1 mice were irradiated once with 2,240 J/m2 UVB and sacrificed
for analysis 48 h after exposure. A, skin fold thickness measurements in
UVB-exposed and unirradiated control mice. B, mean units of myeloperoxidase
(MPO ) in UVB-exposed and unirradiated control mice. Columns, average; bars,
SE; *, P < 0.05, difference to no UVB; #, P < 0.05, difference to males.
Gender Differences in UVB-Exposed Skin
www.aacrjournals.org 3471 Cancer Res 2007; 67: (7). April 1, 2007
(P = 0.00016) irradiated skin. However, there were no detectable
differences in the numbers of CPD-positive cells between male and
female (P = 0.29) UVB-exposed skin. Interestingly, the percentage of
nuclei staining for 8-oxo-dG was significantly higher in unirradiated
male skin compared with female skin (50.3% versus 31.7%;
P = 0.000024). This gender difference held true for UVB-exposed
male and female skin (63.9% and 52.3%; P = 0.0027). Representative
sections of 8-oxo-dG immunohistochemistry on male and female
UVB-exposed skin are shown in Fig. 4B .
Antioxidant activity. The antioxidant activity assay was
conducted to quantitate the cumulative antioxidant capacity of
the murine skin (Fig. 5). The antioxidant concentration is
represented relative to the concentration of the Trolox standard
provided in the kit. Male and female mice were exposed once to
2,240 J/m2 UVB and sacrificed for analysis 48 h after exposure. In
unirradiated skin, females had significantly more antioxidant
activity compared with the males (P = 0.00017). Following UVB
exposure, female skin continued to have significantly more
antioxidant activity than the males (P = 0.015). However, there
was significantly less activity in the UVB-exposed female skin
compared with the unirradiated controls (P = 0.016). This same
trend was seen in the male skin.
Discussion
The present study used a well-established animal model of
UVB-induced skin carcinogenesis to show clearly, and for the first
time, that male mice develop more tumors than female mice when
exposed to equal doses of UVB. These results support the results of
the epidemiologic studies to date (1–4).3 Although males tend to
have more sun exposure and are less likely to use protection, which
may potentially lead to increased tumor formation (5, 6), our data
shows an additional squamous cell carcinoma susceptibility related
to the male gender. The fact that this gender difference has been
seen both in epidemiologic studies of humans and in our animal
model with equal UV exposure suggests that this difference may be
due not entirely to sociologic differences but rather to specific
biological characteristics. In the current study, male mice
developed tumors significantly earlier than the female mice. Male
mice developed significantly more tumors than female mice and,
by week 25, tended to have larger tumors. Moreover, the total
tumor burden in males was nearly twice that in females. In
addition to having more tumors and larger tumors, males had
tumors of a higher histologic grade than females, suggesting
accelerated progression of the tumors. Thus, when receiving
identical UVB exposure, male mice have enhanced skin tumor
susceptibility.
We expected to see a correlation between the degree of acute
UVB-induced inflammation and chronic UVB-induced tumor
formation. Previously, our laboratory has shown, using female
Skh-1 mice, that the anti-inflammatory effects of celecoxib after
acute UVB exposure (15) correlated with reduced UVB-induced
tumor formation (19). However, in the current study, males showed
less of an inflammatory response, as determined by skin fold
thickness and myeloperoxidase activity, compared with females
exposed to the same dose, but developed more tumors. Studies by
Gambichler et al. (34) showed that the MED in humans is not
significantly influenced by gender. Although it appears from our
previous studies, as well as the studies of others, that there is a
correlation between levels of cutaneous inflammation and skin
tumor susceptibility in female mice, this does not appear to hold
true in male skin (15–20). Thus, the difference in inflammatory
response to UVB did not account for the difference in skin tumor
susceptibility between male and female mice in our study.
We therefore investigated if susceptibility to UVB-induced DNA
damage or ability to repair this DNA damage influenced the gender
difference in the skin tumor susceptibility that we observed.
Figure 4. Gender differences in acute UVB-induced DNA damage. Male and
female Skh-1 mice were irradiated once with 2,240 J/m2 UVB and sacrificed
for analysis 48 h after exposure. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue
sections were immunohistochemically stained for CPD or 8-oxo-dG. A,
percentage positive staining nuclei per total nuclei in the epidermis. Columns,
average; bars, SE. #, P < 0.05, difference to males. Differences between the
different types of damage cannot be compared because of the differences in the
immunohistochemical processes. B, immunohistochemical staining of 8-oxo-dG
in male and female UVB exposed epidermis. Original magnification, 100.
Figure 5. Gender differences in antioxidant capacities. Male and female Skh-1
mice were irradiated once with 2,240 J/m2 UVB and sacrificed for analysis
48 h after exposure. The antioxidant activity is represented as a concentration
relative to the concentration of the Trolox standard. Columns, average; bars, SE.
*, P < 0.05, difference to no UVB; #, P < 0.05, difference to males.
Cancer Research
Cancer Res 2007; 67: (7). April 1, 2007 3472 www.aacrjournals.org
Different types and markers of DNA damage were evaluated in the
acutely UVB-exposed skin. CPDs are a form of direct UVB damage.
Quantitative immunohistochemical staining indicated that there
were no significant differences in numbers of CPD-positive nuclei
between male and female epidermis. Because the males and
females were exposed to equal doses of UV, it is not surprising that
there were no differences in the extent of this type of damage.
Because our samples were analyzed 48 h after UV and CPDs are
formed immediately after exposure, the lack of difference also
suggests that there were no gender differences in repair of this type
of lesion. Quite interestingly, there was a significant difference in
the percentage of 8-oxo-dG–positive cells detected in unirradiated
male and female skin. The fact that males had more of this indirect,
oxidative damage both in unexposed skin and at 48 h after
exposure suggests that males are more susceptible to the formation
of 8-oxo-dG adducts or have a less effective oxidative repair
capacity, especially in view of the limited inflammatory response
in the males. We are not the first to report gender differences in
8-oxo-dG formation. A previous study has shown that males tend to
have greater steady-state levels of 8-oxo-dG in the white blood cells
of healthy individuals (discussed in ref. 35). Studies on hepatic
mitochondrial DNA have shown the levels of 8-oxo-dG to be 4-fold
higher in the males compared with the females (36). Interestingly,
studies by Paz-Elizur et al. (37) showed a lack of gender differences
in OGG1 (8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase) activity, the enzyme
responsible for removing 8-oxo-dG lesions from the DNA.
Semiquantitative reverse transcription-PCR analysis of OGG1
mRNA expression in the skin from the unirradiated and acute
UVB-exposed skin in this study showed no significant gender
difference (data not shown). Although functional differences in
OGG1 in male and female skin were not identified in this study, it
is one area of focus in our ongoing investigations into the role of
gender in skin carcinogenesis.
Gender differences in oxidative damage also suggest differences
in the antioxidant pathways designed to remove reactive oxygen
species, thus preventing DNA damage. The total antioxidant
capacity was determined in the male and female unirradiated
and UVB-exposed skin. There were significant gender differences,
with the unirradiated and UVB-exposed female skin demonstrating
more activity than their male counterparts. UVB exposure
significantly decreased the antioxidant activity in the female mice
compared with the unirradiated controls. This same trend was seen
in the males; however, the results were not significant, likely due to
the low baseline activity in the unirradiated males. Katalinic et al.
(24) have shown greater antioxidant capacity in female rat heart,
kidney, and liver. Other studies have shown that glutathione
peroxidase and manganese superoxide dismutase, two antioxidant
enzymes, have greater expression and activity in female mitochon-
dria compared with male mitochondria. Additionally, H2O2 levels
are higher in males than females. Glutathione, an intracellular
antioxidant, is more abundant in female hepatic mitochondria than
in male mitochondria (reviewed in ref. 38). Collectively, these
studies showed enhanced antioxidant capacity in females, suggest-
ing a potential biological basis for gender differences in skin
carcinogenesis. The present study evaluated the total antioxidant
capacity of the skin in male and female mice. To our knowledge,
gender differences in specific antioxidant enzymes have not been
reported in UVB-exposed mouse skin and are the focus of future
studies.
Gender differences in tumor formation suggest a possible role
for sex hormones in skin carcinogenesis. Skin is not traditionally
considered a sex hormone–responsive tissue; however, studies have
shown that such hormones can have a significant influence on the
skin. Studies by Azzi et al. (39) showed gender differences in mouse
skin morphology, an effect of gonadectomy on skin structure, and
an influence of exogenous estrogen and estrogen precursors on
skin histology. Postmenopausal women with diminished systemic
estrogen production show significant changes in the skin, including
delayed wound healing, skin thinning, and increased wrinkling, all
of which can be reversed with hormone replacement therapy (40).
Studies by Ashcroft et al. (41) have shown enhanced wound healing
in both males and females with topical application of 17h-estradiol,
further supporting the potential influence of estrogen in the skin.
Studies on hepatic mitochondrial antioxidant capacities showed
that estrogen acted via estrogen receptors to reduce H2O2
production and enhance antioxidant enzyme expression (36).
Studies in our laboratory are currently under way to examine the
influence of exogenous estrogen on UVB-induced cutaneous
inflammation and skin carcinogenesis; these studies will further
investigate the hormonal component of gender differences in
tumor development. Very little is yet known regarding the role of
gender in cutaneous responses to UVB exposure; thus, this report is
the first step in the systematic examination of gender differences in
skin carcinogenesis.
Acknowledgments
Received 10/17/2006; revised 12/12/2006; accepted 1/19/2007.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Yanna Kisala, Aaron Primm, and Mary Ross for their technical assistance
with the histologic and immunohistochemical procedures, and Amy Lehman for her
assistance with the statistical analysis of the tumor data.
Gender Differences in UVB-Exposed Skin
www.aacrjournals.org 3473 Cancer Res 2007; 67: (7). April 1, 2007
References
1. Scrivener Y, Grosshans E, Cribier B. Variations of basal
cell carcinomas according to gender, age, location and
histopathological subtype. Br J Dermatol 2002;147:41–7.
2. Graells J. The risk and risk factors of a second non-
melanoma skin cancer: a study in a Mediterranean
population. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 2004;18:142–7.
3. Foote JA, Harris RB, Giuliano AR, et al. Predictors for
cutaneous basal- and squamous-cell carcinoma among
actinically damaged adults. Int J Cancer 2001;95:7–11.
4. Armstrong BK, Kricker A. The epidemiology of UV
induced skin cancer. J Photochem Photobiol B 2001;63:
8–18.
5. McCarthy EM, Ethridge KP, Wagner RF, Jr. Beach
holiday sunburn: the sunscreen paradox and gender
differences. Cutis 1999;64:37–42.
6. Hall HI, May DS, Lew RA, Koh HK, Nadel M. Sun
protection behaviors of the U.S. White population. Prev
Med 1997;26:401–7.
7. Matsumura Y, Ananthaswamy HN. Toxic effects of
ultraviolet radiation on the skin. Toxicol Appl Pharma-
col 2004;195:298–308.
8. Gawkrodger DJ. Occupational skin cancers. Occup
Med (Lond) 2004;54:458–63.
9. van Steeg H, Kraemer KH. Xeroderma pigmentosum
and the role of UV-induced DNA damage in skin cancer.
Mol Med Today 1999;5:86–94.
10. Clydesdale GJ, Dandie GW, Muller HK. Ultraviolet
light induced injury: immunological and inflammatory
effects. Immunol Cell Biol 2001;79:547–68.
11. Terui T, Okuyama R, Tagami H. Molecular events
occurring behind ultraviolet-induced skin inflammation.
Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2001;1:461–7.
12. Young AR. Acute effects of UVR on human eyes and
skin. Prog Biophys Mol Biol 2006;92:80–5.
13. Freinkel RWD. The biology of the skin. New York: The
Parthenon Publishing Group, Inc.; 2001. p. 432.
14. Klebanoff SJ. Myeloperoxidase: friend and foe. J
Leukoc Biol 2005;77:598–625.
15. Wilgus TA, Ross MS, Parrett ML, Oberyszyn TM.
Topical application of a selective cyclooxygenase
Cancer Research
Cancer Res 2007; 67: (7). April 1, 2007 3474 www.aacrjournals.org
inhibitor suppresses UVB mediated cutaneous inflam-
mation. Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat 2000;62:
367–84.
16. Fischer SM, Lo HH, Gordon GB, et al. Chemo-
preventive activity of celecoxib, a specific cyclooxyge-
nase-2 inhibitor, and indomethacin against ultraviolet
light-induced skin carcinogenesis. Mol Carcinog 1999;25:
231–40.
17. Pentland AP, Schoggins JW, Scott GA, Khan KN, Han
R. Reduction of UV-induced skin tumors in hairless mice
by selective COX-2 inhibition. Carcinogenesis 1999;20:
1939–44.
18. Fischer SM, Conti CJ, Viner J, Aldaz CM, Lubet RA.
Celecoxib and difluoromethylornithine in combination
have strong therapeutic activity against UV-induced
skin tumors in mice. Carcinogenesis 2003;24:945–52.
19. Wilgus TA, Koki AT, Zweifel BS, Kusewitt DF, Rubal
PA, Oberyszyn TM. Inhibition of cutaneous ultraviolet
light B-mediated inflammation and tumor formation
with topical celecoxib treatment. Mol Carcinog 2003;38:
49–58.
20. Wilgus TA, Parrett ML, Ross MS, Tober KL, Robertson
FM, Oberyszyn TM. Inhibition of ultraviolet light B-
induced cutaneous inflammation by a specific cyclo-
oxygenase-2 inhibitor. Adv Exp Med Biol 2002;507:85–92.
21. Nishigori C, Hattori Y, Toyokuni S. Role of reactive
oxygen species in skin carcinogenesis. Antioxid Redox
Signal 2004;6:561–70.
22. Halliday GM. Inflammation, gene mutation and
photoimmunosuppression in response to UVR-induced
oxidative damage contributes to photocarcinogenesis.
Mutat Res 2005;571:107–20.
23. Mobley JA, Brueggemeier RW. Increasing the DNA
damage threshold in breast cancer cells. Toxicol Appl
Pharmacol 2002;180:219–26.
24. Katalinic V, Modun D, Music I, Boban M. Gender
differences in antioxidant capacity of rat tissues
determined by 2,2¶-azinobis (3-ethylbenzothiazoline 6-
sulfonate; ABTS) and ferric reducing antioxidant power
(FRAP) assays. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol
Pharmacol 2005;140:47–52.
25. Cleaver JE, Crowley E. UV damage, DNA repair and
skin carcinogenesis. Front Biosci 2002;7:d1024–43.
26. Stabile LP, Siegfried JM. Sex and gender differences in
lung cancer. J Gend Specif Med 2003;6:37–48.
27. Berger U, Maywald O, Pfirrmann M, et al. Gender
aspects in chronic myeloid leukemia: long-term results
from randomized studies. Leukemia 2005;19:984–9.
28. DeCosse JJ, Ngoi SS, Jacobson JS, Cennerazzo WJ.
Gender and colorectal cancer. Eur J Cancer Prev 1993;2:
105–15.
29. Voskuhl RR. Gender issues and multiple sclerosis.
Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 2002;2:277–86.
30. Ren J, Ceylan-Isik AF. Diabetic cardiomyopathy: do
women differ from men? Endocrine 2004;25:73–83.
31. Ries LAG, Harkins D, Krapcho M, et al., editors. SEER
cancer statistics review, 1975-2003. Bethesda (MD):
National Cancer Institute; 2006.
32. Lu YP, Lou YR, Yen P, Mitchell D, Huang MT, Conney
AH. Time course for early adaptive responses to
ultraviolet B light in the epidermis of SKH-1 mice.
Cancer Res 1999;59:4591–602.
33. Tober KL, Wilgus TA, Kusewitt DF, Thomas-Ahner
JM, Maruyama T, Oberyszyn TM. Importance of the
EP(1) receptor in cutaneous UVB-induced inflammation
and tumor development. J Invest Dermatol 2006;126:
205–11.
34. Gambichler T, Moussa G, Tomi NS, Paech V,
Altmeyer P, Kreuter A. Reference limits for erythema-
effective ultraviolet doses. Photochem Photobiol 2006;
82:1097–102.
35. Proteggente AR, England TG, Rehman A, Rice-Evans
CA, Halliwell B. Gender differences in steady-state levels
of oxidative damage to DNA in healthy individuals. Free
Radic Res 2002;36:157–62.
36. Borras C, Sastre J, Garcia-Sala D, Lloret A, Pallardo
FV, Vina J. Mitochondria from females exhibit higher
antioxidant gene expression and lower oxidative dam-
age than males. Free Radic Biol Med 2003;34:546–52.
37. Paz-Elizur T, Elinger D, Leitner-Dagan Y, et al.
Development of an enzymatic DNA repair assay for
molecular epidemiology studies: Distribution of OGG
activity in healthy individuals. DNA Repair (Amst) 2007;
6:45–60.
38. Vina J, Borras C, Gambini J, Sastre J, Pallardo FV.
Why females live longer than males? Importance of the
upregulation of longevity-associated genes by oestro-
genic compounds. FEBS Lett 2005;579:2541–5.
39. Azzi L, El-Alfy M, Martel C, Labrie F. Gender
differences in mouse skin morphology and specific
effects of sex steroids and dehydroepiandrosterone. J
Invest Dermatol 2005;124:22–7.
40. Brincat MP. Hormone replacement therapy and the
skin. Maturitas 2000;35:107–17.
41. Ashcroft GS, Ashworth JJ. Potential role of estrogens
in wound healing. Am J Clin Dermatol 2003;4:737–43.
