Spectral wave dissipation over a barrier reef
Ryan J. Lowe,1 James L. Falter,2 Marion D. Bandet,3 Geno Pawlak,3 Marlin J. Atkinson,2
Stephen G. Monismith,1 and Jeffrey R. Koseff1
Received 12 September 2004; revised 20 November 2004; accepted 1 February 2005; published 5 April 2005.
[1] A 2 week field experiment was conducted to measure surface wave dissipation on a
barrier reef at Kaneohe Bay, Oahu, Hawaii. Wave heights and velocities were measured at
several locations on the fore reef and the reef flat, which were used to estimate rates of
dissipation by wave breaking and bottom friction. Dissipation on the reef flat was found to
be dominated by friction at rates that are significantly larger than those typically observed
at sandy beach sites. This is attributed to the rough surface generated by the reef
organisms, which makes the reef highly efficient at dissipating energy by bottom friction.
Results were compared to a spectral wave friction model, which showed that the variation
in frictional dissipation among the different frequency components could be described
using a single hydraulic roughness length scale. Surveys of the bottom roughness
conducted on the reef flat showed that this hydraulic roughness length was comparable
to the physical roughness measured at this site. On the fore reef, dissipation was due
to the combined effect of frictional dissipation and wave breaking. However, in this
region the magnitude of dissipation by bottom friction was comparable to wave breaking,
despite the existence of a well-defined surf zone there. Under typical wave conditions the
bulk of the total wave energy incident on Kaneohe Bay is dissipated by bottom friction, not
wave breaking, as is often assumed for sandy beach sites and other coral reefs.
Citation: Lowe, R. J., J. L. Falter, M. D. Bandet, G. Pawlak, M. J. Atkinson, S. G. Monismith, and J. R. Koseff (2005), Spectral wave
dissipation over a barrier reef, J. Geophys. Res., 110, C04001, doi:10.1029/2004JC002711.
1. Introduction
[2] Coral reefs are abundant in shallow tropical and
subtropical coastal regions, environments where significant
amounts of surface wave energy can be dissipated through
wave breaking and bottom friction processes. The physical
structure of coral reefs is notably different from that of
beaches, which to date have been the primary focus of
nearshore hydrodynamic studies [Komar, 1998]. Unlike
beaches, which typically have mild slopes and relatively
smooth bottoms, coral reefs often form a steep transition
from relatively deep to shallow water, and generate a very
rough bottom surface due to the presence of reef organisms
[Wiens, 1962].
[3] Accurately predicting surface waves on coral reefs is
important for several reasons. First, as waves break on a reef
they produce an increase in the mean water surface eleva-
tion, creating a pressure (radiation stress) gradient that
drives reef circulation [Longuet-Higgins and Stewart,
1962]. These wave-driven currents are responsible for the
cross-reef transport of nutrients, sediment, plankton, larvae,
etc., and accordingly their prediction has been the focus of
several analytical and numerical studies [e.g., Symonds et
al., 1995; Hearn, 1999; Kraines et al., 1999; Tartinville and
Rancher, 2000].
[4] Second, wave processes on coral reefs play a major
role in determining coral reef ecology. Wave-induced forces
can have a detrimental effect by destroying delicate reef
organisms. Wave exposure is thus often used as a predictor
of the community structure of coral reefs [e.g., Dollar,
1982;Dollar and Tribble, 1993;Grigg, 1998]. Alternatively,
there is increasing evidence that water motion can benefit
coral reef organisms by increasing the rate at which these
organisms take up nutrients and hence their overall produc-
tivity. Several studies have found that under unidirectional
flow, nutrient uptake by coral reef communities is positively
correlated with bed shear stress at a rate that can be
predicted using engineering mass transfer formulas [e.g.,
Atkinson and Bilger, 1992; Baird and Atkinson, 1997;
Thomas and Atkinson, 1997]. However, many coral reefs
are found in coastal regions with significant wave activity
such that wave-induced shear stresses exerted on the bed can
often be much larger than the stress attributed to the unidi-
rectional current. This enhanced wave stress can increase
the rate of nutrient uptake [e.g., Falter et al., 2004]. Hearn
et al. [2001] proposed a model that predicts these uptake
rates as a function of the rate at which wave energy is
dissipated by bottom friction. Thus the development of an
accurate approach for parameterizing wave dissipation
processes on coral reefs is needed to understand and model
the productivity and distribution of reef organisms.
JOURNAL OF GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH, VOL. 110, C04001, doi:10.1029/2004JC002711, 2005
1Environmental Fluid Mechanics Laboratory, Stanford University,
Stanford, California, USA.
2Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology, University of Hawaii, Kaneohe,
Hawaii, USA.
3Department of Oceans and Resources Engineering, University of
Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA.
Copyright 2005 by the American Geophysical Union.
0148-0227/05/2004JC002711$09.00
C04001 1 of 16
[5] The geomorphology of a typical barrier reef is divided
into three main regions (Figure 1): (1) a sloping fore reef,
(2) a reef flat where the bottom slope is minimal, and (3) a
deep lagoon [Wiens, 1962]. As waves propagate over the
reef they undergo several transformations. Waves first begin
to interact with the fore reef when their wavelength
becomes comparable to the local water depth h. As they
move shoreward and shoal, the waves increase in height
while dissipating some of their energy to bottom friction.
Eventually their height becomes some critical fraction of the
water depth and the waves become unstable and break. At a
given cross-reef location, a maximum allowable wave
height thus exists that is controlled by the local water depth
according to
Hrms < gh; ð1Þ
where Hrms is the root-mean-squared (RMS) wave height
and g is a critical breaking parameter [Thornton and Guza,
1982]. This breaking region extends a finite distance,
denoted as the surf zone in Figure 1, and in this region a
significant amount of the incident wave energy can be
dissipated through breaking. On sandy beaches, wave
energy dissipation is predominantly due to breaking [e.g.,
Thornton and Guza, 1983] and for many coral reefs wave
breaking has been assumed to be the primary source of
dissipation [e.g., Young, 1989; Gourlay, 1994; Massel and
Gourlay, 2000].
[6] Unlike beaches where the water depth approaches
zero toward shore, the water depth over the reef flat is
nonzero and relatively constant. Waves with height ratios
that are smaller than the critical breaking limit g in equation
(1) are then free to pass onto the reef flat. The barrier reef
thus serves as a low-pass wave height filter by filtering out
waves with heights larger than the depth-limited maximum.
For most barrier reefs the reef flat is quite shallow, usually
no deeper than a few meters, so waves propagating across
the reef flat can dissipate significant amounts of energy to
bottom friction. Moreover, coral reef organisms are known
to form some of the roughest surfaces in the coastal ocean,
so frictional dissipation rates can be expected to be larger
than sandy or even rocky reef sites located along the
continental shelf.
[7] A limited number of field experiments have investi-
gated wave transformation over coral reefs. These include
studies of fringing reefs, which are attached to the shoreline
[e.g., Lee and Black, 1979; Gerritsen, 1981; Brander et al.,
2004], as well as barrier reefs where a lagoon exists on the
leeward side of the reef [e.g., Young, 1989; Hardy and
Young, 1996; Lugo-Fernandez et al., 1998a, 1998b]. Per-
haps the most comprehensive field study conducted on a
barrier reef is that described by Hardy and Young [1996],
where wave heights at four stations at a site on the Great
Barrier Reef were recorded for a 3 week period. The study
confirmed the existence of a maximum stable wave height
on the reef flat which is controlled by the reef flat water
depth and is modulated by the tidal elevation.
[8] A major challenge for modeling wave transformation
on coral reefs is choosing an appropriate parameterization
for wave dissipation due to wave breaking and bottom
friction. Several formulas exist to predict rates of wave
dissipation, but these are semiempirical and must be cali-
brated through experiments. While the studies cited above
include detailed observations of wave attenuation across
reefs, the focus of these studies was not on calculating rates
of wave energy dissipation, or more specifically isolating
the relative contributions of wave breaking and bottom
friction. Measuring dissipation due to wave breaking is
particularly difficult since for spectral wave conditions,
the case where the wave field is composed of an infinite
number of frequency components, the width of the surf zone
is difficult to define [Hardy and Young, 1996]. As a
consequence, measurements of the rate of wave breaking
dissipation on reefs have been confined to controlled
laboratory experiments such as those reported by Gourlay
[1994]. Measuring rates of frictional wave dissipation in the
field is similarly difficult, but some estimates have been
reported by Gerritsen [1981], Nelson [1996], and Falter et
al. [2004].
[9] In this paper we describe results from a field exper-
iment where wave transformation across a barrier reef in
Kaneohe Bay, Oahu, Hawaii was measured. Wave energy
dissipation was estimated by determining the decrease in
wave energy flux at several sites across the reef. A goal of
this study was to isolate the relative contributions of wave
breaking and frictional dissipation from the total incident
Figure 1. Cross section of a barrier reef and lagoon.
C04001 LOWE ET AL.: WAVE DISSIPATION OVER A BARRIER REEF
2 of 16
C04001
wave energy dissipated on the reef. In addition, special
attention is given to parameterizing bottom friction, which
is particularly important over coral reefs. Frictional dissipa-
tion was investigated using dissipation measurements on the
reef flat, since breaking does not occur within this region.
The spectral wave friction model developed by Madsen et
al. [1988] was used to investigate how wave energy is
dissipated among the different frequency components. This
model has been validated in laboratory experiments by
Mathisen and Madsen [1999], but has yet to be applied to
field data sets, in part because frictional dissipation is often
difficult to accurately measure in the field environment. The
reef flat at Kaneohe Bay is ideal for this investigation since
waves propagate across the reef flat maintaining a relatively
constant direction with minimal refraction such that the
problem can be treated as one-dimensional. Moreover, the
reef flat is both shallow and very rough, so the frictional
dissipation signal is strong, making it well suited for this
type of study. Finally, in this study a comparison is made
between the hydraulic roughness obtained from the frictional
dissipation measurements and the surveyed physical bottom
roughness. Data collected from previous laboratory studies
have been used to develop empirical formulas describing
frictional dissipation as a function of wave kinematics and
the physical roughness properties. In principle, it should be
possible to apply these formulas to coral reef sites, however
to date no studies have specifically linked the measured
bottom roughness of a coral reef to observed rates of
frictional dissipation.
[10] This paper is organized as follows. In section 2, an
overview of theory which can be used to describe wave
transformation on coral reefs is presented. A description of
the field site and experimental setup is presented in section 3,
including a summary of the wave and tide conditions encoun-
tered in the experiments. Results from the experiments are
described in section 4. In this section, measurements of wave
height attenuation across the reef are used to estimate rates of
dissipation, and the Madsen et al. [1988] spectral wave
friction model is used to investigate frictional dissipation
measured on the reef flat. The hydraulic roughness calculated
from the frictional dissipation measurements is then com-
pared to direct measures of the physical bottom roughness
obtained from surveys. Finally, wave breaking dissipation on
the fore reef is investigated using a simple one-dimensional
numerical model.
2. Spectral Wave Dissipation
[11] Wave energy dissipation on the barrier reef at
Kaneohe Bay is assumed to be dominated by wave breaking
and bottom friction. Wave models generally parameterize
dissipation using the wave energy conservation equation.
For spectral wave conditions, the continuous wave spectrum
is typically discretized into a total of N discrete frequency
components of index j. For the case where waves of all
frequency components propagate in the same direction x,
the one-dimensional wave energy equation is
@Fj
@x
¼ b;j  f ;j ð2Þ
Fj ¼ EjCg;j; ð3Þ
where for each jth frequency component, Fj is the wave
energy flux, Ej is the wave energy density, Cg,j is the group
velocity, and b,j and f,j represent the rates of energy
dissipation (per unit area) due to wave breaking and bottom
friction, respectively. It should be noted that equation (2)
does not include the potential transfer of energy between the
different frequency components due to nonlinear interac-
tions, as described by Hasselmann [1962]. This issue will
be discussed further in section 4. By applying linear wave
theory, the energy density and group velocity are
Ej ¼ 1
2
rga2j ð4Þ
Cg;j ¼ 1
2
1þ 2kjh
sinh 2kjh
 
wj
kj
; ð5Þ
respectively, where for the jth component, wj is the radian
frequency, kj is the wave number and aj is the wave
amplitude. In this formulation the effect of a background
current has not been included in equation (3), since
measured currents on the Kaneohe reef during the
experiment were very weak. Cross-reef currents U were
measured to be at most 4 cm/s, so their effect can be
neglected since Ukj/wj < 0.01 for all frequency components
included in the analysis [Dean and Dalrymple, 1991].
[12] Several semiempirical models have been developed
to predict the dissipation functions b,j and f,j in equation (2).
These models have been validated in laboratory and field
experiments. Owing to the limited number of field measure-
ments on coral reefs, and because the bottom slopes of reefs
can be very steep and the bottom roughness can be large, the
application of these models to coral reefs has been
questioned by Massel and Gourlay [2000]. A summary
of some of the models used to predict wave dissipation
follows.
2.1. Dissipation Due to Wave Breaking
[13] Because wave breaking is a highly nonlinear process,
models which predict wave breaking dissipation are gener-
ally semiempirical. For the most part, these models have
been derived for coastlines where the bottom slope is mild
[e.g., Battjes and Janssen, 1979;Dally et al., 1985; Thornton
and Guza, 1983]. An often cited model is that of Thornton
and Guza [1983], which parameterizes the rate of bottom
friction for spectral wave conditions according to
Eb ¼ 3
ﬃﬃﬃ
p
p
16
rgfpB3
g4h5
H7rms; ð6Þ
where Eb represents the rate of change of the total wave
energy due to breaking summed over all of the frequency
components, i.e., Eb =
XN
j¼1b,j. Here fp is the peak
frequency in the wave energy spectrum, g is the critical
wave breaking parameter (equation (1)), B is an empirical
constant of order 1, and Hrms is the RMS wave height
defined later in section 4. Owing to the fact that Eb
represents the total rate of dissipation (i.e., the sum over all
frequencies), equation (6) has been applied to spectral wave
conditions by assuming that the rate of dissipation in each
frequency component is proportional to the wave height of
that component [e.g., Chawla et al., 1998].
C04001 LOWE ET AL.: WAVE DISSIPATION OVER A BARRIER REEF
3 of 16
C04001
[14] The dissipation function in equation (6) has been
validated for mild bottom slopes. However, for some reefs
the bottom slope can be very steep and Massel and Gourlay
[2000] propose an alternative form of Eb, based on a
modification of the model by Battjes and Janssen [1979].
Given that the barrier reef at Kaneohe Bay is unusually wide
(2 km) and hence the bottom slope is relatively mild
(1:50), which places it within the stated applicability
limits of the model, equation (6) will be used in this paper
to model wave breaking dissipation.
2.2. Dissipation Due to Bottom Friction
[15] Several models have been developed to predict the
rate of energy dissipation due to friction in turbulent wave
boundary layer flows [e.g., Putman and Johnson, 1949;
Kajiura, 1968; Jonsson, 1966]. These models were origi-
nally developed for monochromatic waves. Madsen et al.
[1988] and Madsen [1994] extended theory originally
developed for monochromatic waves to spectral wave con-
ditions by defining representative flow parameters that are
based on taking a weighted average of the given parameter
by placing more weight on the frequency components that
contain more wave energy. A representative maximum near-
bed horizontal orbital velocity ub,r can thus be defined as
ub;r ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃXN
j¼1
u2b;j
vuut ; ð7Þ
where ub,j is the velocity corresponding to the jth frequency
component. A representative wave radian frequency, wr, can
similarly be defined as
wr ¼
XN
j¼1
wju2b;j
XN
j¼1
u2b;j
: ð8Þ
Using the representative wave parameters in equations (7)
and (8), Madsen [1994] showed that the rate of dissipation
due to bottom friction for a given wave frequency can be
modeled as
f ;j ¼ 1
4
rfe;jub;ru2b;j; ð9Þ
where fe,j is the jth component of the ‘‘energy dissipation
factor.’’ The form of dissipation in equation (9) is notable,
in that it allows for wave energy to be dissipated at different
rates among the different frequency components.
[16] Madsen [1994] further showed that for spectral
waves the energy dissipation factor fe,j can be related to
the ‘‘wave friction factor’’ fw,j according to
fe;j ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
fw;r
p ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
fw;j
p
cosfj; ð10Þ
where fw,j is the jth component of the wave friction factor,
fw,r is the representative wave friction factor, and fj is the
phase angle between the bottom shear stress and the near-
bed horizontal orbital velocity. The representative wave
friction factor fw,r in equation (10) is used to parameterize
the shear stress exerted on the bed as
tw;r ¼ 1
2
rfw;ru2b;r; ð11Þ
where tw,r is the representative shear stress. Several
empirical formulas have been developed to predict wave
friction factors as a function of the wave conditions and
bottom roughness properties, and these formulas will be
discussed below. Finally, by using equation (10) to estimate
fe,j, a representative energy dissipation factor fe,r can be
determined using the weighted average approach:
fe;r ¼
XN
j¼1
fe;ju
2
b;j
XN
j¼1
u2b;j
; ð12Þ
which gives a single energy dissipation factor that is
representative of the spectral wave conditions.
[17] In order to predict frictional energy dissipation f,j at
a given field site using equations (7)–(12), it is necessary to
choose values for the wave friction factor fw,j and phase lag
fj by somehow relating these quantities to the bottom
roughness properties. For monochromatic waves, several
empirical formulas exist to predict wave friction factors fw
and phase lags f as a function of wave parameters and a
representative hydraulic roughness length scale kw. Madsen
[1994] assumed that these monochromatic friction formulas
can be extended to spectral waves by simply applying these
formulas to each frequency component. An inherent as-
sumption of this approach is that kw is a constant and, hence,
independent of the hydrodynamics. This assumption was
found to be valid in laboratory experiments by Mathisen
and Madsen [1999], but has yet to be directly investigated
in field experiments.
[18] A number of formulas have been developed to
predict wave friction factors under monochromatic wave
conditions. For rough turbulent wave boundary layers,
many of these formulas parameterize the wave friction
factor as a function of the ratio of the near-bed horizontal
wave orbital excursion amplitude Ab = ub/w to a hydraulic
roughness length kw [e.g., Jonsson, 1966; Swart, 1974;
Madsen, 1994]. Although several formulas exist, Nielsen
[1992] gives a comprehensive formula to predict wave
friction factors as a function of the physical bottom rough-
ness, by compiling data from several laboratory experiments
where the bottom roughness was measured and hence was
known. Madsen [1994] showed that these monochromatic
friction formulas can be extended to spectral conditions
according to
fw;j ¼ exp a1 ub;r
kwwj
 a2
þ a3
	 

; ð13Þ
where a1, a2, and a3 are empirical coefficients given in the
monochromatic friction formulas. In Nielsen’s [1992]
formula these coefficients are a1 = 5.5, a2 = 0.2, and
a3 = 6.3. Although the coefficients given by Madsen
[1994] could alternatively be used in equation (13), we have
chosen to use Nielsen’s coefficients because he explicitly
C04001 LOWE ET AL.: WAVE DISSIPATION OVER A BARRIER REEF
4 of 16
C04001
describes how to calculate kw based on the measured bottom
roughness. Use of the Nielsen [1992] relationship therefore
allows us to compare our estimates of fw,j, derived later from
measured wave energy fluxes, with estimates of kw based on
in situ measurements of the bottom roughness.
[19] Finally, to estimate the energy dissipation factor fe,j
using equation (10) requires an estimate of the phase angle
fj for the different frequency components. Madsen [1994]
states that the phase angle can be approximated in degrees
as
fj ¼ 33 6:0 log10
ubm;r
kwwj
 
: ð14Þ
For a given fe,r, a representative wave friction factor fw,r can
be determined by applying equation (10) according to
fe;r ¼ fw;r cosfr; ð15Þ
where the representative phase lag fr can be determined by
substituting wr in equation (14) for wj.
3. Experimental Setup and Conditions
3.1. Study Site
[20] A 2 week experiment was conducted on the barrier
reef in Kaneohe Bay, which is located on the northeastern
(windward) shore of the island of Oahu in Hawaii (21290N,
157480W). It represents the largest sheltered body of water
in the Hawaiian Islands, and extends about 15 km along
shore and is approximately 3 km wide. The aerial photo-
graph in Figure 2 shows that the Kaneohe Bay reef has a
similar form to the idealized barrier reef in Figure 1. The
barrier reef itself runs NW to SE along the seaward side of
the bay and is approximately 2 km wide and 10 km long.
Compared to other reefs around the world, the reef at
Kaneohe Bay is unusually wide, as many reefs tend to be
on the order of only several hundred meters wide [Wiens,
1962], such as those sites described by Hardy and Young
[1996] and Lugo-Fernandez et al. [1998a, 1998b]. The
depth of the reef flat ranges from 3 m in the region closest
to the fore reef to <1 m in the region nearest to the lagoon.
Located behind the reef is a lagoon having a width 1–2 km
and a depth of 10–15 m.
[21] Kaneohe Bay is exposed to the trade winds which
blow most of the year from E to NE, averaging approx-
imately 5 m/s. The wave environment is predominantly
derived from two major sources: (1) wind waves derived
from the trade winds with 6–10 s periods, which dominate
during the summer months and (2) ocean swells 10–14 s
in period that are generated by North Pacific storms
primarily in the winter months. The mean tidal range in
Kaneohe Bay is approximately 0.7 m with a maximum of
about 1.1 m.
3.2. Instrument Deployment
[22] The instruments that were used to estimate wave
dissipation were located at five sites arranged in a line
oriented in the cross-reef direction (Figure 3). A summary
of the instrument locations and settings is given in Table 1.
Site 1 was located on the fore reef at a position such that no
wave breaking would occur offshore of this site. During the
experiment, the surf zone was located between sites 1 and 2.
Sites 2 through 5 were located on the reef flat at least one
hundred meters shoreward of where the surf zone ended. As
a consequence, wave breaking was negligible between these
sites.
[23] A RD Instruments 1200 kHz acoustic Doppler
current profiler (ADCP) was located on the fore reef at
site 1 in approximately 7 m of water, and was primarily
used to measure incident wave energy flux (before break-
ing) and wave direction. The instrument was programmed
in mode 12 (RDI’s fast-pinging rate mode) to sample
velocities and pressure at 1 Hz using 23 0.25 m bins.
The ADCP at site 1 sampled continuously from 19 August
to 3 September 2003.
[24] Site 2 was located approximately 700 m shoreward
of site 1, and was the first site on the reef flat. All sites on
the reef flat (sites 2–5) were spaced approximately 100 m
apart. A sawhorse instrument frame of length 1.5 m and
height 1.0 m was located at site 2 in approximately 2 m of
water. The frame was situated such that the support beam
was normal to the wave propagation direction to minimize
flow interference by the frame legs. Two Nortek Vector
acoustic Doppler velocimeters (ADVs) were mounted to the
instrument frame. The upper ADV sampled velocities 1.3 m
above the bed while the lower ADV sampled 0.3 m above
the bed. Each ADV sampled velocities and pressure at 16 Hz,
andwas operated in burstmode collecting 20min bursts every
hour (19200 samples per burst). The memory and battery
endurance for these sampling parameters was only 7 days,
so the two ADVs were retrieved and redeployed with a
10 hour turn around time on 27 August. Seabird Elec-
tronics 26 pressure sensors were placed at sites 3–5 to
measure wave heights across the reef flat. Each sampled
pressure at 2 Hz in 17 min bursts (2048 samples per
Figure 2. Kaneohe Bay, Oahu, Hawaii. The box approxi-
mately indicates the study area shown in Figure 3. (Landsat
7–ETM+ image). See color version of this figure in the
HTML.
C04001 LOWE ET AL.: WAVE DISSIPATION OVER A BARRIER REEF
5 of 16
C04001
burst) every hour. Finally, an offshore directional wave buoy
(Datawell, Netherlands) was located approximately 15 km
southeast of Kaneohe Bay (2124.90N, 15740.70W), which
recorded wave conditions every 30 min.
3.3. Wave and Tide Conditions
[25] The experiment was conducted from 18 August to
4 September 2003. During the experiment the incident
waves measured by the offshore wave buoy were predom-
inantly trade wind generated with a peak period Tp between
7 and 10 s (Figure 4). During the beginning of the
experiment, strong trade winds in the eastern Pacific gen-
erated waves with a RMS wave height Hrms 	 1.5 m
propagating westward (toward 270). Beginning on day
238 the trade winds weakened and the wave height
decreased to as low as Hrms 	 0.7 m. The peak direction
at this time switched to roughly 180 (toward the south).
Finally, near day 245, Hurricane Jimena passed just south
of the Hawaiian Islands and generated waves with Hrms 	
2.2 m, which is unusually large for this time of year, and
is more typical of winter swell wave heights. A wide range
of wave conditions were thus encountered over this
relatively short experiment. An analysis of wave heights
measured at the same wave buoy for the 3 year period
from 1 January 2001 to 31 December 2003 showed that
this range of wave heights (Hrms = 0.7–2.2 m) occurred
Table 1. Instrument Locations and Settings
Instrument(s) Settings
Offshore
Datawell directional wave buoy data recorded every 30 min
Site 1
RDI 1200 KHz ADCP (with pressure sensor) operated in mode 12
bin size = 0.25 m
total bins = 23
16 subpings at 25 Hz
ping rate = 1 Hz
Site 2
Two Nortek Vector ADVs (with pressure sensors) 16 Hz sampling rate
operated in burst mode
19200 samples per burst
one burst every hour
Sites 3–5
Seabord Electronics 26 pressure sensors 2 Hz sampling rate
operated in burst mode
2048 samples per burst
one burst every hour
Figure 3. Reef bathymetry and instrument locations. Water depth is based on the mean tidal elevation
during the experiment. The contour interval is 1 m, and the 1 and 2 m isobaths are highlighted.
Instrument locations are indicated by the squares. See color version of this figure in the HTML.
C04001 LOWE ET AL.: WAVE DISSIPATION OVER A BARRIER REEF
6 of 16
C04001
greater than 95% of the time. Thus the experiments
incorporated the vast majority of the historical wave height
conditions.
[26] Finally, tide data recorded on the reef flat at site 2 is
shown in Figure 4d. The experiment covered a complete
spring neap tidal cycle.
4. Observations and Results
4.1. Wave Heights
[27] Waves propagating across the reef dissipate energy
through wave breaking and bottom friction. According to
the wave energy equation (equation (2)), a decrease in the
wave energy flux will be accompanied by a change in
wave height across the reef. Owing to the relatively mild
slope of the fore reef (1:50) wave reflection, as estimated
using the Battjes [1974] sloping bottom reflection formula,
is extremely small and can be neglected. We therefore
used wave height attenuation measurements to estimate
wave dissipation.
[28] Wave height variation across the reef was measured
using the pressure time series measurements at sites 1–5.
The spectral density of the water surface elevation S was
calculated for each hourly burst by first calculating the one-
sided spectral density of the pressure fluctuations Sp using a
Hanning window to reduce spectral leakage and band-
averaging using eight fundamental frequencies (bandwidth
Dfb = 1/128 Hz). Each frequency component j of the
resulting discrete pressure spectrum Sp,j was then converted
to a wave spectrum component Sj using linear wave theory
according to
Sj ¼
cosh kjh
 
rg cosh kj h zð Þ
 
 !2
SP;j; ð16Þ
where z is the vertical distance of the pressure sensor below
the mean surface elevation and kj is the wave number that is
determined by solving the linear dispersion relation
w2j ¼ gkj tanh kjh
 
: ð17Þ
An analysis of the wave spectra showed that, for all sites,
the frequency range 0–0.5 Hz contained greater than 95%
of the total energy. As a consequence, in all of the analysis
that follows, only wave frequencies up to 0.5 Hz will be
considered.
[29] The RMS wave height Hrms was calculated for each
wave burst by determining the total energy in the wave
spectrum, i.e.,
Hrms ¼
ﬃﬃﬃ
8
p XN
j¼1
SjDfb
 !1=2
; ð18Þ
where N is the total number of frequency components.
Figure 5 shows Hrms calculated during the experiment at the
offshore wave buoy, site 1 on the fore reef, and sites 2 and 5
on the reef flat. The average RMS wave height recorded
Figure 4. Wave and tide conditions. (a) Offshore RMS
wave height Hrms. (b) Offshore peak period TP. (c) Offshore
dominant wave direction DP. (d) Tidal elevation (as
represented by the deviation from mean depth measured at
site 2).
Figure 5. RMS wave height recorded at the offshore wave
buoy, site 1 on the fore reef, and sites 2 and 5 on the reef
flat.
Table 2. Minimum, Average, and Maximum RMS Wave Height
Hrms at the Offshore Wave Buoy and Sites 1–5
a
Wave Buoy Site 1 Site 2 Site 3 Site 4 Site 5
Minimum 0.70 0.62 0.20 0.15 0.10 0.06
Mean 1.17 0.96 0.35 0.29 0.23 0.17
Maximum 2.21 1.61 0.50 0.47 0.40 0.30
aWave height is measured in meters.
C04001 LOWE ET AL.: WAVE DISSIPATION OVER A BARRIER REEF
7 of 16
C04001
during the experiment at each site is given in Table 2, along
with the minimum and maximum recorded values. Wave
heights at site 1 are slightly smaller than the offshore value,
although there is good agreement during days 239–242.
Figure 4 shows that these days correspond to when the wave
direction was more southerly. Therefore the discrepancy
appears to be a function of offshore wave direction and may
be the result of wave sheltering by Mokapu point located
SW of the field site.
[30] A significant decrease in wave height occurred on
the fore reef region between sites 1 and 2, due to the
combined effects of wave breaking and frictional dissipa-
tion. A smaller decrease in wave height occurs between sites
2 and 5 on the reef flat, due to dissipation by bottom
friction. The height of waves on the reef flat (sites 2 and 5)
falls within a relatively narrow range compared to larger
variation in the offshore and fore reef (site 1) values
(Figure 5).Wave height on the reef flat is mostly insensitive to
the incident wave height because it is controlled by the water
depth per equation (1). The wave height on the reef flat is thus
controlled by the tidal elevation. This tidalmodulation ismost
apparent in Figure 6, which shows wave height measured on
both the fore reef and reef flat plotted as a function of tidal
elevation, for all recorded bursts. There is no apparent
correlation of the fore reef wave height with water depth.
On the reef flat, however, the wave height is a strong function
of the water depth because the allowable height of waves on
the reef flat increases as the water depth increases.
[31] The wave height on the reef flat is thus a function of
both the incident wave height and water depth. Figure 7
shows contours of reef flat wave height plotted as a function
of the fore reef wave height (before breaking) and the tidal
elevation. During low tides, as the fore reef wave height
increases the contours become increasingly vertical imply-
ing that the allowable wave height on the reef flat is only a
function of the water depth. Alternatively, for cases when
the incident waves on the fore reef are small, the contours
become increasingly horizontal as the water depth increases,
implying that the wave height on the reef flat is now
controlled by the incident wave height. Note that the exact
shape of the contours in Figure 7 are specific to the
Kaneohe reef, and depend on the Kaneohe reef geometry
and its wave climate. For shallow reefs that regularly
experience large wave conditions, contours of this type will
be mostly vertical as the reef flat wave height will be
controlled by the water depth. For deeper reef flats that
typically experience small wave conditions, contours will be
mostly horizontal as the wave height of the reef flat will not
be significantly controlled by the water depth. The Kaneohe
Bay barrier reef is clearly an intermediate case where wave
height is a function of both tides and offshore wave
conditions. Similar contours have been observed using
wave height data collected at a site on the Great Barrier
Reef by Hardy and Young [1996].
4.2. Wave Dissipation
[32] The spatially averaged rate of wave energy dissipa-
tion htotal,ji, due to both wave breaking and bottom friction,
between two arbitrary adjacent sites A and B, can be
estimated as a function of the wave frequency component
j by discretizing the spectral form of the one-dimensional
wave energy equation (equation (2)) as
total;j
  ¼ f ;j þ b;j  	 DFj
Dr
 DR;j ð19Þ
Dr ¼ LAB cos q; ð20Þ
where the angled brackets indicate spatial averaging
between adjacent sites. Here DFj is the difference in the
wave energy flux measured between sites A and B, which
can be determined by applying equations (3)–(5), LAB is
the direct distance between sites A and B, and q is the
angle formed between the line connecting the two sites and
the wave propagation direction. Note that in equation (20),
the projected distance Dr is assumed to not be a function
of wave frequency, which implies that all waves propagate
in the same direction. For waves measured over the reef
this was a good assumption, as will be discussed below,
since the wave direction is set by the shallow bathymetry.
Figure 6. RMS wave height measured on the fore reef and
reef flat versus tidal elevation. (a) Fore reef wave height.
(b) Reef flat wave height. The solid line indicates the
depth-limited wave height.
Figure 7. Contours of reef flat RMS wave height
measured at site 2 versus fore reef wave height (site 1)
and tidal elevation (as represented by deviation from mean
reef flat depth). The contour interval is 0.025 m.
C04001 LOWE ET AL.: WAVE DISSIPATION OVER A BARRIER REEF
8 of 16
C04001
Since equation (19) is based on the one-dimensional wave
equation, the term DR,j is included to account for any
apparent decrease in wave energy flux resulting from two-
dimensional wave refraction effects. To investigate the
magnitude of DR,j, the numerical wave model REF/DIF 1
[Kirby and Dalrymple, 1983] was used to simulate a
monochromatic wave field in the study area. To investigate
refraction effects, separate simulations were conducted
with bottom friction and wave breaking turned off in the
model for a range of different incident wave frequencies,
and DR,j was estimated by calculating DFj/Dr between
each pair of sites. Results showed that in the worst case
DR,j/(DFj/Dr) < 0.1 between each pair of sites on the reef
flat (sites 2–5), and hence refraction effects can be
neglected since its effect is smaller than the inherent
uncertainty in the frictional dissipation estimates discussed
below. This estimate of negligible refraction is consistent
with previous estimates of refraction made for the same
site [Falter et al., 2004].
[33] Wave dissipation htotal,ji was calculated for each
frequency component j in each burst using equation (19)
between each adjacent pair of sites. Because the linear
array of pressure sensors between sites 1 and 5 was not
perfectly aligned with the measured wave direction, the
Dr term was calculated between each adjacent pair of
sites using equation (20). To determine the wave direction
q, the directional wave spectrum was calculated using the
pressure and velocity data recorded by the ADVs at site 2
on the reef flat, as well as the ADCP located at site 1, by using
the Maximum Entropy Method [Massel, 1996]. The wave
direction q was assumed to be represented by the dominant
wave direction Dp that was calculated from the directional
spectrum for each burst. Time series of Dp measured at both
sites 1 and 2, are shown in Figure 8. The dominant wave
direction at site 2 on the reef flat is very constant and averages
225with very minimal variation of ±2. The dominant wave
direction measured at site 1 on the fore reef is on average 229
with a larger variation of approximately ±20. As expected,
the wave direction on the fore reef is more sensitive to
offshore changes in wave direction than on the reef flat since
the fore reef is located in deeper water where refraction
has less of an influence. For each burst, these measure-
ments of Dp at sites 1 and 2 were used to estimate q
between each pair of sites in order to calculate the
projected distance Dr. The projected distance between
sites 1 and 2 averaged about 700 m. The projected
distance between adjacent sites on the reef flat, each aver-
aged about 100 m.
[34] Dissipation between each pair of sites was calculated
for each frequency component in a given burst, by applying
equation (19). The total dissipation hEtotali for each burst
was then calculated by summing the dissipation calculated
for each frequency component up to 0.5 Hz, i.e.,
Etotalh i ¼
XN
j¼1
total;j
 
: ð21Þ
Figure 8. Time series of dominant wave direction Dp
measured at (a) site 2 and (b) site 1.
Figure 9. Spatially averaged rate of dissipation hEtotali
measured on the fore reef and reef flat.
Figure 10. Average rate of dissipation hEtotali versus the
fore reef wave height (measured at site 1). (a) Dissipation
measured on the fore reef between sites 1 and 2, where the
solid line indicates a quadratic dependence, obtained by
fitting the dissipation data to aHrms
2, where a is a fitting
parameter. (b) Dissipation measured on the reef flat taken as
the average of the values measured between sites 2–3, 3–4,
and 4–5.
C04001 LOWE ET AL.: WAVE DISSIPATION OVER A BARRIER REEF
9 of 16
C04001
Figure 9 shows a time series of the total dissipation hEtotali,
which reflects the spatially averaged dissipation rate
between the sites. ‘‘Fore reef’’ refers to the dissipation
calculated between sites 1 and 2. ‘‘Reef flat’’ refers to the
average value calculated for the reef flat sites (between
sites 2–3, 3–4 and 4–5) for each burst. The rate of
dissipation is generally much higher on the fore reef
where dissipation is due to the combined effects of wave
breaking and bottom friction.
[35] Figure 10 shows dissipation calculated on the fore
reef and reef flat as a function of the incident wave height
measured at site 1. Dissipation on the fore reef is highly
correlated with the incident wave height. Equation (4)
shows that the wave energy flux at each site is proportional
to wave height squared. However, compared to the signif-
icant variation in the fore reef wave height, the wave height
on the reef flat varies minimally (Figure 5) since it is
controlled by the water depth per equation (1). The reef
flat wave height thus can essentially be treated as a constant,
and in this case the total dissipation measured on the fore
reef should be approximately proportional to the incident
wave height squared. This quadratic dependence is shown
as the solid line in Figure 10a. In general, the dissipation
measured on the fore reef should not be perfectly quadratic
because the wave height on the reef flat is not exactly
constant due to the tidal modulation of the water depth.
[36] Similarly, Figure 10b shows reef flat dissipation as a
function of the incident wave height measured on the fore
reef. In general, reef flat dissipation increases with fore reef
wave height although the correlation is smaller than in
Figure 10a. Reef flat dissipation is due to frictional dissi-
pation, and according to equation (9) will increase in
proportion to the near-bottom wave orbital velocity cubed,
and hence proportional to the reef flat wave height cubed.
Therefore reef flat dissipation is not well correlated with
offshore wave height, since wave height and accordingly
frictional dissipation is also a function of the water depth.
4.2.1. Frictional Dissipation on the Reef Flat
[37] Wave dissipation measured on the reef flat between
sites 2 and 5 can be used to calculate wave friction
parameters for the reef. No wave breaking occurs on the
reef flat (i.e., b,j 	 0) so the total dissipation measured
between sites 2 and 5 can be assumed to be only due to
friction. Frictional dissipation is parameterized as a function
of the maximum near-bottom horizontal orbital velocity ub,j,
according to equation (9). This velocity was only directly
measured at site 2 (see section 3), so at each site ub,j was
estimated for each frequency component j using the mea-
sured wave spectrum by applying linear wave theory:
ub;j ¼ ajwj
sinh kjh
; ð22Þ
where the wave amplitude component aj can be determined
as aj =
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2SjDfb
p
. The ADV located at site 2 simultaneously
sampled velocity and pressure, allowing a check of the
applicability of equation (22), which may break down in
shallow depths where nonlinear effects are potentially
significant. Figure 11 shows scatter plots of ub,j measured
by the lower ADV for each frequency component of each
burst, as a function of the corresponding velocity predicted
using equation (22), during each week of the experiment. A
1:1 correspondence (r2 = 0.98) is observed over the full
range of conditions measured in the experiment, indicating
that equation (22) can be applied to obtain accurate
estimates of ub,j at each site on the reef flat using the wave
height records, similar to findings described by Guza and
Thornton [1980].
[38] Combining the estimates of hf,ji and ub,j described
above, enables us to calculate the energy dissipation factor
fe,j using equation (9) and its representative value fe,r by
applying equation (12), between each pair of sites on the
reef flat. A time series of fe,r calculated between each pair of
sites on the reef flat is shown in Figure 12. In general, fe,r is
consistent between the different sites (Table 3), indicating
that the frictional properties were independent of where they
where measured on the reef flat. The average value of fe,r
Table 3. Mean Values of the Representative Frictional Dissipation
Parameters Measured Between the Reef Flat Sites
ubm,r, m/s wr, 1/s fe,r fw kw, m
Sites 2–3 0.30 1.02 0.23 0.28 0.18
Sites 3–4 0.27 1.01 0.24 0.28 0.16
Sites 4–5 0.23 0.98 0.24 0.29 0.15
Mean 0.27 1.00 0.24 0.28 0.16
Figure 11. Measured wave orbital velocity ub,j for each
frequency component at site 2 versus that predicted from the
wave height measurements using linear wave theory for
(a) week 1 and (b) week 2 of the experiment.
Figure 12. Representative energy dissipation factor fe,r
measured between each pair of sites on the reef flat. See
color version of this figure in the HTML.
C04001 LOWE ET AL.: WAVE DISSIPATION OVER A BARRIER REEF
10 of 16
C04001
measured between the reef flat sites during the experiment
was fe,r = 0.24 ± 0.03 (Table 3), where the uncertainty is
expressed as twice the standard deviation of the mean value.
This value fe,r is consistent with previous estimates made on
the Kaneohe Bay reef flat (fe,r = 0.22 ± 0.03 [Falter et al.,
2004]) and is also comparable to values estimated for other
coral reefs such as Ala Moana Reef, Hawaii (fe,r = 0.28 ±
0.25 [Gerritsen, 1981]) and John Brewer Reef, Great
Barrier Reef (fe,r = 0.15 ± 0.04 [Nelson, 1996]).
4.2.2. Hydraulic Roughness
[39] Using the measured values for ub,r, wr and fe,r, the
wave friction factor fw,r and hydraulic roughness length kw
can be determined using equations (13)–(15). The average
values of fw,r and kw, calculated between each pair of sites
on the reef flat are shown in Table 3. Note that fw,r is
approximately 20% larger than fe,r which is due to the
assumed phase lag fr between the maximum shear stress
and the maximum near-bottom velocity. It should be em-
phasized that the average fw,r calculated for the duration of
the experiment was fw,r = 0.28 ± 0.04, which is 30 times
larger than a typical value of 0.01 cited for flat sandy
bottoms [e.g., Thornton and Guza, 1983]. Coral reef surfaces
are thus highly efficient at dissipating wave energy by bottom
friction due to the large bottom roughness produced by reef
organisms. The hydraulic roughness length kw (calculated
using equation (13)) does not vary significantly between
locations on the reef flat, and has an average value kw =
0.16 ± 0.03 m for this experiment, as shown in Table 3.
[40] An advantage of the spectral wave friction model of
Madsen [1994] is that it can be used to investigate how
wave energy is dissipated among the different frequency
components. For each burst, hf,ji was calculated for each
frequency component, and equation (9) was applied to
determine the energy dissipation factor fe,j as a function of
wave frequency. The energy dissipation factor fe,j, ensemble
averaged over all bursts during the 2 week experiment, is
shown in Figure 13. There is a general trend of increasing
energy dissipation factor as the wave frequency increases,
which is consistent between the different pairs of sites. In
laboratory experiments, Mathisen and Madsen [1999]
showed that a single hydraulic roughness length kw works
well to predict how the energy dissipation factor varies as a
function of wave frequency. The predicted shape of fe,j
using equation (13) and the measured value kw = 0.16 m
held constant, is plotted as a solid line in Figure 13. The
model prediction agrees very well with the form of fe,j
observed in the experiments, and only deviates significantly
from the observed measurements for frequencies greater
than about 0.4 Hz. At higher frequencies (>0.4 Hz), the
measured energy dissipation factor is larger than that
predicted using the model. It is possible that this deviation
is due to nonlinear energy transfer, as discussed below.
Another, likely possibility, is that at high wave frequencies
the ratio ub,r/(kwwj) becomes order one which implies that the
magnitude of the near-bed wave orbital excursion length is
comparable to the roughness length scale. When this is the
case, the wave friction factor becomes dependent on the
bottom roughness geometry and wave friction formulas are
likely to break down.As a consequence,many frictionmodels
suggest a maximum applicability limit based on ub,r/(kwwj)
[e.g.,Madsen, 1994], but no upper limit is specifically stated
for theNielsen [1992] formula. Regardless of the discrepancy
at high frequencies, the bulk of the total wave energy is
located in the frequency range 0.1–0.25 Hz and within this
range the agreement is excellent. It should be emphasized that
the spectral friction model neglects the potential transfer of
energy among the different frequency components due to
nonlinear interactions, which could contaminate the dissipa-
tion estimates. As there is no simple method to analytically
determine this rate of nonlinear energy transfer [Hamm et al.,
1993], the specific effect of nonlinear interactions at this site is
unknown. Nevertheless, the fact that the rates of dissipation
predicted using theMadsen et al. [1988] model agree so well
with our observations may suggest that the rate of nonlinear
energy transfer on this flat surface is negligible over these
short distances compared to the high rate of frictional dissi-
pation on the reef.
[41] In order to predict rates of frictional dissipation at
arbitrary field sites, values for parameters in the friction
models must be specified. Estimates of the hydrodynamic
Figure 13. Energy dissipation factor as a function of wave
frequency. Measured values are indicated by dotted lines.
The solid line represents predicted energy dissipation factor
using a constant roughness length kw = 0.16 m.
Figure 14. Photograph taken on the reef flat between
sites 2 and 3. See color version of this figure in the HTML.
C04001 LOWE ET AL.: WAVE DISSIPATION OVER A BARRIER REEF
11 of 16
C04001
parameters in these models are simple as these are defined
by the incident wave field. However, a hydraulic roughness
length kw must also be specified which may be challenging
since the bottom roughness characteristics depend on the
particular field site. In principle, kw can be determined from
wave attenuation measurements as we have done here, but
in practice it would be preferable to specify kw based on the
physical roughness of the reef, which could potentially be
obtained by doing bottom roughness surveys.
[42] A major question then is, how well does kw obtained
from the wave friction estimates relate to actual measure-
ments of the bottom roughness. Figure 14 shows a photo of
the reef flat taken between sites 2 and 3. The reef flat is
composed of a hard limestone base which is covered by a
variety of benthic organisms, including various species of
algae and coral [Falter et al., 2004]. To measure the bottom
roughness, surveys were conducted at 14 random locations
distributed across the reef flat study area (between sites 2
through 5). At each survey location a roughness profiler,
similar to the apparatus described by McCormick [1994]
and detailed by V. Nunes and G. Pawlak (manuscript in
preparation, 2005), was used to measure the height of the
roughness in the cross-reef direction in 5 cm intervals along
a 3 m transect to a vertical resolution of ±2 mm. Roughness
along each transect was characterized by the standard
deviation of the substratum heights sr which is equivalent
to the RMS roughness amplitude. Values of sr measured for
the 14 transects averaged 3.6 cm and ranged from 2.0 to
4.9 cm. The variation in the measured roughness between
the survey sites was surprisingly small, suggesting that
the reef flat roughness is mostly homogeneous within the
study area. In order to compare the hydraulic roughness
kw with the measured roughness, the same definition of
kw in Nielsen’s [1992] friction formula (equation (13))
must be used. This equation was derived from laboratory
experiments using nonmovable three-dimensional rough-
ness (e.g., fixed sand, pebbles, gravel, etc.) where the
hydraulic roughness was assigned a value of kw = 2D
based on the grain diameter D [Nielsen, 1992]. The
measured RMS roughness height is 2sr (twice the rough-
ness amplitude) and to an approximation it is reasonable
to assume that D 	 2sr. Hence to specify a value of kw
consistent with its definition in equation (13), the expression
kw 	 4sr ð23Þ
can be used to an approximation. Applying equation (23) to
the roughness measurements produces an average value of
kw = 14 cm. This value is remarkably similar to the
hydraulic roughness obtained using equation (13) with the
bottom friction measurements (kw = 16 ± 3 cm), and is most
importantly of the correct order of magnitude, suggesting
that it may be possible to predict frictional dissipation on
coral reefs by making small-scale surveys of the bottom
roughness. Although these results show great promise, it
must be emphasized that this comparison has only been
applied using this data set and to verify whether this
approach is consistently valid on coral reefs and not
coincidental, similar data collected on other reefs is needed.
[43] Finally, it should be noted that the hydraulic rough-
ness kw in equation (23) has been characterized by a single
length scale based on the RMS roughness height. Yet,
studies have shown that the hydraulic roughness can be a
function of not only the height of the roughness but also the
roughness element spacing and distribution. The hydraulic
roughness associated with a two-dimensional vortex ripple,
for example, is known to be a function of both the ripple
height and its wavelength [Nielsen, 1992]. Laboratory
experiments have also shown that inhomogeneities in
roughness can establish residual circulations that can alter
dissipation [Pawlak and MacCready, 2002]. The Kaneohe
reef flat, however, does not appear to have organized two-
dimensional spatial structure. Having formed from eroded
limestone, benthic organisms and coral rubble, the reef flat
roughness is three-dimensional in nature and is thus well
approximated by the three-dimensional, ‘‘sand-grain’’
roughness used in laboratory experiments to derive the
Nielsen [1992] friction formula given in equation (13).
4.2.3. Wave Breaking Dissipation on the Fore Reef
[44] The direct measure of wave breaking dissipation in
the field environment is difficult. For our experiment, wave
breaking occurred in the surf zone between sites 1 and 2.
Between these sites, however, frictional dissipation also
occurs which prevents us from directly measuring the
effects of breaking alone. In order to investigate the contri-
bution of wave breaking to the total dissipation measured
between sites 1 and 2, a simple one-dimensional numerical
model was implemented. The model follows the approach
described by Thornton and Guza [1983], which is based on
solving the wave energy equation in equation (2). In their
approach, the wave energy equation is integrated such that
the total energy in the spectrum is modeled, not the
individual contributions of the frequency components, i.e.,
@F
@x
¼ Eb  Ef ; ð24Þ
where F represents the total (sum over all frequencies) wave
energy flux, Eb represents the total rate of wave breaking
dissipation, and Ef is the total rate of frictional dissipation.
Equation (24) is numerically integrated from site 1 to site 2
using a forward differencing scheme. A grid convergence
test was done and a step size of 1 m was found to be
Figure 15. Water depth profile, as referenced to the mean
tidal elevation, between sites 1 and 2. The vertical dashed
line indicates the approximate location of the reef crest.
C04001 LOWE ET AL.: WAVE DISSIPATION OVER A BARRIER REEF
12 of 16
C04001
adequate, since further reducing the step size had a
negligible influence on the results. Figure 15 shows the
bathymetry profile along a line between sites 1 and 2, which
was used as an input to the model.
[45] Frictional dissipation Ef was parameterized using the
representative hydraulic roughness kw = 0.16 m measured
on the reef flat. The bottom roughness between sites 1 and 2
is believed to be comparable to that measured on the reef
flat, since it is covered with similar reef organisms. To
parameterize wave breaking dissipation, the mild bed slope
model of Thornton and Guza [1983] was used as given in
equation (6). The applicability of this model to coral reefs
has been questioned by Massel and Gourlay [2000], since it
may not accurately predict wave breaking on very steep
coral reef slopes, however, the barrier reef at Kaneohe Bay
is unusually wide and consequently has a relatively mild
slope. Between sites 1 and 2, the fore reef has a slope of
1:50 which is the same slope as the sandy beach site that
was used for the original model calibration [Thornton and
Guza, 1983]. The empirical constants in the breaking
dissipation model, equation (6), were set to g = 0.5 and
B = 1 which represent standard values cited in the literature.
[46] The model was run using the mean tidal elevation
and a constant wave period of 7.5 s, which represents the
average offshore peak period Tp recorded during the exper-
iment (see Figure 4). The RMS wave height was initialized
at site 1 using the range of values shown in Table 4, and
equation (24) was integrated along the line connecting sites
1 and 2. The initial wave heights at site 1 were chosen to
represent three different conditions: (1) the minimum
recorded wave height measured at site 1 during the exper-
iment, Hrms = 0.60 m, (2) the mean wave height, Hrms =
0.95 m, and (3) the maximum recorded wave height, Hrms =
1.60 m.
[47] Figure 16 shows the computed wave transformation
as the waves propagate from site 1 to 2, for the range of
wave conditions encountered in the experiments. In general,
there is a monotonic decrease in wave height as wave
energy is dissipated due to breaking and frictional dissipa-
tion, although there is a slight increase in wave height on the
fore reef slope for small wave conditions, which is attrib-
uted to shoaling effects. A rapid decrease in wave height
occurs about 100 m seaward of the reef crest. The final
predicted wave height at site 2 varied between 0.33 and
0.37 m, which is consistent with the mean value recorded at
site 2 during the experiment of 0.35 m (see Table 2). The
model clearly shows that the wave height on the reef flat is
controlled by the water depth. Despite the considerable
variation in the wave height at site 1, for the fixed tidal
elevation used in the model the wave height at site 2 is
approximately constant near 0.35 m for all incident wave
conditions, as shown in Table 4.
[48] The numerical model can be used to determine rates
of dissipation between site 1 and 2 and how it is partitioned
Table 4. Results From the Wave Transformation Model
Calculations
Parameter Run 1 Run 2 Run 3
Hrms (site 1), m 0.60 0.95 1.60
Hrms (site 2), m 0.33 0.37 0.37
hEfi, W/m2 2.91 5.35 9.24
hEbi, W/m2 0.74 4.94 21.89
hEtotali, W/m2 3.66 10.29 31.13
hEfi/hEbi 3.92 1.10 0.42
SEb/SEtotal 0.16 0.44 0.68
SEf /SEtotal 0.84 0.56 0.32
Figure 16. RMS wave height predicted using the
numerical model for incident wave heights of 0.60 m,
0.95 m, and 1.60 m. The location of the reef crest is
indicated by the dashed line.
Figure 17. Profiles of dissipation calculated using the
model, where Eb is the rate of breaking dissipation and Ef is
the rate of frictional dissipation for incident RMS wave
heights of (a) 0.60 m, (b) 0.95 m, and (c) 1.60 m.
C04001 LOWE ET AL.: WAVE DISSIPATION OVER A BARRIER REEF
13 of 16
C04001
between wave breaking and bottom friction. Table 4 shows
the spatially averaged total rate of dissipation hEtotali = hEbi +
hEfi, due to the sum of wave breaking and bottom friction, for
the range of wave conditions encountered in the experiment.
Comparison with the measured rate of dissipation in Figure 9
shows that these values agree fairly well with the observa-
tions, indicating that this simple model accurately represents
dissipation on the fore reef.
[49] Figure 17 shows the individual contribution of wave
breaking and bottom friction plotted as a function of
distance from site 1. Both wave breaking and bottom
friction dissipation rates peak slightly behind the reef crest
for all wave conditions. However, the relative contribution
of wave breaking and bottom friction is a strong function of
the incident wave conditions. For small wave conditions
(Hrms = 0.60 m) the fore reef region is dominated by
frictional dissipation and Table 4 shows that the average
rate of frictional dissipation hEfi in this region is about 4 times
larger than wave breaking dissipation hEbi. For the average
wave conditions (Hrms = 0.95 m) the average rate of frictional
dissipation approximately equals the rate of wave break-
ing dissipation although the magnitude of the peak for
breaking dissipation is higher within the surf zone. For
the largest wave conditions encountered during the ex-
periment (Hrms = 1.60 m) the average rate of dissipation
due to bottom friction is still comparable to that due to
breaking. Thus despite the presence of the surf zone, the
frictional contribution to the total dissipation measured on
the fore reef is surprisingly important for the full range of
wave conditions encountered in this experiment.
[50] Finally, results from the model can be used to
estimate how the overall incident wave energy dissipated
by the reef is partitioned between wave breaking and bottom
friction. The total wave energy dissipated by the reef is
denoted SEtotal, which is the sum of the total wave breaking
SEb and total frictional SEf contributions. To an approxi-
mation it will be assumed that the total energy incident on
the reef is represented by the energy flux F1 measured at
site 1, and that all of this energy is dissipated in some
form by the reef in the region onshore of this site, i.e.,
SEtotal 	 F1. This value will be slightly smaller than the
actual total energy dissipated, due to the fact that some
unaccounted for energy is dissipated offshore of site 1 by
friction, but importantly not by wave breaking. Since all
wave breaking occurs between sites 1 and 2, the model
results above can be used to calculate the total wave
energy dissipated by breaking on the reef SEb. The total
energy dissipated by friction is simply the difference
between the total dissipation and wave breaking dissipa-
tion, i.e., SEf = SEtotal  SEb. Hence the partitioning of
total dissipation between wave breaking and bottom
friction can be estimated from the model calculations.
Table 4 shows the fraction of wave breaking and fric-
tional dissipation with respect to total dissipation for the
three wave conditions used in the model. For small waves
(Hrms = 0.60 m) greater than 80% of the total incident
energy is dissipated by friction and for average conditions
(Hrms = 0.95 m) approximately 60% is dissipated by
friction. Only for large wave conditions (Hrms = 1.60 m) does
wave breaking dominate, but even then frictional dissipation
is still important, contributing greater than 30% to the total.
Hence frictional dissipation is very important on this reef, and
since additional frictional dissipation occurring offshore of
site 1 is not included in these calculations, it is safe to assume
that on average a majority of wave energy incident on the
Kaneohe Bay barrier reef is dissipated by bottom friction.
5. Summary and Conclusions
[51] Results from a 2 week experiment on the Kaneohe
Bay barrier reef show that for typical wave conditions, a
majority of the incident wave energy is dissipated by bottom
friction, and that wave breaking is of lesser importance.
This is in contrast to observations made on sandy beach
sites [e.g., Thornton and Guza, 1983] and some assump-
tions about dissipation on other coral reefs [e.g., Young,
1989; Gourlay, 1994; Massel and Gourlay, 2000], where
wave breaking is assumed to dominate and bottom friction
makes a smaller contribution. A major morphological
function of barrier reefs is to impede the transmission of
wave energy, acting as a break water, and hence to predict
wave attenuation by reefs, an accurate parameterization of
all dissipation processes is needed. Frictional dissipation is
often expected to be of prime importance on coral reefs and
hence its accurate parameterization must be incorporated
into wave models of these sites.
[52] The spectral wave friction model of Madsen et al.
[1988] appears to accurately describe rates of frictional
dissipation measured on the reef flat. Moreover, the use of
a single hydraulic roughness seems to describe the observed
variation in the dissipation rates among the different fre-
quency components, similar to findings in previous studies
conducted in smaller-scale laboratory flumes [Mathisen and
Madsen, 1999]. Results from the bottom roughness survey
conducted on the reef flat indicate that the measured
roughness compares well to the hydraulic roughness
obtained with the frictional dissipation measurements using
Nielsen’s [1992] wave friction formula. This suggests that it
may be possible to characterize frictional dissipation on
other reefs from local measurements of bottom roughness
and wave kinematics, rather than derived from large-scale
observations of wave transformation. Such an approach
would be more useful in reef environments where the wave
fields are generally more complex and/or the effect of
bottom friction is overshadowed by other wave-transforming
processes such as refraction, diffraction, and breaking.
Notation
h i operator indicating spatial average value be-
tween sites.
a wave amplitude.
Ab near-bed wave orbital excursion amplitude.
B empirical wave breaking constant.
Cg group velocity.
D grain diameter.
Dp dominant wave direction.
E wave energy density.
Eb total rate of breaking dissipation summed over
all frequency components.
Ef total rate of frictional dissipation summed over
all frequency components.
Etotal sum of Eb and Ef.
fe wave energy dissipation factor.
C04001 LOWE ET AL.: WAVE DISSIPATION OVER A BARRIER REEF
14 of 16
C04001
fp peak wave frequency.
fw wave friction factor.
F wave energy flux.
F1 wave energy flux measured at site 1.
g gravitational acceleration.
h water depth.
Hrms root-mean-squared wave height.
k wave number.
kw hydraulic roughness length.
LAB direct distance between adjacent sites.
N number of discrete frequency components.
S wave spectrum.
Sp pressure spectrum.
Tp peak wave period.
ub near-bed maximum horizontal wave orbital
velocity.
U current velocity.
x cross-reef direction.
z vertical distance measured below the mean free
surface level.
g critical wave breaking ratio.
DR difference in energy flux between sites due to
refraction.
Dfb frequency bandwidth.
DF difference in wave energy flux measured
between sites.
Dr projected distance between sites in the wave
direction.
b rate of breaking dissipation.
f rate of frictional dissipation.
total sum of b and f.
q angle between wave direction and adjacent
sites.
r density of seawater.
sr root-mean-squared bottom roughness ampli-
tude.
SEb total incident wave energy dissipated by
breaking on the reef.
SEf total incident wave energy dissipated by
friction on the reef.
SEtotal sum of SEb and SEf.
tw wave-induced bed shear stress.
f phase difference between bottom stress and
orbital velocity.
w radian wave frequency.
Subscripts
j frequency component j.
r representative parameter.
[53] Acknowledgments. The authors are grateful to Jim Fleming for
assisting with the experimental setup and instrument deployment. We also
thank Vasco Nunes for offering the use of his roughness profiler to conduct
the bottom roughness surveys and Jerome Aucan and Mark Merrifield at the
UH Sea Level Center for providing the offshore wave buoy data. Landsat 7
ETM+ image of Kaneohe Bay in Figure 2 is distributed by the Land
Processes Distributed Active Archive Center (LP DAAC), located at the
U.S. Geological Survey’s EROS Data Center (http://LPDAAC.usgs.gov).
Image processed by Eric Hochberg. This work was supported by the
National Science Foundation under grant OCE-0117859.
References
Atkinson, M. J., and R. W. Bilger (1992), Effects of water velocity on
Phosphate uptake in coral reef-flat communities, Limnol. Oceanogr.,
37, 273–279.
Baird, M. E., and M. J. Atkinson (1997), Measurement and prediction of
mass transfer to experimental coral reef communities, Limnol. Oceanogr.,
42, 1685–1693.
Battjes, J. (1974), Surf similarity, in Proceedings of the 14th Coastal
Engineering Conference, pp. 466–480, Am. Soc. of Civ. Eng., Reston,
Va.
Battjes, J., and J. Janssen (1979), Energy loss and set-up due to breaking of
random waves, in Proceedings of the 16th Coastal Engineering Confer-
ence, vol. 1, pp. 563–587, Am. Soc. of Civ. Eng., Reston, Va.
Brander, R. W., P. S. Kench, and D. Hart (2004), Spatial and temporal
variations in wave characteristics across a reef platform, Warraber Island,
Torres Strait, Australia, Mar. Geol., 207, 169–184.
Chawla, A., H. T. Ozkan-Haller, and J. T. Kirby (1998), Spectral model for
wave transformation and breaking over irregular bathymetry, J. Waterw.
Port Coastal Ocean Eng., 124, 189–198.
Dally, W. R., R. G. Dean, and R. A. Dalrymple (1985), Wave height
variation across beaches of arbitrary profile, J. Geophys. Res., 90,
1917–1927.
Dean, R., and R. Dalrymple (1991), Water Wave Mechanics for Engi-
neers and Scientists, Adv. Ser. Ocean Eng., vol. 2, World Sci., Hack-
ensack, N. J.
Dollar, S. J. (1982), Wave stress and coral community structure in Hawaii,
Coral Reefs, 1, 71–81.
Dollar, S. J., and G. W. Tribble (1993), Recurrent storm disturbance and
recovery—A long-term study of coral communities in Hawaii, Coral
Reefs, 12, 223–233.
Falter, J. L., M. J. Atkinson, and M. Merrifield (2004), Mass transfer
limitation of nutrient uptake by a wave-dominated reef flat community,
Limnol. Oceanogr., 49, 1820–1831.
Gerritsen, F. (1981), Wave attenuation and wave set-up on a coastal reef,
Tech. Rep. 48, Look Lab. Univ. Hawaii, Honolulu.
Gourlay, M. R. (1994), Wave transformation on a coral-reef, Coastal Eng.,
23, 17–42.
Grigg, R. W. (1998), Holocene coral reef accretion in Hawaii: A function of
wave exposure and sea level history, Coral Reefs, 17, 263–272.
Guza, R. T., and E. B. Thornton (1980), Local and shoaled comparisons of
sea surface elevations, pressures, and velocities, J. Geophys. Res., 85,
1524–1530.
Hamm, L., P. Madsen, and D. Peregrine (1993), Wave transformation in the
nearshore zone: A review, Coastal Eng., 21, 5–39.
Hardy, T. A., and I. R. Young (1996), Field study of wave attenuation on an
offshore coral reef, J. Geophys. Res., 101, 14,311–14,326.
Hasselmann, K. (1962), On the non-linear energy transfer in a gravity-wave
spectrum. 1. General theory, J. Fluid Mech., 12, 481–500.
Hearn, C. J. (1999), Wave-breaking hydrodynamics within coral reef sys-
tems and the effect of changing relative sea level, J. Geophys. Res., 104,
30,007–30,019.
Hearn, C. J., M. J. Atkinson, and J. L. Falter (2001), A physical derivation
of nutrient-uptake rates in coral reefs: Effects of roughness and waves,
Coral Reefs, 20, 347–356.
Jonsson, I. (1966), Wave boundary layers and friction factors, in Tenth
Conference on Coastal Engineering, vol. 1, Am. Soc. of Civ. Eng., Re-
ston, Va.
Kajiura, K. (1968), A model of the bottom boundary layer in water waves,
Bull. Earthquake Res. Inst., 46, 75–126.
Kirby, J. T., and R. A. Dalrymple (1983), A parabolic equation for the
combined refraction diffraction of stokes waves by mildly varying
topography, J. Fluid Mech., 136, 453–466.
Komar, P. (1998), Beach Processes and Sedimentation, 2nd ed., Prentice-
Hall, Upper Saddle River, N. J.
Kraines, S. B., A. Suzuki, T. Yanagi, M. Isobe, X. Y. Guo, and H. Komiyama
(1999), Rapid water exchange between the lagoon and the open ocean at
Majuro Atoll due to wind, waves, and tide, J. Geophys. Res., 104, 15,635–
15,653.
Lee, T., and K. P. Black (1979), The energy spectra of surf waves on a coral
reef, in Proceedings of the 16th Coastal Engineering Conference, vol. 1,
pp. 588–608, Am. Soc. of Civ. Eng., Reston, Va.
Longuet-Higgins, M. S., and R. W. Stewart (1962), Radiation stress and
mass transport in gravity waves, with application to surf beats, J. Fluid
Mech., 13, 481–504.
Lugo-Fernandez, A., H. H. Roberts, and J. N. Suhayda (1998a), Wave
transformations across a Caribbean fringing-barrier coral reef, Cont. Shelf
Res., 18, 1099–1124.
Lugo-Fernandez, A., H. H. Roberts, and W. J. Wiseman (1998b), Tide
effects on wave attenuation and wave set-up on a Caribbean coral reef,
Estuarine Coastal Shelf Sci., 47, 385–393.
Madsen, O. S. (1994), Spectral wave-current bottom boundary layer flows,
in Coastal Engineering 1994: Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Inter-
national Conference, edited by B. L. Edge, pp. 623–634, Am. Soc. of
Civ. Eng., Reston, Va.
C04001 LOWE ET AL.: WAVE DISSIPATION OVER A BARRIER REEF
15 of 16
C04001
Madsen, O., Y.-K. Poon, and H. Graber (1988), Spectral wave attenuation
by bottom friction: Theory, in Coastal Engineering 1998, vol. 1,
pp. 492–504, Am. Soc. of Civ. Eng., Reston, Va.
Massel, S. (1996), Ocean Surface Waves: Their Physics and Prediction,
Adv. Ser. Ocean Eng., vol. 11, World Sci., Hackensack, N. J.
Massel, S. R., and M. R. Gourlay (2000), On the modelling of wave break-
ing and set-up on coral reefs, Coastal Eng., 39, 1–27.
Mathisen, P. P., and O. S. Madsen (1999), Waves and currents over a fixed
rippled bed: 3. Bottom and apparent roughness for spectral waves and
currents, J. Geophys. Res., 104, 18,447–18,461.
McCormick, M. (1994), Comparison of field methods for measuring sur-
face topography and their associations with a tropical reef assemblage,
Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser., 112, 87–96.
Nelson, R. C. (1996), Hydraulic roughness of coral reef platforms, Appl.
Ocean Res., 18, 265–274.
Nielsen, P. (1992), Coastal Bottom Boundary Layers and Sediment Trans-
port, Adv. Ser. Ocean Eng., vol. 4, World Sci., Hackensack, N. J.
Pawlak, G., and P. MacCready (2002), Oscillatory flow across an irregular
boundary, J. Geophys. Res., 107(C5), 3036, doi:10.1029/2000JC000596.
Putman, J., and J. Johnson (1949), The dissipation of wave energy by
bottom friction, Eos Trans. AGU, 30, 67–74.
Swart, D. (1974), Offshore sediment transport and equilibrium beach
profiles, Tech. Rep. 131, Delft Hydraul. Lab., Netherlands.
Symonds, G., K. P. Black, and I. R. Young (1995), Wave-driven flow over
shallow reefs, J. Geophys. Res., 100, 2639–2648.
Tartinville, B., and J. Rancher (2000), Wave-induced flow over Mururoa
atoll reef, J. Coastal Res., 16, 776–781.
Thomas, F. I. M., and M. J. Atkinson (1997), Ammonium uptake by coral
reefs: Effects of water velocity and surface roughness on mass transfer,
Limnol. Oceanogr., 42, 81–88.
Thornton, E. B., and R. T. Guza (1982), Energy saturation and phase
speeds measured on a natural beach, J. Geophys. Res., 87, 9499–
9508.
Thornton, E. B., and R. T. Guza (1983), Transformation of wave height
distribution, J. Geophys. Res., 88, 5925–5938.
Wiens, H. (1962), Atoll Environment and Ecology, Yale Univ. Press, New
Haven, Conn.
Young, I. R. (1989), Wave transformation over coral reefs, J. Geophys.
Res., 94, 9779–9789.

M. J. Atkinson and J. L. Falter, Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology,
University of Hawaii, 46-007 Lilipuna Road, Kaneohe, HI 96744, USA.
(mja@hawaii.edu; falter@hawaii.edu)
M. D. Bandet and G. Pawlak, Department of Oceans and Resources
Engineering, Holmes Hall 404, University of Hawaii, 2540 Dole Street,
Honolulu, HI 96822, USA. (marionb@hawaii.edu; gpawlak@oe.soest.
hawaii.edu)
J. R. Koseff, R. J. Lowe, and S. G. Monismith, Environmental Fluid
Mechanics Laboratory, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-4020,
USA. (koseff@stanford.edu; rlowe@stanford.edu; monismith@stanford.
edu)
C04001 LOWE ET AL.: WAVE DISSIPATION OVER A BARRIER REEF
16 of 16
C04001
