J. Great Lakes Res. 33:62–82
Internat. Assoc. Great Lakes Res., 2007
62
Modeling Dissolved Oxygen in a Dredged Lake Erie Tributary
Jagjit Kaur1,†, Gopi Jaligama2, Joseph F. Atkinson3, Joseph V. DePinto4,*,
and Adrienne D. Nemura4
1CH2M HILL
1000 Wilshire Boulevard, 21st Floor
Los Angeles, California 90017
2TRC Omni Environmental Corporation
Research Park, 321 Wall Street
Princeton, New Jersey 08536
3University at Buffalo
Buffalo, New York 14260
4Limno-Tech, Inc.
501 Avis Drive
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48108
ABSTRACT. A two-dimensional numerical model was developed to study dissolved oxygen (DO) kinet-
ics in a dredged Lake Erie tributary. The model design was aimed to specifically address the fact that
many tributaries to the Great Lakes are dredged periodically for navigation, and that resultant changes
in morphology and hydraulics can have significant impacts on DO. Due to the greater depths caused by
dredging, river velocities slow considerably and vertical mixing is not as effective, leading to thermal
stratification and potential short-circuiting of warmer upstream flow. The model solves the two-dimen-
sional (laterally averaged) hydrodynamic and mass balance equations to simulate transport and transfor-
mation relevant to dissolved oxygen using an alternating direction, implicit finite difference method.
Effects of oxygen-demanding pollutants from municipal and industrial discharges and also from nonpoint
sources are included. A model application was developed for the Black River (Ohio), a tributary of Lake
Erie. The river is dredged periodically, becomes stratified during the low flow summer months, and is
affected by changing lake levels associated with seiching in Lake Erie. After calibration and confirma-
tion, the model was used as a diagnostic tool to understand the impact of various loading sources on low
DO levels observed along the bottom of the river. It is shown that sediment oxygen demand (SOD), com-
bined with the river hydraulics, is the primary cause for low DO levels in the Black River. 
INDEX WORDS: Dissolved oxygen, Great Lakes tributaries, sediment oxygen demand, modeling.
*Corresponding author. E-mail: jdepinto@limno.com
† formerly with Limno-Tech, Inc.
INTRODUCTION
Many tributaries in the Great Lakes are dredged
for navigational purposes. Dredging usually involves
the periodic removal of accumulated bottom sedi-
ments from waterways to enlarge or deepen a navi-
gation channel. The resultant changes in morphology
and hydraulics can have significant impacts on water
quality. Dissolved oxygen (DO) is one of the most
important variables in water quality analysis, and
many of these tributaries suffer from low DO con-
centrations, particularly in the summer months. Low
DO concentrations directly affect fish and alter a
healthy ecological balance. Because DO is affected
by many other water quality parameters, it is a sensi-
tive indicator of the health of an aquatic system. To
protect warm water fish and plant life, many water
quality standards require that DO be greater than 4
milligrams per liter (mg L–1), with a daily minimum
average of 5 mg L–1, and temperatures must be less
than maximum criteria, which vary depending on the
time of the year (U.S. EPA 1986).
When coupled with large swings in surface ele-
Dissolved Oxygen in a Lake Erie Tributary 63
vation of the lake into which it discharges, dredged
tributaries can behave like estuaries, with frequent
and significant flow reversals and rapid changes in
water levels. The dredged portions have depths that
may be four to six times the normal depth of the
river and are characterized by low velocities and
decreased vertical mixing. The differences in tem-
peratures and densities between the river and lake
waters in the warmer summer months lead to verti-
cal stratification and potential short-circuiting of
upstream flow, where the warmer river flow re-
mains at the surface. Stratification reduces vertical
mixing, which reduces the downward transfer of
surface oxygen, and sediments exert oxygen de-
mand, resulting in low DO concentrations in the
bottom waters. A conceptual sketch of conditions
affecting DO concentrations in a dredged tributary
is depicted in Figure 1. Discharges from point
sources, such as industries, wastewater treatment
plants, sanitary sewer overflows (SSOs) and com-
bined sewer overflows (CSOs), and nonpoint
sources (surface runoff) also contribute to low DO
concentrations in the receiving waters. To under-
stand the DO problems occurring in these tribu-
taries, the spatial resolution needed for any
hydrodynamic/water quality model must incorpo-
rate at least a two-dimensional (laterally averaged)
structure. On the other hand, data availability is
usually such that a fully three-dimensional ap-
proach is not warranted. The present model adopts
a two-dimensional framework.
A number of existing water quality models, such
as WASP (Wool et al. 2003), QUAL2E (Brown and
Barnwell 1987), and CE-QUAL-W2 (Cole and
Buchak 1995) simulate DO transport in rivers, but
those models are not directly applicable for evaluat-
ing DO kinetics in the dredged portions of rivers. For
example, the WASP (which uses DYNHYD, a one-
dimensional hydrodynamic model) and QUAL2E
models simulate only longitudinal velocity profiles,
whereas CE-QUAL-W2, a two-dimensional, longitu-
dinal/vertical, hydrodynamic and water quality
model, was found to require a large number of inputs
and modifications to the source code in order to ade-
quately represent conditions for dredged tributaries
of the Great Lakes. Moreover, CE-QUAL-W2 uses a
z-grid computational approach. Terrain following
models tend to be more stable than the z-grid models
and have distinct advantages in terms of specifying
the bottom boundary conditions. It is important to
build a modeling framework capable of describing
the longitudinal gradients as well as vertical stratifi-
FIG. 1. Conceptualization of conditions in the dredged Great Lakes tributaries (see
text for details).
64 Kaur et al.
cation, which is essential for simulating conditions in
dredged channels and to evaluate the impacts of oxy-
gen-demanding pollutants on DO. In addition, other
requirements of the model include the ability to han-
dle multiple point and nonpoint sources to account
for time-varying discharges, withdrawals from vari-
ous sources, watershed runoff, impacts of the lake
seiche, and time-dependent boundary conditions. 
The specific goal of this study was to develop a
coupled two-dimensional, laterally averaged, hy-
drodynamic and water quality model that could be
used to evaluate the impacts of oxygen demanding
sources and assess the factors contributing to low
DO in the dredged portions of Great Lakes tribu-
taries. The model was built upon a previously de-
veloped framework (Blair 1992, Wight 1995, Hall
1997), which was originally designed to evaluate
sources of oxygen demand in the Buffalo River,
Buffalo, New York. In the present study the model
is applied to the Black River, which enters Lake
Erie at Lorain, Ohio.
The model application was conducted to deter-
mine the feasibility of meeting warm water DO
standards. Specifically, the model was designed to
understand the impact of various point and non-
point sources of pollutants along with changes in
morphology and hydraulics caused by navigational
dredging on DO dynamics. Numerical experiments
were conducted to test the hypothesis that SOD,
coupled with the altered system hydraulics, is the
primary cause of low DO levels in the bottom wa-
ters of the dredged tributary. Diagnostic and sensi-
tivity analyses were conducted to understand the
mechanisms affecting the low DO concentrations.
MODEL DEVELOPMENT
Conceptual Model Approach
The overall modeling approach used in this study
involved coupling of a two-dimensional, laterally
averaged, hydrodynamic model and a water quality
model. The hydrodynamic model is based on conti-
nuity and momentum balances. Hydrodynamic con-
stituents include water depth and vertical and
horizontal velocities. The water quality model cal-
culates values for water quality constituents using
basic mass balances, as expressed through the ad-
vection-diffusion equation, while incorporating ap-
propriate sources and sinks. Water quality
constituents include temperature, carbonaceous bio-
chemical oxygen demand (CBOD), ammonia
(NH3), nitrate (modeled as nitrate plus nitrite,
NO3+NO2), total organic nitrogen (TON), and dis-
solved oxygen (DO). The water quality model con-
tains an SOD formulation that allows spatially
variable SOD rates to change with temperature and
water column DO.
The numerical discretization is a terrain-following
coordinate system, with an equal number of layers
(referred to as “sigma layers”) everywhere in the
model domain. In other words, the layer thickness
expands in deeper portions of the river and becomes
thinner in shallower regions. This type of formula-
tion simplifies the finite difference representation for
the system, but may produce errors when flows are
very high or when there are rapid changes in depth.
To avoid these problems, care must be taken to
choose a combination of longitudinal grid length,
number of layers, and time step. In addition to sigma
layers, a staggered grid approach is adopted in which
velocities are defined at the edges of the grid, while
the concentrations of nutrients, temperature, density
and viscosity of water are defined at the center of the
grid as shown in Figure 2. This method is numeri-
cally stable and effective in limiting excessive com-
putational time associated with solving the
non-linear momentum equation (Kantha and Clayson
1994). The model is formulated to handle up to 20
layers in the vertical direction and up to 200 grids (or
segments) longitudinally.
The alternating direction implicit (ADI) method
(Zhao 2002) was used to solve the governing equa-
tion in two steps. In the first half time step, consec-
utive layers of elements are solved implicitly by
holding adjacent elements, above and below, as
constant at their values from the previous time step.
In the second half time step, a similar procedure is
followed, solving consecutive columns along the
model reach. All concentration values are updated
only after one full sweep is completed. A derivation
of the general finite difference expressions for the
two-dimensional advection diffusion equation is
presented by Jaligama (2004).
Hydrodynamic Model
The hydrodynamic model uses the momentum
equation to solve for longitudinal velocities (Clark
1996),
∂
∂ +
∂
∂ +
∂
∂ = −
∇
+
∂
∂
∂
∂
  +
UW
t
U UW
x
V UW
z
W P
x
UW
x
x
ρ
ν
∂
∂
∂
∂
 z
UW
zz
ν
(1)
Dissolved Oxygen in a Lake Erie Tributary 65
where U = longitudinal velocity; V = vertical veloc-
ity; P = pressure; ρ = water density; W = river
width, νx = viscosity in the longitudinal direction
and νz = viscosity in vertical direction. Assuming
hydrostatic pressure, eqn. (1) is solved for U. Conti-
nuity is then used to find vertical velocities,
computational time that would have been needed to
solve a full free surface formulation. In addition,
the main goal of the study did not require detailed
hydrodynamic calculations, nor were data available
to verify the model, so this simplification was ap-
propriate.
Initial horizontal (longitudinal) velocities are cal-
culated by assuming a logarithmic velocity profile
(Jaligama 2004),
FIG. 2. Sigma layer coordinate system with staggered grids.
∂
∂ +
∂
∂ =
U
x
V
z
qin (2)
U Q
W z
D
z
D
z
R
= +




−






−
0 0 0
1 1ln
1
0
ln D z
z
−



 (3)
where qin = net lateral inflow per unit volume of
each grid cell. It should be noted in the derivation
of eqn. (2) that terms involving gradients of width
have been neglected.
The surface elevation of the river at the down-
stream boundary is assumed to be sinusoidal and
depends on the amplitude and period of the lake
seiche. The water elevation in the entire section of
the river is assumed to vary linearly from the down-
stream boundary (water depth is fixed at the up-
stream boundary). Thus, the model has a semi-rigid
lid and is not able to simulate surface waves, for in-
stance. However, this approach was found to pro-
vide stability and to reduce the required
where D = depth of the river section; z = depth of
the grid element from the surface; and z0 = height
from the bottom of the river where the velocity is
zero (i.e., the virtual origin of the profile). The ini-
tial vertical velocities in the bottom layer are as-
sumed to be zero and the initial vertical velocities
in the other layers are obtained by using the initial
horizontal velocities and solving the continuity eqn.
(2). (Note that all vertical velocities would be zero
initially for a river of constant depth.)
66 Kaur et al.
Thermal Stratification (Temperature Balance)
Temperatures in different sections of the river are
calculated using a heat balance equation,
where T = temperature (°C); c = specific heat; ΦS =
solar radiation; and kx and kz are thermal diffusivi-
ties in the longitudinal and vertical directions, re-
spectively. The solar source term is calculated using
a simple exponential decay, 
where ΦS0 = solar radiation at the surface; β = frac-
tion of radiation absorbed at the surface; and η =
absorption or extinction coefficient.
The density of water depends on its temperature
and salinity. Since the model is developed for fresh
water systems, salinity is neglected and density is
obtained by solving the equation of state (e.g.,
Rubin and Atkinson 2001),
where ρ0 is the density of water at 4°C (= 999.97 kg
m–3).
Water Quality Model
The water quality model uses mass conservation
in the form of an advection-diffusion equation for
evaluating the concentrations of CBOD, NH3, NO3,
TON, and DO,
processes affecting the other chemical constituents
simulated with the model as shown in Figure 3. All
the constituents are affected by temperature, exter-
nal loads, and meteorological conditions, and are
transported by advection and diffusion processes.
The transformation rates (SK terms) for the various
constituents are described in the following para-
graphs.
CBOD 
CBOD in the water column is present in both
particulate and dissolved forms. The rate of CBOD
lost through decay is calculated as a first-order re-
action (Wool et al. 2003),
∂
∂ +
∂
∂ +
∂
∂ =
∂
∂
∂
∂
  +
∂
∂
∂
∂

T
t
U T
x
V T
z x
k T
x
z
k T
z
x
z  −
1
ρc
d
d z
sΦ
(4)
S K C f CKTON mon TON T TON STON TON TON= − −
−
−[ ] ( )θ ν20 1
D
(10)
∂
∂ +
∂
∂ +
∂
∂ =
∂
∂
∂
∂
  +
∂
∂
∂
∂

C
t
U C
x
V C
z
x
D C
x z
D C
zx z
 + +S SK
(7)
S K C
K C
C
f
KCBOD b
DO
BOD DO
CBOD
SBOD C
= −
+



 −
−ν (1 BOD CBODC
D
)
(8)
Φ ΦS S z= − −0 1( ) exp( )β η (5)
K Kb CBOD
T
=
−
20
20[ ]( )θ (9)
ρ ρ= − −0 20 00663 4. ( )T (6)
where C = concentration; Dx, and Dz are the longi-
tudinal and vertical diffusivities, respectively; SK =
total kinetic transformation rate; and S = source or
sink, where a positive value indicates a source and
a negative value indicates a sink. Assuming the dif-
fusivities are driven by turbulent mixing, all diffu-
sivities and viscosities are assumed to take the same
values, i.e., νx = kx = Dx and νz = kz = Dz.
The mass balance for DO is dependent not only
on the processes affecting it directly, but also on the
where Kb = deoxygenation rate coefficient that varies
with temperature; K20 = rate at 20°C; νSBOD =
CBOD settling rate; (1 – fCBOD) = fraction of CBOD
associated with settling solids; and θCBOD = tempera-
ture coefficient for CBOD reaction term. The first
term in parentheses in eqn. (8) describes the decline
in aerobic decomposition of CBOD when the dis-
solved oxygen concentration in the system is very
low and the second term represents a sink for CBOD
due to settling. Equation (9) shows the variation in
the decay rate as a function of temperature.
Total Organic Nitrogen (TON)
Conversion of TON to ammonia follows a first
order reaction (Wool et al. 2003),
where Kmon = organic nitrogen mineralization rate
at 20°C; θTON = temperature coefficient for organic
nitrogen mineralization reaction; fTON = dissolved
fraction of TON; νSTON = TON settling rate; and
CTON = concentration of total organic nitrogen.
Similar to CBOD, the first term in eqn. (10) repre-
sents the loss of TON due to mineralization and the
second term represents loss due to settling.
Dissolved Oxygen in a Lake Erie Tributary 67
Ammonia (NH3)
The mineralization of TON (eqn. 10) serves as a
source of ammonia, which is also lost from the sys-
tem through the process of nitrification, in which
ammonia is converted to nitrate. The mathematical
expression of these processes is given by Wool et
al. (2003),
where K2D = denitrification rate at 20°C; θNO3 =
temperature coefficient for denitrification reaction;
and KNO3 = half-saturation constant for denitrifica-
tion.
Dissolved Oxygen (DO)
The decomposition (i.e., decay of CBOD) and ni-
trification losses of DO are calculated as (Wool et
al. 2003),
S K C
K
C
K
KHN mon TON
T
TON
n NH
T DO
NI
3
20
3
20
= −
−
−
[ ]
[ ]
θ
θ
T DO
NHC
C
+



 3
(11)
S K C K C
K CKDO b DO n NH
T DO
NIT D
= −
  +−
64
14 3
20[ ]θ
O
NHC



 3 (13)
S K C
K C
C
K
KNO n NH
T DO
NIT DO
NH
D
3 3 3
20
2
=
+



 −
−[ ]θ
[ ]θNO T NO
NO DO
NO
K
K C
C
3
3
3
3
20−
+




(12)
FIG. 3. Processes affecting DO concentration in the water column.
where Kn = nitrification rate at 20°C; KNIT = half
saturation constant for oxygen limitation of nitrifi-
cation; θNH3 = temperature coefficient for nitrifica-
tion reaction; and CNH3 = ammonia concentration.
Nitrate (NO3)
Nitrate is produced by the nitrification of ammo-
nia and is lost from the system through denitrifica-
tion, by which nitrate is reduced to nitrogen gas
under anaerobic conditions. Both of these reactions
follow Monod kinetics (Wool et al. 2003),
The factor (64/14) in the second term is a stoi-
chiometric ratio, which represents the mass of oxy-
gen consumed per mass of ammonia nitrogen oxi-
dized.
68 Kaur et al.
Photosynthesis and Respiration 
Phytoplankton concentrations (represented by
chlorophyll a) were used to estimate the gain and
loss of oxygen due to the growth and death, respec-
tively, of phytoplankton (Thomann and Mueller
1987). The gain and loss of DO by photosynthesis
and respiration, respectively, can be calculated as
(Chapra 1997), 
where Pa = average gross production; aop = DO/
chlorophyll a (mg ⋅µg–1); Gmax = maximum growth
rate of phytoplankton; P = chlorophyll a concentra-
tion; F(Ia) = light attenuation factor; and R = respi-
ration rate. In the model, photosynthesis and
respiration rates were computed for optimum or
“saturated” light conditions.
Other processes such as SOD and reaeration can
be considered as boundary conditions in the model,
where SOD is evaluated at the bottom of the water
column and reaeration is evaluated at the water sur-
face.
Sediment Oxygen Demand (SOD)
Although SOD serves as a boundary condition, it
was convenient to incorporate it as an internal sink
in the model, applied to the bottom layer. It is a
function of temperature and is calculated as
(Thomann and Mueller 1987) 
where SODb is the base SOD, for which it is as-
sumed that an adequate supply of oxygen is avail-
able in the water column and the temperature is
20°C, θSOD is the temperature correction coefficient
for SOD, and Dzbl is the thickness of the bottom
water column segment, which is determined inter-
nally in the model based on the number of sigma
layers and the total depth (this thickness ranges be-
tween about 0.15 and 1 m). The variation of SOD
due to variations in DO levels is given by Thomann
and Mueller (1987) as,
where KSO = half saturation constant representing
the dependence of SOD on DO concentration. Ex-
pressing SOD in this way prevents calculations of
negative CDO values, which can occur when SOD is
specified as a zero-order, or constant sink term.
Reaeration
Atmospheric reaeration is the primary source of
oxygen to surface water. The rate of mass transfer
of oxygen at the air water interface is directly pro-
portional to the oxygen deficit within the water
body,
Pa a G P F Iop
T
a=
 −max ( . ) ( )1 066 20 (14)
R a Pop
T
=
−( . )( . )0 1 1 08 20 (15)
S a C CRDO k s DO= −( ) (18)
a Dk =
−12 9 0 5 1 5. . .ν (19)
S SOD
DBDO
b
zbl
SOD
T
= −
−[ ]( )θ 20 (16)
C
T Ts a a
= − +
×
−
×
+exp . . .139 3441 1 5755 10 6 6423 10
5 7
2


×
−
× 

1 2438 10 8 62195 1010
3
11
4
. .
T Ta a
(20)
SOD SOD C
K Cb
DO
SO DO
=
+



 (17)
where CDO = dissolved oxygen concentration; ak =
reaeration coefficient; and Cs = saturation concen-
tration of dissolved oxygen in the water column. In
eqn. (18), the gradient in oxygen concentration is
evaluated at the surface, and the reaeration coeffi-
cient is calculated as a function of velocity and
depth using the O’Connor Dobbins formula
(Chapra 1997): 
where v = average velocity. Although the use of this
formula has been questioned for stratified condi-
tions (Atkinson et al. 1995), suitable alternatives
for such conditions have not been formulated and it
was assumed that eqn. (19) would provide reason-
able values here.
The saturation concentration of dissolved oxygen
is dependent on temperature and is calculated using
(APHA 1992)
where Ta is absolute temperature (K) of the water at
the surface.
Point Sources
Point sources (industrial discharges and dis-
charges from wastewater treatment plants) are in-
corporated into the mass balance of each
constituent (S in eqn. 7). Point sources are modeled
Dissolved Oxygen in a Lake Erie Tributary 69
by performing a mass balance for a specified dis-
charge rate on the element closest to the point
source location, 
MODEL APPLICATION
The model was developed for the Black River,
which is a tributary of Lake Erie located near Lo-
rain, Ohio (Fig. 4). It suffers from low DO concen-
trations, even though significant investments have
been made for advanced treatment of waste dis-
charges into the river (Ohio EPA 1999). The river is
periodically dredged by the United States Army
Corps of Engineers (USACE) for navigational pur-
poses. The dredged section of the river extends
from the mouth of the river upstream about 2.8
miles.
The study area extends from the mouth of the
river to 4.94 miles upstream (downstream of the
confluence of French Creek), as shown in Figure 4.
This section of the river receives discharges from
outfalls of Republic Technologies International
(RTI), the wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) for
the City of Lorain (located near the mouth of the
river), surface runoff from the sub-watersheds (1
and 2) that drain to this section of the river, and
sanitary sewer overflows (SSOs). RTI withdraws
water for non-contact cooling and returns the water
to the river. The river also receives flows and loads
from the Elyria Wastewater Pollution Control Plant
(WPCP), the French Creek WWTP (operated by the
City of North Ridgeville, OH), French Creek, and
significant agricultural loads from the East and
West Branches (not shown in Fig. 4) of the Black
River.
Bathymetric data for the Black River were ob-
tained from the HEC-2 model input file prepared
for the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s
Flood Insurance Studies (FEMA 1992). Figure 5
shows a depth profile of the model application do-
main. The depth varies between 1.5 m and 9.8 m
and width ranges from 29 m to 220 m. 
For this application, the model used 500 seg-
ments – 50 segments in the longitudinal direction,
and 10 vertical layers with depth of each layer vary-
ing between about 0.15 m and 1.0 m. Monitoring of
the water quality parameters in the river was con-
ducted in the summer of 2001 on a long-term (bi-
weekly for 5 months from May to September) and a
short-term (two 5-day intensive survey periods
from 25 to 29 June and from 6 to 10 August) basis
at various locations (refer to Fig. 5 for station loca-
tions). Data were collected by Ohio EPA and con-
tractors for the Black River Cooperative Parties,
who funded the study. This monitoring provided
large datasets for developing and evaluating the
model performance (LTI 2001). 
C C C C Q tn n= + − ∆
∀0
0( ) (21)
where C = concentration of constituent (i.e., state
variable) being modeled; C0 = concentration of
constituent in the river; Qn = discharge rate from
the point source; Cn = discharge concentration; and
∀ = volume of the element. It is assumed that the
mass flux is instantly mixed within the volume of
the element into which the discharge occurs. Possi-
ble increases in vertical mixing due to the dis-
charges are neglected. 
Boundary and Initial Conditions
Boundary conditions for the hydrodynamic
model are specified in terms of water depth and
flow rate upstream, and water depth downstream.
For the vertical and horizontal velocities at the
downstream boundary, zero-gradient conditions are
assumed. Vertical velocities are zero along the bot-
tom and are equal to the rate of water level changes
at the surface. For longitudinal velocities, zero-gra-
dient in the vertical direction is used at the surface
and a no – slip condition is imposed at the bottom.
The boundary conditions for the water quality
model are specified as concentration (or tempera-
ture) values both at the upstream and downstream
locations. For DO calculations, the surface bound-
ary condition is specified as flux, according to
reaeration, and the bottom boundary condition is set
to zero flux (SOD is incorporated as an internal
sink in the bottom layer—see equations 16 and 17).
The upper boundary condition for temperature is
determined by surface heat flux, which depends on
meteorological conditions and surface tempera-
tures, and zero vertical gradient is set at the bottom.
Zero vertical gradients at both upper and lower
boundaries are assumed for other water quality con-
stituents.
Initial conditions for all state variables are speci-
fied at a number of locations, depending on avail-
able measurements, and the model interpolates (or
extrapolates) to define values for all numerical grid
points. The exception to this is with the initial lon-
gitudinal velocities, which are determined by as-
suming a logarithmic velocity profile (eqn. 3).
70 Kaur et al.
FIG. 4. Model application domain of the lower portion of the Black River with its sub-watersheds, and
locations of RTI outfalls, intakes, and the Lorain WWTP.
Dissolved Oxygen in a Lake Erie Tributary 71
Hourly average gross flows (without seiche ef-
fect) were specified at the upstream boundary at
River Mile (RM) 4.94 (7,950 m). The gross up-
stream flow is the sum of flow recorded at the
USGS gage at Cascade Park near Elyria (~RM
15.6—not shown in Fig. 6), flows from the Elyria
WPCP, French Creek (including the French Creek
WWTP and nonpoint source runoff), surface runoff
from nonpoint sources located upstream of the
model boundary, and RTI #001. The upstream flow
time series, showing the contribution of the differ-
ent sources from the upper river, is shown in Figure
6. The total flow at this location ranged from 0.5 m3
s–1 to 43 m3 s–1 during the 1 May through 5 Sep-
tember 2001 monitoring period. The significance of
the nonpoint sources and the point sources on total
river flows when the upstream flows are low can be
seen in Figure 6.
A WASP model (LTI 2003) was used to develop
upstream (at RM 4.94) boundary concentrations for
CBOD, DO, NH3, NO3 and TON. Table 1 provides
a summary of loadings from May through Septem-
ber from various sources.
Based on data from Cleveland Port, a seiche with
a period of 14.6 hours and amplitude of 0.15 m was
determined to represent typical changes in water el-
evation at the downstream boundary. Data collected
at multiple depths from a station located at RM
0.01 were used to establish the downstream bound-
ary concentrations. For the model layers with no
measured data, concentrations were estimated based
on the measured concentrations above and below
the layer. Data were linearly interpolated to esti-
mate concentrations for days with no sampling data.
Table 2 provides a summary of the range of flows
of point and nonpoint sources to the model com-
pared to the gross upstream flow. Data were used to
develop time series of flow and concentrations for
RTI and Lorain WWTP effluents (LTI 2001). The
concentration of the oxygen-demanding con-
stituents from the RTI effluents is negligible com-
pared to the upstream load and the load from other
sources in the model. However, the temperature of
RTI’s effluents is generally higher than the in-
stream temperature and thus, potentially affects the
temperature balance and thermal stratification sim-
ulated by the model. A summary of temperatures of
the RTI outfalls is provided in Table 2. 
The Lorain WWTP is the principal point source
discharging CBOD and nutrients directly to the
lower river. Daily flows from the Lorain WWTP
were used in the model. For all constituents, the
monthly average values were used on days when no
data were available. 
Previous investigations by the City of Lorain
showed a rainfall event with total precipitation of at
least one inch is required to trigger an SSO event.
SSO flows were estimated using an empirical rela-
tionship (LTI 2003). There were only two events in
the 1 May to 5 September 2001 simulation period
that had sufficient rainfall to cause an SSO event.
Even then, the flows from SSOs were insignificant
relative to the other sources discharging to the
model domain. 
Nonpoint source flows from sub-watersheds 1
FIG. 5. Depth profile of the model application domain. Vertical lines represent
location of 2001 monitoring stations of the Black River (BR).
72 Kaur et al.
and 2 (Fig. 4) that drain to the modeled section of
the river were not added to any specific location,
but rather were uniformly distributed to the whole
channel to reflect the diffuse loading pattern of this
source type. A land-use weighted impervious area
was multiplied by the precipitation volume of each
rainfall event to determine the storm water volume
in each sub-watershed. The volume estimated for
each sub-watershed was distributed over the dura-
tion of the rainfall to develop a flow time series.
Event mean concentrations (EMCs) were assigned
based on a weighted average pollutant concentra-
tion for different land uses within the sub-water-
shed. Several sources were used to develop the
EMCs, including CERS (2000), Loehr (1974),
Novotny (1992, 1991), Jordan et al. (2000), and the
City of Austin, Texas (1990). The runoff volumes
and composite, land use-weighted concentrations
from each sub-watershed were then used to calcu-
late the loading time series (LTI 2003). 
The pollutant loads from Elyria CSOs were in-
cluded in the nonpoint source load estimates, and
the suitability of representing CSOs in this manner
was investigated. Initial values for the SOD base
FIG. 6. Time series of upstream river flow, showing contributions from various
upstream sources.
TABLE 1. Loading summary for the model (from 1 May to 5 September 2001). 
Source Volume CBOD5 NH3 NO3 TON
Type (MG) Total (kg) Total (kg) Total (kg) Total (kg)
Upstream (WASP model 
output at RM 4.94) 9,915 107,675 5,686 222,654 65,256
NPS (sub-watershed 1) 526 14,621 524 2,643 2,698
NPS (sub-watershed 2) 2 54 2 7 5
Lorain WWTP 1,413 52,440 42,326 12,407 7,233
SSOs 1 47 5 13 10
Total 11,857 174,836 48,543 237,725 75,201
Dissolved Oxygen in a Lake Erie Tributary 73
rates for each model cross-section were estimated
from the sediment concentrations of chemical oxi-
dation demand (LTI 2003). The initial estimates of
base SOD rates varied between 0.1 and 3.8 g m–2
day–1 over the model domain. Monthly concentra-
tions for chlorophyll-a were used as model input. 
MODEL CALIBRATION AND
CONFIRMATION
In the calibration process, the site-specific inputs
were fixed while the coefficients describing trans-
port kinetics and transformation processes were
varied within ranges of values described in the liter-
ature (e.g., U.S. EPA 1985). Site-specific inputs in-
clude the flows and loads from upstream and
various sources within the model domain, cross-
sectional areas, boundary concentrations and envi-
ronmental conditions, such as water temperature.
Calibration parameters include the CBOD deoxy-
genation and settling rates, the nitrification and
denitrification rates, the organic nitrogen mineral-
ization and settling rates, and the SOD rates. In
general, the calibration proceeded sequentially
through the following model constituents: 
Temperature → CBOD → Nitrogen species → DO
Following this calibration procedure, the diffu-
sivities were calibrated first using the temperature
profiles. As noted above, all diffusivities (for each
direction) for each state variable were assumed to
TABLE 2. Range of flows for point and non-
point sources to the model (from 1 May to 5 Sep-
tember 2001). Values in parenthesis are the tem-
peratures.
Flow in m3 s–1
(Temperature in °C for RTIs)
Minimum Average Maximum
Gross US Flow 0.54 3.40 33.40
Sub-watershed 1 0.14 2.17 6.78
Sub-watershed 2 0.001 0.01 0.02
RTI 005 0.30 (18.2) 0.35 (26.8) 0.41 (32)
Intake 902 –0.78 –0.70 -0.64
RTI 002 0.53 (19.9) 0.64 (27.4) 0.74 (34.2)
Intake 901 –3.07 –2.29 –1.40
RTI 004 0.30 (22.6) 0.75 (29.2) 1.81 (34.9)
RTI 003 0.23 (21.8) 1.22 (28.4) 1.90 (34.4)
Lorain WWTP 0.43 0.48 0.83
TABLE 3. Kinetic coefficients and transformation rates after calibration. 
Description Symbol Value Units Range Source
CBOD deoxygenation rate at 20°C Kb 0.2 day–1 0.1–0.4 1
1⁄2 saturation constant for O2 limitation of CBOD KBOD 0.5 mgO2 L–1 2
Temperature coefficient for CBOD reaction term θCBOD 1.056
Organic nitrogen mineralization rate at 20°C Kmon 0.06 day–1 0.001–0.4 1
Ammonia nitrification rate at 20°C Kn 0.2 day–1 0.009–0.2 1
half-saturation constant for O2 limitation of nitrification KNIT 2.0 mgO2 L–1 0.5–2.0 1
Temperature coefficient for conversion of TON to NH3 θTON 1.07
Denitrification rate at 20°C K2D 0.2 day–1 1
Temperature coefficient for nitrification reaction θNH3 1.07
Temperature coefficient for SOD reaction θSOD 1.07
half-saturation constant for O2 limitation for denitrification KNO3 0.1 mgO2 L–1 2
half-saturation constant for O2 limitation on SOD KSO 2.0 mgO2 L–1 1
TON settling rate nSTON 1.0 m day–1
CBOD settling rate nSBOD 1.0 m day–1
Longitudinal diffusivity kx, Dx 105 cm2 s–1 105–107 3
Vertical diffusivity for surface layer* kz, Dz 10 cm2 s–1 10–1–104 3
Vertical diffusivity for deep layers* kz, Dz 0.8 cm2 s–1 10–2 – 1 3
Absorption or extinction coefficient η 1.0 m–1
Faction of radiation absorbed at the surface β 0.4
*The vertical diffusivity was reduced by 50 percent whenever there is more than 1 deg C difference in temperature be-
tween adjacent vertical layers. This is to account for vertical temperature gradients that can reduce vertical mixing.
Source: 
1: U.S. EPA 1985
2: Ambrose et al. 1993
3: Chapra, S.C. 1997
74 Kaur et al.
take the same value. Also, once calibrated values
were determined they were fixed, i.e., they were not
calculated as a function of flow, wind, or other con-
ditions. The available data set was not sufficient to
develop a detailed model for diffusivities, and the
values found here may be considered as average
values applicable for the calibration period. Given
the model’s ability to simulate conditions different
from those for which it was calibrated (the confir-
mation step, see below), it was concluded that the
mixing coefficients determined in this process were
adequate for the present study. Once diffusivities
were determined, the reaction rates for CBOD and
nitrogenous nutrients were calibrated for corre-
sponding concentrations of CBOD, TON, ammonia,
and nitrates and nitrites. Once all the rates were es-
FIG. 7. Model calibration results: depth profiles of temperature showing comparison of model out-
put (line) and measured values (filled circles) at different monitoring locations for 25 June 2001.
Dissolved Oxygen in a Lake Erie Tributary 75
tablished, the SOD rates were calibrated for DO
profiles at the bottom and photosynthesis and respi-
ration rates were adjusted for DO concentrations at
the surface.
Following the procedure described above, the
model was calibrated for June 2001, with particular
emphasis on the 5-day survey (25 to 29 June) for
the Black River. Table 3 summarizes the kinetic co-
efficients and transformation rates obtained after
the calibration process, along with the respective
ranges described in the literature. 
A comparison of model output and measured val-
ues for temperature at different monitoring loca-
tions for the Black River for 25 June 2001 is shown
in Figure 7. The calibration of temperature is de-
pendent primarily on physical processes such as
longitudinal and vertical mixing rates. These rates
produced the surface water temperatures as well as
FIG. 8. Model calibration results: depth profiles of dissolved oxygen showing comparison of model
output (line) and measured values (filled circles) at different monitoring locations for 25 June 2001.
76 Kaur et al.
the vertical gradients of decreasing temperature
with depth in the navigational channel reasonably
well (see below for further discussion of model fit).
Surface temperatures during the period never ex-
ceeded 30°C. 
A depth-wise comparison of the model output
and the measured values for the DO concentrations
at different monitoring locations for 25 June 2001 is
shown in Figure 8. Dissolved oxygen profiles gen-
erated by the model compare well with observa-
tions, particularly in the lower layers of the channel
reach between RM 2.38 and the river mouth. The
DO standard is violated in this reach as shown by
both the model and the data. Good agreement be-
tween the model results and data for CBOD, NH3,
and NO3 were also obtained (Jaligama 2004). 
The model confirmation results for DO concen-
trations in the surface, middle and bottom layers at
RM 2.38 (the location where the depth and width
changes drastically) and at RM 1.75 and 1.10 from
May to September 2001 are shown in Figure 9. This
comparison demonstrates that the model captures
the time trends in DO quite well. The DO in the
bottom layers goes below 4 mg L–1 starting from
mid-June to the end of the summer, even reaching
below 1 mg L–1 at several locations. 
To better quantify the degree to which the model
fits measured data, cumulative frequency distribu-
tions for all model results are shown for tempera-
ture and DO in Figures 10 and 11, respectively.
These paired comparisons between the model re-
sults and data were based on the two weekly exten-
sive sampling periods (25–29 June 2001 and 6–10
August 2001). Data collected at all sampling loca-
tions and at various depths were used for conduct-
ing this analysis. 
FIG. 9. Model confirmation results: temporal variation in DO showing comparison of model output
(line) and measured values (filled rectangles) for surface, mid-depth, and bottom layers at RMs 2.38,
1.75, and 1.10.
Dissolved Oxygen in a Lake Erie Tributary 77
As presented in Figure 10, the model results
compare well with measured data below 26°C.
However, the model under predicted the measured
temperatures near the water surface (higher values).
Note that the surface temperature data were col-
lected at the water surface, whereas the model re-
sults represent water temperature at some depth
below the surface, depending on grid thickness, so
that a slight under-prediction of surface temperature
is to be expected.
As seen in Figure 11, the model under predicted
DO concentrations for values above 10 mg L–1,
which represents the near surface conditions. It is
believed that the DO concentrations at the water
surface were not simulated properly because
chlorophyll a data were not available for all sta-
tions at all times. No attempt was made to better
represent the high DO values (at the surface) with
the model since the main concern for this study
was for lower concentrations. In addition, it is to
be noted that the data and the model results do not
always correspond spatially to each other. For ex-
ample, the data were collected at a particular depth
in the water column, whereas a model result repre-
sents a layer of finite thickness, uniform over its
depth. 
It should also be noted that the model tends to
slightly over predict DO values at the lower end,
which should be taken into account when estimat-
ing possible regulatory actions. However, the main
purpose of the present study was to identify causes
of low DO, and that result is not affected by the
slight over prediction.
Table 4 provides estimates of errors between the
model results and data measured during the two
weekly sampling periods in 2001 for temperature
and DO concentrations. In this table, the “relative
error” is simply the average of all differences be-
tween the paired measured and simulated values,
and “absolute error” is the average of the absolute
values of the differences. As can be seen, the root
mean square error (RMSE) is largest, since extreme
differences, while few in number, are emphasized
in the squaring process. The relative and absolute
errors, compared with typical magnitudes for tem-
perature and DO, are considered to be within a rea-
sonable range for this application.
FIG. 10. Cumulative frequency distribution plot
showing the comparison between the model-simu-
lated and measured temperature at all sampling
locations monitored during the two extensive mon-
itoring periods (25 to 29 June 2001 and 6 to 10
August 2001). 
FIG. 11. Cumulative frequency distribution plot
showing the comparison between the model-simu-
lated and measured dissolved oxygen concentra-
tions at all sampling locations monitored during
the two extensive monitoring periods (25 to 29
June 2001 and 6 to 10 August 2001).
78 Kaur et al.
DIAGNOSTIC ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
The calibrated and confirmed model was applied
in a diagnostic mode to understand the impact of
various sources on DO concentrations. The aim of
the Black River model application was to under-
stand the factors contributing to low DO in the
channel and to evaluate whether DO standards can
be attained with technically feasible and economi-
cally achievable point and nonpoint source control
strategies. 
A series of model runs was performed to assess
the effects of the WWTP loads, thermal discharges
from RTI and the upstream and nonpoint source
loads on the DO concentrations. As mentioned ear-
lier, the conditions (i.e., loads, inputs, and results)
used in the model confirmation run served as the
baseline for the sensitivity analysis. In the reduced
loading scenarios, SOD rates were kept constant.
However, in reality, reduction in pollutant loads
would likely reduce SOD, so that the results pre-
sented here are probably conservative in terms of
predicting lower DO concentrations than might ac-
tually occur. 
Zero Point Source Pollutant Loads 
To assess the effect of point sources on DO con-
centrations, the loads of oxygen-demanding con-
stituents (CBOD, DO, NH3, NO3, TON) from the
Elyria PCP, the N. Ridgeville WWTP, and the Lo-
rain WWTP were set to zero. Two separate model
runs were conducted. In the first run, the loads from
the Elyria PCP and the N. Ridgeville WWTP were
set to zero. A comparison of the DO concentration
with the baseline results showed a small (~0.5 mg
L–1) increase in DO concentration at RM 2.38 in
the middle layer. Almost insignificant changes in
the DO concentration were found for the surface
and bottom layers. In the second model run, loads
from all three WWTPs were set to zero. Compared
to the results from the first model run, the second
model run showed a maximum increase of 0.5 mg
L–1 in surface DO concentration at RM 1.10, while
there were insignificant changes in DO concentra-
tion in the middle and bottom layers. The impact
seen at RM 1.10 might be caused by the location of
the Lorain WWTP. It appears that the impacts of
point source discharges on the DO concentration
are small and are influenced by the outfall locations
of the WWTPs. 
Zero Upstream Pollutant Loads 
The model was run with zero upstream pollutant
loads while keeping the nonpoint source loads and
other flows and loads the same as the baseline run.
A comparison of DO concentrations with the
baseline results for the lower portion of the river
showed that the DO concentrations increased
slightly (< 0.5 mg L–1) in the middle portions of 
the river. This suggests that upstream pollutant
loads have a small effect on the bottom DO concen-
tration. 
Reduced Upstream and
Nonpoint Source Pollutant Loads
To assess the effect of upstream and nonpoint
source loads, the pollutant concentrations were re-
duced by half of their baseline values. This change
in loads resulted in only about a 0.5 mg L–1 in-
crease in DO in the mid to bottom layers at RM
2.38. This suggests that nonpoint sources are not
important.
Increased RTI Discharges
The discharge and temperature concentrations
from all the RTI outfalls were increased by 33 per-
cent and the water intakes were also adjusted to ac-
count for increased water withdrawals. Model
results indicated that the DO concentration was
slightly increased in the surface layer, which might
be due to the increased withdrawals. The changes in
DO concentrations at the mid-depth and lower lay-
ers were negligible (Jaligama 2004). RTI discharges
have the most effect at the surface at RM 2.38 (near
TABLE 4. Statistical measure of the errors between the model-simulated and mea-
sured dissolved oxygen concentrations at all sampling locations monitored during the
two extensive monitoring periods (25 to 29 June 2001 and 6 to 10 August 2001).
Parameter Relative Error Absolute Error Root Mean Square Error (RMSE)
Temperature (°C) –0.39 0.67 0.94
DO (mg L–1) 0.77 1.24 1.76
Dissolved Oxygen in a Lake Erie Tributary 79
RTI #003). However, the effect of RTI discharges
on bottom water temperature is negligible. 
Changes in SOD Rates
The base SOD rates were increased and de-
creased by 25 percent of the baseline values. The
maximum changes in DO concentration relative to
baseline were 24 percent and 20 percent with 25
percent increase and decrease in SOD rates, respec-
tively, at the bottom layer at RM 2.38 (Fig. 12).
There are also significant responses in DO in the
bottom layer at RM 1.75 (21 percent and 18 percent
change in DO with 25 percent increase and de-
crease in SOD rates, respectively) and RM 1.10 (16
percent and 15 percent change in DO with 25 per-
cent increase and decrease in SOD rates, respec-
tively). Differences in DO concentrations at
mid-depth are considerably less (0.3-0.5 mg L–1)
than in the bottom layer, indicating that stratifica-
FIG. 12. Comparison of DO profiles for 25 percent increased (line) and 25 percent decreased (light thick
line) SOD rates with baseline (dark thick line) results at RMs 2.38, 1.75, and 1.10 for the surface, mid-
depth, and bottom layers.
80 Kaur et al.
tion reduces the influence of SOD on oxygen re-
sources at depths above the bottom. This result also
reflects the relatively low vertical mixing rates in
the river. Diffusivities were calibrated using tem-
perature data, as previously described, and higher
vertical mixing rates would presumably lead to
greater mixing of low DO water upward. On the
other hand, greater vertical mixing would also en-
hance the impact of surface aeration, and the net ef-
fect of these two processes can be variable. Since
mixing similarly affects all chemical species in the
model, it is difficult to isolate the effect of vertical
mixing on the results, and there was no attempt
made to consider model sensitivity to variations in
diffusivities. Differences in DO concentrations at
the water surface were negligible throughout the
simulation period at all locations, and it was con-
cluded that SOD is the primary sensitivity parame-
ter affecting the DO levels at the critical locations
of the channel where DO violations have occurred.
DISCUSSION
This work demonstrates the development and ap-
plication of a coupled two-dimensional, hydrody-
namic/water quality model for a dredged river,
which typically becomes stratified in summer.
Model results showed that the DO concentrations in
surface waters of the river are always above 5 mg
L–1 and DO violations occur mostly in the bottom
layers. The region of low DO starts near the up-
stream limit of navigational dredging, and it ap-
pears that SOD, combined with altered hydraulics
due to dredging, is the main cause of DO violations. 
Navigational dredging has caused significant
changes in physical and hydraulic conditions in the
Black River as shown in Figure 1. Moreover, such
changes in morphology due to navigational dredg-
ing are not unique in the Great Lakes basin. For ex-
ample, a similar situation is observed with the
Buffalo River (Buffalo, New York). Jaligama
(2004) applied the model to understand the DO dy-
namics due to changes in morphology and hy-
draulics resulting from navigational dredging in the
Buffalo River. Similar to the Black River, velocities
are strongly affected and mixing is reduced, con-
tributing to the stratification of the river in the late
spring and early summer. In both rivers, the thermal
stratification combined with the low flows during
the summer decreases vertical mixing in the water
column and isolates a pocket of water near the bot-
tom that is significantly impacted by SOD while at
the same time receiving very limited atmospheric
reaeration. It should be noted that the SOD is deter-
mined by deposition of oxygen demanding material
to the sediment surface, which changes continu-
ously due to physical-chemical-biological condi-
tions in the river. Flow reversals along the bottom
of the channel due to seiches of colder lake water
also have the effect of increasing water residence
time (LTI 2001), thus allowing SOD to have a
larger impact. With prolonged residence times,
sometimes lasting up to four or five days (in the
Buffalo River case), even with a low SOD there is
sufficient time for significant oxygen demand to be
exerted. For example, for a residence time of 5 days
and SOD as low as 1 g m–2 d–1 in a bottom layer of
1 m depth, a drop in DO concentration of 5 mg L–1
could occur due to SOD. As found in the present
Black River study, the DO results in the Buffalo
River application were also found to be most sensi-
tive to the SOD rates. Thus, the impact on DO con-
centration due to SOD rates in conjunction with the
changes in hydraulics of the channel due to naviga-
tional dredging as found for the Black River and the
Buffalo River is expected to be found in most Great
Lakes tributaries that are periodically dredged. 
It should be noted that vertical mixing in the
stratified zone of the river and SOD interact to ei-
ther produce large DO concentration sensitivity to
SOD in a relatively thin bottom layer of water (low
vertical mixing) or to spread out (and thus reduce
the DO concentration change) the areal SOD-in-
duced DO concentration response over a thicker
bottom layer (higher vertical mixing). So with high
vertical mixing, the impact of a given SOD would
be spread out over a greater depth, and therefore the
concentration effect would be mitigated to some ex-
tent.
It should also be noted that navigational dredging
may impact SOD due to the removal of oxygen de-
manding materials. The impact of dredging on the
reduction of SOD may occur for a short period of
time (i.e., just after the dredging) due to removal of
surface sediments yet to undergo diagenetic
processes, but oxygen demand would not be elimi-
nated since over time additional oxygen-demanding
materials would be continuously deposited. 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The coupled 2-dimensional (laterally averaged)
hydrodynamic-dissolved oxygen model developed
and applied herein has been successful in simulat-
ing stratified conditions in the Black River. Further-
more, it has been designed to simulate the effects of
Dissolved Oxygen in a Lake Erie Tributary 81
multiple point and nonpoint source discharges,
withdrawals from the river, time dependent bound-
ary conditions and changes in the water levels at the
downstream boundary. The model produced reason-
able results to represent the observed spatial and
temporal trends in the dredged portions of the
Black River for temperature, CBOD, ammonia, or-
ganic nitrogen, nitrate, and DO concentrations. The
diagnostic analysis indicated that there are no rea-
sonable point source controls that can increase DO
concentrations above 4 mg L–1 at all times.
Results from the present application, as well as a
similar application to the Buffalo River, support the
conclusion that SOD, combined with alterations in
flow hydraulics due to navigational dredging, are
the main contributors to low DO levels, and it may
be expected that similar conditions should prevail
for other Great Lakes tributaries. These results give
rise to an interesting question: what is the contribu-
tion of deposition of organic matter originating
from upstream, CSOs, and nonpoint sources on
SOD rates? A more detailed assessment of oxygen
demanding sediment sources and sinks from up-
stream and nonpoint sources would be necessary
prior to implementing a watershed management
plan aimed at reducing SOD in the dredged portion
of the rivers. 
It should be noted that the model does not in-
clude phosphorus dynamics. Addition of the phos-
phorus cycle would allow the model to predict
phytoplankton blooms and their impact on DO con-
centrations. A more complete picture of relation-
ships among external phosphorus loadings, cycling
of phosphorus internally in the system, and its im-
pact on DO dynamics would require extension of
the model to incorporate organic and dissolved
phosphorus kinetics similar to nitrogen and dis-
solved oxygen kinetics. This application would re-
quire additional site-specific data for these
variables. 
The model is not capable of handling branched
systems. Tributaries to the main stem of the river
can be added as point sources, but they cannot be
modeled simultaneously with the main stem of the
river. Modifications to handle branched systems
would make the model applicable to any number of
water bodies linked together.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The model development and its application to the
Black River were conducted under a contract from
the Black River Cooperative Parties to Limno-Tech,
Inc. and sub-contract to the University at Buffalo.
The application of the model to the Buffalo River
was carried out by the University at Buffalo with a
contract from Malcolm-Pirnie. We thank the Cities
of Elyria, Lorain and North Ridgeville, OH, and
RTI for providing the database necessary for mod-
eling the Black River. The authors also acknowl-
edge the significant contributions of the Ohio EPA
staff to the monitoring program. Comments from
the reviewers of the first draft of this manuscript are
also appreciated.
REFERENCES
Ambrose, R.B., Jr., Wool, T.A., and Martin, F. 1993.
The water quality analysis simulation program,
WASP5, Part A: model documentation. U.S. Environ-
mental Protection Agency, Athens, GA. 
APHA. 1992. American Public Health Association, stan-
dard methods for the examination of water and
wasterwater, 18 ed. Washington DC.
Atkinson, J.F., Blair, S., Taylor, S. and Ghosh, U. 1995.
Surface aeration. J. Environ. Eng. 121 (1):113–118.
Blair, S.H. 1992. Dissolved oxygen modeling for the
Buffalo River. M.S. thesis, Dept. Civil, Structural and
Environ. Eng., Univ. at Buffalo.
Brown, L.C.,  and Barnwell,  T.O., Jr.  1987. The
enhanced stream water quality models, Qual-2E and
Qual-2E UNCAS: Documentation and users manual.
EPA/600/3-87/007, Environ. Res. Lab., U.S. Environ-
mental Protection Agency, Athens, GA.
Center for Environmental Research and Service (CERS),
2000. Characteristics of pollutants in storm water
runoff from Dothan, Alabama catchments: Implica-
tions for Phase II storm water management. Prepared
for the Alabama Department of Environmental Man-
agement.
Chapra, S. 1997. Surface water-quality modeling. New
York: McGraw Hill Companies, Inc.
City of Austin, Texas. 1990. Stormwater Pollutant Load-
ing Characteristics for Various Land Uses in the
Austin Area. Prepared by the Watershed Protection
and Development Review Department. www.ci.
austin.tx.us/watershed/rptswload.htm
Clark, M.M., 1996. Transport modeling for environmen-
tal engineers and scientists. New York: John Wiley
and Sons, Inc.
Cole T., and Buchak, E. 1995. CE-QUAL-W2: A two-
dimensional, laterally averaged, hydrodynamic and
water quality model. Version 2.0, Tech Rpt. EL-95-
May 1995, Waterways Experiments Station, Vicks-
burg, MS.
FEMA. 1992. Flood Insurance Study. The City of
Lorain, Ohio.
Hall, J. 1997. Dissolved oxygen modeling for the Buf-
falo River. M. Eng. project, Dept. Civil, Structural
and Environ. Eng., Univ. at Buffalo.
82 Kaur et al.
Jaligama, G.K. 2004. A two dimensional coupled hydro-
dynamic/water quality model for Great Lakes Tribu-
taries. M.S. thesis. Dept. Civil, Structural and Envi-
ron. Eng., Univ. at Buffalo.
Jordan, T.E., Correll, D.L., and Weller, D.E. 2000. Mat-
tawoman Creek Watershed: Nutrient and Sediment
Dynamics. Smithsonian Environmental Research Cen-
ter, Edgewater, MD. www.charlescounty.org/pgm/
planning/plans/environmental/mattawoman/sercreport.
pdf
Kantha, L.H., and Clayson, C.A. 1994. An improved
mixed layer model for geophysical applications. J.
Geophysics. Res. 99:25235–25266.
Limno-Tech, Inc. (LTI). 2001. Design of modeling and
monitoring programs for the lower Black River water
quality model, Phase 1 Report. Prepared for the Black
River Cooperative Parties. Supplemented with
Revised Section 3.4 of the Lower Black River Phase 1
Report. Draft. Prepared for the Black River Coopera-
tive Parties. 
———
. 2003. Development of a WASP model of the free-
flowing portion of the Black River. Memorandum to
the Black River Cooperative Parties.
Loehr, R.C. 1974. Characteristics and Comparative Mag-
nitude of Non-point Sources. Journal WPCF
46(8):1849–1872.
Novotny, V. 1991. Urban Diffuse Pollution: Sources and
Abatement. Water Enviro. Tech. 3(12):60–65.
———
. 1992. Unit Pollutant Loads: Their Fit in Abate-
ment Strategies. Water Enviro. Tech. 4(1):40–43. 
Ohio EPA. 1999. Biological and Water Quality Study of
the Black River Basin, Lorain and Medina Counties.
State of Ohio Environmental Protection Agency,
Columbus, Ohio, March 31, 1999.
Rubin, H., and Atkinson, J. F. 2001. Environmental
Fluid Mechanics. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.
Thomann, R.V., and Mueller, J.A. 1987. Principles of
surface water quality modeling and control. New
York: Harper Collins Publishers.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA). June
1985. Rates, constants, and kinetics formulations in
surface water quality modeling (second edition).
Environmental Research Laboratory. EPA/600/3-
85/040. Athens, GA.
———
. 1986. Ambient water quality criteria for dis-
solved oxygen. Criteria and standards division. U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C.
EPA 440/5-86-003.
Wight, M. 1995. A numerical model to examine dissolved
oxygen in the Buffalo River. M. Eng. project. Dept.
Civil, Structural and Environ. Eng., Univ. at Buffalo.
Wool, T.A., Ambrose, R.B., Martin, J.L., and Comer,
E.A. 2003. Water Quality Analysis Simulation Pro-
gram (WASP6). Draft User’s manual, version 6. Envi-
ronmental Research Laboratory, U.S. EPA, Athens,
GA (http://www.epa.gov/region4/water/tmdl/tools/
WASPG_Manuel.pdf)
Zhao, P.A. 2002. Analysis of numerical dispersion of 2-
D alternating-direction implicit FDTD method IEEE
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. 50:2003–2007.
Submitted: 10 December 2005
Accepted: 22 October 2006
Editorial handling: William M. Schertzer
