JProGO: a novel tool for the functional
interpretation of prokaryotic microarray data
using Gene Ontology information
Maurice Scheer1,3, Frank Klawonn3, Richard Mu¨nch1, Andreas Grote1,2,
Karsten Hiller1, Claudia Choi1, Ina Koch4, Max Schobert1, Elisabeth Ha¨rtig1,
Ulrich Klages3 and Dieter Jahn1,*
1Institute of Microbiology, Technische Universita¨t Braunschweig, Spielmannstrasse 7,
Braunschweig, 38106, Germany, 2Institute of Biochemical Engineering, Technische Universita¨t
Braunschweig, Gaussstrasse 17, Braunschweig, 38106, Germany, 3Department of Computer
Science, Fachhochschule Wolfenbu¨ttel, Am Exer 2, Wolfenbu¨ttel, 38302, Germany and
4Department of Bioinformatics, Technische Fachhochschule Berlin, Seestrasse 64, Berlin,
13347, Germany
Received February 14, 2006; Revised March 15, 2006; Accepted April 14, 2006
ABSTRACT
A novel program suite was implemented for the
functional interpretation of high-throughput gene
expression data based on the identification of Gene
Ontology (GO) nodes. The focus of the analysis
lies on the interpretation of microarray data from
prokaryotes. The three well established statistical
methods of the threshold value-based Fisher’s
exact test, aswell as the threshold value-independent
Kolmogorov–Smirnov and Student’s t-test were
employed in order to identify the groups of genes
with a significantly altered expression profile.
Furthermore, we provide the application of the rank-
based unpaired Wilcoxon’s test for a GO-based
microarray data interpretation. Further features of
the program include recognition of the alternative
gene names and the correction for multiple testing.
Obtained results are visualized interactively both as
a table and as a GO subgraph including all signifi-
cant nodes. Currently, JProGO enables the analysis
of microarray data from more than 20 different
prokaryotic species, including all important model
organisms, and thus constitutes a useful web service
for the microbial research community. JProGO is
freely accessible via theweb at the following address:
http://www.jprogo.de
INTRODUCTION
High-throughput technologies, such as DNA microarray-
based gene expression profiling provide valuable information
on the transcription of all genes of a single microorganism.
Usually, the first step for the interpretation of a microarray
experiment is the statistical processing of the huge amount
of data, including background substraction and normalization.
This procedure usually generates long lists of interesting
genes, which were found to be differentially expressed bet-
ween the two conditions tested. The challenging biological
interpretation of these results follows. For the automatization
of this process on the basis of the available functional
information about the proteins encoded by the genes of
interest, a sophisticated and well structured functional classi-
fication system is required. Gene Ontology (GO) (1), which is
based on a solid ontology and is applicable for every organ-
ism, fits these needs. It is organized as a directed acyclic
graph (DAG) whose nodes represent the strict vocabulary
that describes key biological functions and processes.
Here, we present JProGO (Java Tool for the Functional
Analysis of Prokaryotic Microarray Data using the Gene
Ontology), which allows for the functional interpretation of
gene expression data based on GO. For related purposes
some programs and algorithms have already been developed
(2–14). In general, these tools perform a thorough analysis
based on a threshold value dependent or independent method,
representing the obtained results as a table, denormalized
tree, or as a subgraph of GO.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +49 531 391 5801; Fax: +49 531 391 5854; Email: d.jahn@tu-bs.de
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
W510–W515 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gkl329
JProGO offers an integrative platform for the majority of
statistical methods commonly used for the determination
of the significant GO nodes. They calculate the probability
that the expression profile of each particular GO node devi-
ates randomly from its environment (alpha error, P-value).
The user can choose between four well established
methods comprising the threshold value-based Fisher’s
exact test (2,12) as well as the threshold value independent
Kolmogorov–Smirnov test (4), Student’s t-test (5) and
unpaired Wilcoxon’s test (3). For the Fisher’s exact test we
offer both two-sided and one-sided versions. The latter are
identical to the hypergeometric test as implemented by
related analysis tools (6,13).
Amongst the variety of different methods of analysis,
JProGO especially facilitates the analysis of microarray data
for a broad range of prokaryotic species (more than 20 spe-
cies), including all important model organisms (see Table 1).
METHODS AND IMPLEMENTATION
Main program and statistical methods
The main program was written in Java (http://java.sun.com).
It manages the invocation of the different algorithms that
were implemented for the identification of GO nodes that sig-
nificantly differ in their gene expression profile from their
environment. For the algorithms based on Fisher’s exact
test, Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, Student’s t-test and unpaired
Wilcoxon’s test, the P-value calculation is performed with the
free statistical language R (http://www.r-project.org/) (15). In
this setup, R runs in a server mode using Rserve. The Java
progam sends requests to and obtains results from R via
TCP/IP using Java-based JRClient classes. Rserve plugin
for R and JRClient are both freely available from http://
stats.math.uni-augsburg.de/Rserve. Statistical testing is res-
tricted to GO nodes to which a sufficient number of genes
is assigned (in this case at least four genes the expression
of which has been measured). Correction for multiple testing
is per default done by the false discovery rate (FDR) method
(16). In addition, the more conservative Bonferroni method
was implemented (17).
For the construction of the GO graph, recent versions of
GO (December 2005) (1) and GO Annotation (November
2005) (18) were imported into the relational database
PRODORIC (19), which contains information on the genes
and the gene products of all publicly available sequenced
prokaryotic genomes. PRODORIC was then used to calculate
organism-specific GO graphs in which each gene of the
considered organism was annotated to the most detailed GO
node available and—due to the true path rule—to all its
parent nodes. These organism specifically annotated GO
graphs were then stored as XML files in order to enable
their fast subsequent reconstruction for the web service. For
that purpose the Sax Parser is used.
Detection of alternative gene names
For each prokaryotic organism of JProGO, official short
names, ORF ID’s (genome project numbers) and synonymous
gene names were obtained from the PRODORIC database
(19) and from a recent Uniprot database release (November
2005) (20). To avoid ambiguities, redundant synonyms are
excluded from matching. For the recognition of the alterna-
tive gene names the following priority order is maintained:
The gene names from the microarray datasets are first
matched with the official short names. Subsequently ORF
ID’s and the remaining non-redundant synonyms are taken
into account.
Web interface and visualization
For the smooth integration of the Java classes of the main
progam into the web interface, we employed Java Servlet
Technology. Jakarata Tomcat runs as the servlet container
and web server on a Linux platform (http://jakarta.apache.
org/tomcat). For visualization of the expression profile
of the genes belonging to a specific GO node and those rep-
resenting the background distribution, the Java package
JFreeChart is used (http://jfree.org/jfreechart). For representa-
tion of GO subgraphs that contain the significant GO nodes
and all their parent nodes up to the root standard graph
traversal algorithms, such as breadth first search are used.
Subgraphs are visualized with the dot tool (GraphViz
package, http://www.graphviz.org).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Rationale of the approach and features of the tool
Our tool enables the automatic interpretation of DNA
microarray gene expression data by combining a priori bio-
logical knowledge with statistical evaluation of expression
profiles of predefined groups of genes. It recognizes altera-
tions in biological functions and processes via the identifica-
tion of corresponding GO terms that are significantly changed
Table 1. List of all 23 prokaryotic species currently available in JProGO
together with the number of genes
Organism Gene
number
Bacillus cereus (strain ATCC 10987) 5603
Bacillus subtilis (strain 168) 4101
Caulobacter crescentus (strain CB15) 3737
Clostridium tetani (strain Massachusetts) 2373
Corynebacterium glutamicum (strain DSM 20300 [Nakagawa]) 3099
Escherichia coli (strain K12) 4291
Helicobacter pylori (strain ATCC 700392) 1580
Listeria innocua (serovar 6a, strain CLIP 11262) 2981
Listeria monocytogenes (serovar 1/2a, strain EGD-e) 2855
Methanococcus jannaschii (strain JAL-1) 1770
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (strain H37Rv) 3918
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (strain Oshkosh) 4187
Mycoplasma genitalium (G-37) 480
Mycoplasma pneumoniae (strain M129) 688
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (strain PAO1) 5573
Pseudomonas putida (strain KT2440) 5351
Rickettsia conorii (strain Malish 7) 1374
Rickettsia prowazekii (strain Madrid E) 834
Salmonella typhimurium (strain ATCC 700720) 4412
Staphylococcus aureus (strain N315) 2595
Streptococcus pneumoniae (strain TIGR4) 2094
Streptococcus pyogenes (serovar M1, strain SF370) 1697
Yersinia pestis (biovar Mediaevalis, strain KIM5) 4090
Only chromosomal protein-coding genes are considered; data were imported
from PRODORIC database (January 2006) (19).
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue W511
in their gene expression profile under the two conditions
compared.
For this purpose we offer a comprehensive range of differ-
ent statistical methods which are either threshold-based
(Fisher’s exact test) or threshold independent (Kolmogorov–
Smirnov test, Student’s t-test and unpaired Wilcoxon’s test).
Threshold-free methods are more appropriate for the iden-
tification of functions and processes involved in cellular
adaptation processes, which are characterized by their con-
tinuous nature. The major advantage is that the user does
not have to define a somewhat arbitrary threshold value,
which usually has a strong influence on the outcome of the
analysis. With the threshold-value independent Student’s
t-test we have included a parametric test into JProGO.
In contrast, the other two threshold independent tests, the
Kolmogorov–Smirnov test and the unpaired Wilcoxon’s
test, are non-parametric and therefore do not assume a normal
distribution for the expression profile of each tested GO node.
Since for each GO node a separate statistical test has to be
performed, a multiple testing problem arises. Therefore, we
have included the control of the FDR (16), which probably
belongs to the most accepted methods of correction. One
advantage of the FDR method in comparison to family-wise
error rate (FWER) controlling methods, such as Bonferroni
correction (17) is its greater statistical power.
Another advantage of our tool is that it supports the
user-friendly immediate functional evaluation of expression
data from more than 20 prokaroytic species (see Table 1).
Currently available tools mainly focus on the analysis of
microarray data from eukaryotes, centering on model organ-
isms, such as man, mouse, rat, Arabidopsis or yeast. For an
analysis with the JProGO program the user only has to submit
the expression data. The input of microarray data both as
expression ratios and as probabilities of differential expres-
sion is supported. No additional effort for the generation of
an assignment between the GO nodes and corresponding
genes or the mapping to alternative gene names is required.
We provide an automated recognition of alternative gene
names.
An important feature of JProGO is that it visualizes the
obtained results both as a table with numerous sorting and
filter functions and as a subgraph of GO, containing all
significant GO nodes and their paths up to the root node
(see Table 1 and Figure 3). The distribution of expression
values of all genes assigned to a selected GO node and that
of the background distribution can be visualized. A list of
genes assigned to a particlular GO node of interest can be
obtained together with the corresponding expression values.
Links to PRODORIC database allow direct access to in-depth
information on the selected genes.
Use of the web interface
Input. In order to start the functional interpretation of proka-
ryotic gene expression data, the microarray data are uploaded
(Figures 1 and 2). Expression data should be saved in a text
file that contains in each row the short name of a particular
gene and its corresponding value. After upload of the data,
the prokaryotic organism from which the data have been
derived is specified. The user has to state the type of data,
either expression ratios or probabilities of differential expres-
sion. As further options the method of analysis can be chosen
and the significance level should be determined (default
0.05). If a threshold-based method is selected, the threshold
value is specified.
After selection of these options all necessary settings are
made. Then, the proof of validity of the submitted microarray
data starts; this includes checking for correct number formats
of the expression values and the matching of gene names
(Figure 2). A summary of this check is shown on a second
Figure 1. JProGO web interface data submission form.
W512 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue
web page. The user can now decide whether to proceed with
the analysis or to return to the data submission form.
Calculation is done on the fly, so no waiting queue exists
but results are immediately available to the user. Altogether
a complete analysis takes about 3–5 min, assuming that the
web server is not fully loaded.
Output. The analysed GO nodes are displayed as an interact-
ive table. They are sorted by their calculated P-values by
default, thus biologically most relevant nodes can be found
at the top of the table (see Table 2). The user can choose
between several sorting and search options, such as searching
for GO nodes that contain a specific phrase in their names.
Table 2.Example for the application of JProGO for amicroarray dataset fromE.coli (21) that investigates the influence of ArcA, a global transcriptional regulator on
genes of aerobic function (compare to Figure 3)
GO category GO accession nos GO name P-value
Molecular function GO:0005215 Transporter activity 1.8845E-6
Biological process GO:0005996 Monosaccharide metabolism 4.71 97E-6
Biological process GO:0019318 Hexose metabolism 1.2557E-5
Biological process GO:0006066 Alcohol metabolism 1.3639E-5
Biological process GO:0006810 Transport 1.5379E-5
Biological process GO:0006351 Transcription, DNA-dependent 2.1493E-5
Biological process GO:0051179 Localization 2.2139E-5
Biological process GO:0051234 Establishment of localization 2.2139E-5
Biological process GO:0015980 Energy derivation by oxidation of organic compounds 4.5974E-5
Molecular function GO:0003676 Nucleic acid binding 4.9689E-5
Table view showing the significant GO nodes with their P-values.
Figure 2. Workflow of the analysis process of JProGO.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue W513
In addition, the user can select nodes the P-value of which is
above or below a certain value or within a certain range. Dis-
played GO nodes can be restricted to one or two of the three
sub-ontologies: molecular function, biological process and
cellular component. GO nodes that meet any of the selected
filter criteria are high-lighted in the corresponding table.
In addition to the table view, the high-lighted nodes—by
default GO nodes with a significant P-value—are visualized
as a GO subgraph. The selected GO nodes and all their
parents up to the root node are shown. Here, the GO nodes’
size and colour reflect a certain P-value. Thus, the user can
easily recognize those functions and processes which are
affected and classify them in the context of the hierarchy of
GO. The table can be downloaded as a tab-delimited text
file and the relevant GO subgraph as a pdf or png file.
In both, table and GO subgraph view, clicking on a node
generates another web page that shows a table with all the
genes that are assigned to this node and their correspond-
ing expression values. Each gene offers a hyperlink to
PRODORIC database (19) where more detailed functional
and regulatory information is provided. In addition, the
expression profile of the genes belonging to the GO node
and those of the background distribution are visualized as
histograms. A guided tour for the JProGO web interface can
be found on our web page (http://www.jprogo.de/tour.jsp).
EXAMPLE APPLICATION
Table 1 and Figure 3 show the results of a typical JProGO
analysis. We investigated a knockout of the global transcrip-
tional regulator ArcA, which regulates the expression of genes
in response to changes in oxygen tension in Escherichia coli
(21). The posterior probabilities of differential expression for
the microarray dataset were taken from http://www.jbc.org/
cgi/content/full/M414030200/DC1.
For example, threshold-free Wilcoxon’s test (two-sided,
alpha ¼ 0.05, FDR correction) yielded 10 significant GO
nodes, representing oxidative energy derivation (e.g. ‘energy
derivation by oxidation of organic compounds’) and central
energy-coupled processes, such as ‘hexose metabolism’
whose activities are typically altered under anaerobic life
conditions (Table 2 and Figure 3).
These results fit well with the biological expectation.
In this example both the FDR correction and the Bonfer-
roni method yield the same results. Supplementary Data
and further examples are available on our web page (http://
www.jprogo.de/examples.jsp).
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
We provide the user with an integrative program suite which
allows the easy and intuitive functional interpretation of
mass gene expression data, such as microarray data. For
this purpose, the user has the opportunity to choose between
threshold-value based or threshold-value independent statist-
ical methods. In addition, we provide the user with a correc-
tion method for multiple testing, the well established FDR
method (16). We also plan to offer a permutation-based
approach, which would be an appealing alternative since
permutation-based procedures (22–24) are well suitable for
correcting multiple dependent tests, although they require
considerably longer running times. In order to integrate this
feature, expanding JProGO towards an asynchronous web
service would be appropriate.
all
molecular_function biological_process
hexose metabolism
transporter activity binding
nucleic acid binding
macromolecule met...
carbohydrate metabolism
cellular metabolism
alcohol metabolism
generation of precursor met... nucleobase, nucleoside, nuc...
primary metab...
cellular carbohydrate metab...
monosaccharide metabolism
cellular physiological pr...
transport
localization
establishment of localization 
energy derivation by oxidat... transcription
transcription, DNA-dependent
physiological process
metabolism
cellular process
Figure 3. Example for the application of JProGO for amicroarray dataset fromE.coli (21) that investigates the influence ofArcA, a global transcriptional regulator on
genes of aerobic function. View of the subgraph induced by the significant GO nodes (thick border, see also Table 1) and the root node (‘all’). The node’s P-value is
reflected by its size and brightnesswhereas nodeswith lowerP-values are larger and brighter. In addition, the node’s colour represents itsGO sub-ontology (category)
which is either molecular function (red), biological process (green) or cellular component (blue).
W514 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue
In summary, JProGO enables a comparative exploratory
analysis of the microarray data using the strengths of the selec-
ted statistical methods. Because of focussing on well investig-
ated bacterial species, we think the tool is especially suitable
for reseachers in the field of prokaryotic gene expression.
In the near future, JProGO will be expanded to support
analysis of other species in order to include all sequenced
prokaryotes. Moreover, in addition to GO further groupings
of genes will be included, such as operons or regulons which
comprise genes regulated by the same transcription factor.
Since PRODORIC database (19), which is a rich source of
operons, regulons and regulatory motifs, is one of the main
data sources for JProGO its expansion towards containing
such gene groupings can be smoothly achieved and this
will constitute a valuable feature for the web service.
SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Supplementary Data are available at NAR online.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Dr Barbara Schulz for critical
proofreading of the manuscript and Albert Gevorgyan for
sharing his knowledge in Java programming. This work
was funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education
and Research for the Bioinformatics Competence
Center ‘Intergenomics’ (Grant No. 031U210D) and the
Sonderforschungsbereich 573 (From Gene to Product).
Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this
article was provided by the Technical University of
Braunschweig/Institute of Microbiology.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Ashburner,M., Ball,C., Blake,J., Botstein,D., Butler,H., Cherry,J.,
Davis,A., Dolinsky,K., Dwight,S., Eppig,J. et al. (2000) Gene
Ontology: tool for the unification of biology. Nature Genet., 79,
266–270.
2. Al-Shahrour,F., Diaz-Uriarte,R. and Dopazo,J. (2004) FatiGO: a web
tool for finding significant associations of Gene Ontology terms with
groups of genes. Bioinformatics, 20, 578–580.
3. Barry,W.T., Nobel,A.B. and Wright,F.A. (2005) Significance analysis
of functional categories in gene expression studies: a structured
permutation approach. Bioinformatics, 21, 1943–1949.
4. Ben-Shaul,Y., Bergman,H. and Soreq,H. (2005) Identifying
subtle interrelated changes in functional gene categories using
continuous measures of gene expression. Bioinformatics, 21,
1129–1137.
5. Boorsma,A., Foat,B.C., Vis,D., Klis,F. and Bussemaker,H.J. (2005)
Tprofiler: scoring the activity of predefined groups of genes using gene
expression data. Nucleic Acids Res., 34, W592–W595.
6. Boyle,E.I., Weng,S., Gollub,J., Jin,H., Botstein,D., Cherry,J.M. and
Sherlock,G. (2004) GO::TermFinder–open source software for
accessing Gene Ontology information and finding significantly
enriched Gene Ontology terms associated with a list of genes.
Bioinformatics, 20, 3710–3715.
7. Kim,S.Y. and Volsky,D.J. (2005) PAGE: parametric analysis of gene
set enrichment. BMC Bioinformatics, 6, 144.
8. Mootha,V.K., Lindgren,C.M., Eriksson,K.F., Subramanian,A.,
Sihag,S., Lehar,J., Puigserver,P., Carlsson,E., Ridderstrale,M.,
Laurila,E., Houstis,N. et al. (2003) PGC-1alpha-responsive genes
involved in oxidative phosphorylation are coordinately downregulated
in human diabetes. Nature Genet., 34, 267–273.
9. Smid,M. and Dorssers,L.C. (2004) GO-Mapper: functional analysis of
gene expression data using the expression level as a score to evaluate
Gene Ontology terms. Bioinformatics, 20, 2618–2625.
10. Subramanian,A., Tamayo,P., Mootha,V.K., Mukherjee,S., Ebert,B.L.,
Gillette,M.A., Paulovich,A., Pomeroy,S.L., Golub,T.R., Lander,E.S.
and Mesirov,J.P. (2005) Gene set enrichment analysis: a
knowledge-based approach for interpreting genome-wide expression
profiles. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 102, 15545–15550.
11. Volinia,S., Evangelisti,R., Francioso,F., Arcelli,D., Carella,M. and
Gasparini,P. (2004) GOAL: automated Gene Ontology analysis of
expression profiles. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, W492–W499.
12. Zeeberg,B.R., Feng,W., Wang,G., Wang,M.D., Fojo,A.T.,
Sunshine,M., Narasimhan,S., Kane,D.W., Reinhold,W.C., Lababidi,S.,
Bussey,K.J., Riss,J., Barrett,J.C. and Weinstein,J.N. (2003) GoMiner: a
resource for biological interpretation of genomic and proteomic data.
Genome Biol., 4, R28.
13. Zhang,B., Schmoyer,D., Kirov,S. and Snoddy,J. (2004) GOTree
Machine (GOTM): a web-based platform for interpreting sets of
interesting genes using Gene Ontology hierarchies. BMC
Bioinformatics, 5, 16.
14. Al-Shahrour,F., Diaz-Uriarte,R. and Dopazo,J. (2005) Discovering
molecular functions significantly related to phenotypes by combining
gene expression data and biological information. Bioinformatics,
21, 2988–2993.
15. R Development Core Team (2004) R: A Language and Environment
for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing,
Vienna, Austria, ISBN 3-900051-07-0.
16. Benjamini,Y. and Hochberg,Y. (1995) Controlling the false discovery
rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. J. R. Stat.
Soc., 57, 289–300.
17. Bland,J.M. and Altman,D.G. (1995) Multiple significance tests: the
Bonferroni method. Biomedical J., 310, 170.
18. Camon,E., Magrane,M., Barrell,D., Binns,D., Fleischmann,W.,
Kersey,P., Mulder,N., Oinn,T., Maslen,J., Cox,A. and Apweiler,R.
(2003) The Gene Ontology annotation (GOA) project: implementation
of GO in SWISS-PROT, TrEMBL, and InterPro. Genome Res., 13,
662–672.
19. Mu¨nch,R., Hiller,K., Barg,H., Heldt,D., Linz,S., Wingender,E. and
Jahn,D. (2003) PRODORIC: prokaryotic database of gene regulation.
Nucleic Acids Res., 33, 266–269.
20. Wu,C.H., Apweiler,R., Bairoch,A., Natale,D.A., Barker,W.C.,
Boeckmann,B., Ferro,S., Gasteiger,E., Huang,H., Lopez,R. et al.
(2006) The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt): an expanding
universe of protein information. Nucleic Acids Res., 34, D187–D191.
21. Salmon,K.A., Hung,S.P., Steffen,N.R., Krupp,R., Baldi,P.,
Hatfield,G.W. and Gunsalus,R.P. (2005) Global gene expression
profiling in Escherichia coli K12: effects of oxygen availability and
ArcA. J. Biol. Chem., 280, 15084–15096.
22. Benjamini,Y. and Yekutieli,D. (2001) The control of the false
discovery rate in multiple testing under dependency. Ann. Statist., 29,
1165–1188.
23. Storey,J.D. and Tibshirani,R. (2003) Statistical significance for
genomewide studies. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 100, 9440–9445.
24. Tusher,V.G., Tibshirani,R. and Chu,G. (2001) Significance analysis of
microarrays applied to the ionizing radiation response. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA, 98, 5116–5121.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue W515
