ODB: a database of operons accumulating known
operons across multiple genomes
Shujiro Okuda1,*, Toshiaki Katayama2, Shuichi Kawashima2, Susumu Goto1 and
Minoru Kanehisa1,2
1Bioinformatics Center, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Gokasho, Uji, Kyoto 611-0011,
Japan and 2Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo,
4-6-1 Shirokane-dai Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan
Received August 15, 2005; Revised and Accepted September 26, 2005
ABSTRACT
Operon structures play an important role in
co-regulation in prokaryotes. Although over 200
complete genome sequences are now available, data-
bases providing genome-wide operon information
have been limited to certain specific genomes.
Thus, we have developed an ODB (Operon
DataBase), which provides a data retrieval system
of known operons among the many complete
genomes. Additionally, putative operons that are
conserved in terms of known operons are also pro-
vided. The current version of our database contains
about 2000 known operon information in more than
50 genomes and about 13 000 putative operons in
more than 200 genomes. This system integrates
four types of associations: genome context, gene
co-expression obtained from microarray data, func-
tional links in biological pathways and the conserva-
tion of gene order across the genomes. These
associations are indicators of the genes that organize
an operon, and the combination of these indicators
allows us to predict more reliable operons.
Furthermore, our system validates these predictions
using known operon information obtained from the
literature. This database integrates known
literature-based information and genomic data. In
addition, it provides an operon prediction tool,
which make the system useful for both bioinformatics
researchers and experimental biologists. Our data-
base is accessible at http://odb.kuicr.kyoto-u.ac.jp/.
INTRODUCTION
With the increasing availability of completely sequenced gen-
omes, comparative genomic approaches are becoming more
important to decipher the functions of genes. Methods, which
are powerful, using the conservation of gene proximity on
genomes (i.e. determining potential operons) can understand
functional associations between genes (1–3). Genes in an
operon are functionally associated with each other in proka-
ryotes; thus, various kinds of operon prediction methods have
been developed to understand the functional relationships and
to annotate genes (4–13). Databases that accumulate the
experimentally verified operon information should be useful
to validate such prediction methods and also to understand the
functional association between genes. However, databases
providing genome-wide operon information have been limited
to certain specific genomes (14,15). Although the STRING
database was developed to identify functional associations
between genes for multiple genomes, it uses gene neighbor-
hood based on genome context methods (16). Here, we intro-
duce the database called ODB (Operon DataBase), which
provides operon data documented in the literature and putative
operons that are conserved in terms of known operons. Fur-
thermore, to characterize operons, it integrates genome con-
text, gene co-expression obtained from microarray data,
functional links in biological pathways and data on the con-
servation of gene order across genomes. ODB also provides
operon prediction based on these various types of data as an
application of our database. These datasets are fully pre-
computed so that all information can be quickly accessed.
The ODB database integrates known literature-based informa-
tion and genomic data. In addition, it provides an operon
prediction tool, which makes the system useful for both bioin-
formatics researchers and experimental biologists.
OPERON DATA SOURCES
We have collected information of known operons of multiple
genomes from the literature. We note that the experimentally
verified operons, which we have collected, have been verified
by a variety of means, from direct measurements such as
primer extension and northern blots to less direct methods
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +81 774 38 3270; Fax: +81 774 38 3269; E-mail: okuda@kuicr.kyoto-u.ac.jp
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
D358–D362 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gkj037
such as gene knock-out experiments. Our database represents
an ongoing effort to increase the coverage of operons. The
current version of our database contains about 2000 known
operon information in more than 50 genomes obtained from a
total of 825 literatures (Table 1). Note that although some of
these operons overlap, we use the term ‘operon’ to refer to a
‘transcriptional unit’ individually as opposed to the generally
understood usage of the term that may include multiple over-
lapping transcriptional units. These data also include the oper-
ons of Caenorhabditis elegans. Operon structures are often
observed in prokaryotes, but nematodes also have similar tran-
scriptional systems (17,18). Thus, we added the eukaryotic
operons into our database. Note that the operons from Bacillus
subtilis contain operons obtained from transcriptional maps
stored in BSORF (http://bacillus.genome.jp/). Because these
maps were derived from the results of northern blotting experi-
ments, we added these operons into our database. Note that
these entries can be distinguished from the operons obtained
from the literature, as the origin of the source (BSORF) is
annotated in the database.
Table 1 also shows putative operons that are conserved in
terms of known operons. When we calculated these conser-
vations, we used KEGG OC as the ortholog gene set (19),
which is ortholog gene clustering based on Smith–Waterman
sequence similarity scores. If genes in a known operon have
ortholog genes in another genome and these ortholog genes
are consecutively located on the same strand of the genome,
we regarded them as a putative but highly reliable operon.
Note that this is not applied to known mono-cistronic genes.
Furthermore, the putative operons were also explored from the
viewpoint of paralog genes. These putative operons are also
explored in eukaryotes. Usually, we do not use the term
’operon’ for the eukaryotic gene clusters, but we use this
term operationally in our database. As a result, over 13 000
putative operons were observed in over 200 genomes.
OVERVIEW OF THE DATABASE
ODB uses a relational database management system (MySQL,
http://www.mysql.com/) to store and manage all information
including not only known and putative operons but also prim-
ary data, such as gene location and definition, and associations
between genes. This system contains four types of associations
between genes that determine an operon: (i) intergenic dis-
tances, (ii) functional links in biological pathways, (iii) gene
co-expression obtained from microarray data and (iv) the con-
servation of gene order across multiple genomes. These four
types of associations are considered indicators and that the
genes linked by them can organize an operon. Therefore, we
pre-calculated these associations among all genes in all avail-
able genomes to characterize operons. Genes in an operon are
often closely located on the genome compared with those
between non-operons. Therefore, this is one of the indicators
to characterize operons. Intergenic distances are defined as the
number of bases between the end position of a gene and the
start position of the next gene on the genome.
In addition, genes in an operon are often functionally
related. For example genes appearing in a metabolic pathway
are often clustered on the genome to be co-transcribed (20).
Such functional links were obtained from KEGG pathway
(19). We calculated the number of steps between genes in
the pathway maps. The number of steps indicates that when
two genes are linked across a compound, the number of steps is
one. In this way, we calculated the number of steps not only in
the same pathway map but also across different pathway maps.
The KEGG EXPRESSION database contains the gene
expression data derived from microarrays of four organisms,
B.subtilis, Escherichia coli K-12 W3110, Synechocystis sp.
PCC6803 and Saccharomyces cerevisiae (19). We used the
information of co-expressed genes from the database. We
calculated the Pearson’s correlation coefficients between
gene expression profiles obtained from these microarray
data. Because it is considered that microarray data reflect
actual gene transcription and that they are powerful tools to
predict operons, co-expressed gene clusters on the genome are
possible operons. However, the limitation of experimental
conditions and quality of the experiments still leave the
issue that certain operons are not transcribed and that the
level of gene co-expression is not homogeneous. Therefore,
there are cases where genes are not co-expressed even if they
are genes in a known operon.
Gene order in an operon is often shuffled and collapsed in
evolutionary history (21,22). Therefore, conservation of gene
order across genomes is rather rare, especially in distantly
related genomes. If such conservation is observed, they are
probably related to a physical interaction such as a molecular
complex (23). Therefore, this feature is also important in char-
acterizing operons. We calculated the step number between
gene pairs. That is, given a gene pair, we took each of their
ortholog genes from all genomes, calling this ‘ortholog gene
pair’. Then we calculated the step number between these two
ortholog genes. When the gene pair is adjacently located on the
genome, the step number is regarded as one. Here, we ignore
the genomes included in the same taxonomic group, which
are defined in KEGG (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/catalog/
org_list.html).
All-against-all runs of these associations between genes
were performed. Pre-computed results are stored in a table,
allowing quick retrieval against the query specified by
users. Each table in our system corresponds to a particular
genome to facilitate efficient access and retrieval of the
information.
When users search a gene or an operon of interest, the gene
cluster including it can be identified by its name and identifier.
Table 1. Statistics of operons in major genomes
Species No. of operons No. of putative operons
Eukaryotes: 7 species
Caenorhabditis elegans 628 149
Saccharomyces cerevisiae – 7
Prokaryotes: 177 species
Bacillus subtilis 711 60
Escherichia coli 389 61
Pseudomonas aeruginosa 33 156
Agrobacterium tumefaciens 15 172
Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 12 26
Bradyrhizobium japonicum 10 190
Archaea: 19 species
Methanosarcina acetivorans – 44
Pyrococcus furiosus 2 13
Total: 203 species 1957 13 258
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D359
Then, the user is presented with a summary of genes and
associations between genes in the region on the genome
(Figure 1). Primary data such as gene names, gene IDs, defini-
tions, KO IDs as functional classes, KEGG pathway IDs and
EC numbers are presented. These are linked to the KEGG
database if available. Additionally, the genomic view of the
region of interest is also presented. This view includes graph-
ical symbols of operons, genes, pathways and EC numbers and
Figure 1. An example view of an operon.
D360 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
each symbol is also linked to the KEGG database. The user can
also scroll and zoom the region of interest on the genome.
Finally, the four types of associations are shown as separate
tables. For the biological pathway table, the shortest step num-
bers between genes are presented. For the ortholog gene table,
the shortest step numbers between the ortholog gene pairs are
shown. In these tables, additional pages are accessible which
show the detail of the information. For the gene expression
table, the correlation coefficients between gene expression
profiles are shown, and the strength of co-expression is illus-
trated by a color gradient ranging from blue to red.
OPERON PREDICTION
Because the conditions to determine putative operons are very
strict and are not genome-wide, ODB also provides a system to
predict operons, using the four associations. Given a specific
species, predicted operons that may exist within that species
are returned. There are two options that are available: simple
and advanced prediction mode. For a simple mode, users can
obtain prediction results based on default parameter values
that have been validated by known operons. However, in
advanced prediction mode, users can freely change these para-
meter values, which are based on the four types of associations
described above. When genes linked by these associations are
clustered on the genome, they are likely to be an operon. Thus,
we benchmarked the accuracy of the predictions based on
combinations of various values of intergenic distances, step
numbers between ortholog genes and the number of the gen-
omes having conserved ortholog genes that are linked within a
specific range of step numbers. Therefore, the optimal values
that predict the largest number of operons while keeping the
accuracy high is provided as default values in simple predic-
tion mode (Supplementary data). When there is little or no
known operon information in a genome, the default values of
another genome in the same taxonomic group and having
sufficient operon information is used as an alternative to the
genome. If such genomes are also unavailable, we used the
values of B.subtilis (see Supplementary Data for details).
CONCLUDING REMARKS
ODB provides a platform for searching known operons and
consequent putative operons and for predicting operons with
high accuracy validated by literature-based operon data. It
includes about 2000 literature-based operons in over 50 gen-
omes and about 13 000 putative operons in over 200 genomes.
In addition, the data from KEGG pathway and related
resources that are provided allow analyses not only based
on a specific genomic context but also across genomes.
Thus, it is the first of its kind to integrate operon data from
a variety of genomes, providing a wide-ranging coverage of
operons. This integrated system of both known literature-
based and genomic data is a useful system for bioinformatics
researchers and experimental biologists.
SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Supplementary Data are available at NAR Online.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Kiyoko F. Aoki-Kinoshita for critical reading of our
manuscript. This work was supported by grants from the
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and
Technology, the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science,
and the Japan Science and Technology Agency. The computa-
tional resources were provided by the Bioinformatics Center,
Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University and the
Super Computer System, Human Genome Center, Institute
of Medical Science, the University of Tokyo. Funding to
pay the Open Access publication charges for this article was
provided by the grant-in-aid for scientific research from the
Ministry of Education.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Tamames,J., Casari,G., Ouzounis,C. and Valencia,A. (1997) Conserved
clusters of functionally related genes in two bacterial genomes.
J. Mol. Evol., 44, 66–73.
2. Overbeek,R., Fonstein,M., D’Souza,M., Pusch,G.D. and Maltsev,N.
(1999) The use of gene clusters to infer functional coupling. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA, 96, 2896–2901.
3. Huynen,M., Snel,B., Lathe,W.,III and Bork,P. (2000) Predicting protein
function by genomic context: quantitative evaluation and qualitative
inferences. Genome Res., 10, 1204–1210.
4. Bockhorst,J., Craven,M., Page,D., Shavlik,J. and Glasner,J. (2003)
A Bayesian network approach to operon prediction. Bioinformatics,
19, 1227–1235.
5. Bockhorst,J., Qiu,Y., Glasner,J., Liu,M., Blattner,F. and Craven,M.
(2003) Predicting bacterial transcription units using sequence and
expression data. Bioinformatics, 19 (Suppl. 1), i34–i43.
6. Craven,M., Page,D., Shavlik,J., Bockhorst,J. and Glasner,J. (2000) A
probabilistic learning approach to whole-genome operon prediction.
Proc. Int. Conf. Intell. Syst. Mol. Biol., 8, 116–127.
7. Ermolaeva,M.D., White,O. and Salzberg,S.L. (2001) Prediction of
operons in microbial genomes. Nucleic Acids Res., 29, 1216–1221.
8. Sabatti,C., Rohlin,L., Oh,M.K. and Liao,J.C. (2002) Co-expression
pattern from DNA microarray experiments as a tool for operon prediction.
Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 2886–2893.
9. Yada,T., Nakao,M., Totoki,Y. and Nakai,K. (1999) Modeling and
predicting transcriptional units of Escherichia coli genes using hidden
Markov models. Bioinformatics, 15, 987–993.
10. Zheng,Y., Szustakowski,J.D., Fortnow,L., Roberts,R.J. and Kasif,S.
(2002) Computational identification of operons in microbial genomes.
Genome Res., 12, 1221–1230.
11. De Hoon,M.J., Imoto,S., Kobayashi,K., Ogasawara,N. and Miyano,S.
(2004) Predicting the operon structure of Bacillus subtilis using
operon length, intergene distance, and gene expression information.
Pac. Symp. Biocomput., 276–287.
12. de Hoon,M.J., Imoto,S., Kobayashi,K., Ogasawara,N. and Miyano,S.
(2003) Inferring gene regulatory networks from time-ordered gene
expression data of Bacillus subtilis using differential equations.
Pac. Symp. Biocomput., 17–28.
13. Price,M.N., Huang,K.H., Alm,E.J. and Arkin,A.P. (2005) A novel method
for accurate operon predictions in all sequenced prokaryotes. Nucleic
Acids Res., 33, 880–892.
14. Makita,Y., Nakao,M., Ogasawara,N. and Nakai,K. (2004) DBTBS:
database of transcriptional regulation in Bacillus subtilis and its
contribution to comparative genomics. Nucleic Acids Res., 32,
D75–D77.
15. Salgado,H., Gama-Castro,S., Martinez-Antonio,A., Diaz-Peredo,E.,
Sanchez-Solano,F., Peralta-Gil,M., Garcia-Alonso,D., Jimenez-
Jacinto,V., Santos-Zavaleta,A., Bonavides-Martinez,C. et al. (2004)
RegulonDB (version 4.0): transcriptional regulation, operon organization
and growth conditions in Escherichia coli K-12. Nucleic Acids Res.,
32, D303–D306.
16. von Mering,C., Jensen,L.J., Snel,B., Hooper,S.D., Krupp,M.,
Foglierini,M., Jouffre,N., Huynen,M.A. and Bork,P. (2005)
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D361
STRING: known and predicted protein–protein associations, integrated
and transferred across organisms. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D433–D437.
17. Blumenthal,T., Evans,D., Link,C.D., Guffanti,A., Lawson,D., Thierry-
Mieg,J., Thierry-Mieg,D., Chiu,W.L., Duke,K., Kiraly,M. et al. (2002)
A global analysis of Caenorhabditis elegans operons. Nature, 417,
851–854.
18. Lercher,M.J., Blumenthal,T. and Hurst,L.D. (2003) Coexpression of
neighboring genes in Caenorhabditis elegans is mostly due to operons and
duplicate genes. Genome Res., 13, 238–243.
19. Kanehisa,M., Goto,S., Kawashima,S., Okuno,Y. and Hattori,M. (2004)
The KEGG resource for deciphering the genome. Nucleic Acids Res.,
32, D277–D280.
20. Ogata,H., Fujibuchi,W., Goto,S. and Kanehisa,M. (2000) A heuristic
graph comparison algorithm and its application to detect functionally
related enzyme clusters. Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 4021–4028.
21. Teichmann,S.A. and Babu,M.M. (2002) Conservation of gene
co-regulation in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Trends Biotechnol.,
20, 407–410; Discussion 410.
22. Itoh,T., Takemoto,K., Mori,H. and Gojobori,T. (1999) Evolutionary
instability of operon structures disclosed by sequence comparisons
of complete microbial genomes. Mol. Biol. Evol., 16, 332–346.
23. Dandekar,T., Snel,B., Huynen,M. and Bork,P. (1998) Conservation of
gene order: a fingerprint of proteins that physically interact. Trends
Biochem. Sci., 23, 324–328.
D362 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
