Non-EST based prediction of exon skipping and
intron retention events using Pfam information
Michael Hiller*, Klaus Huse1, Matthias Platzer1 and Rolf Backofen
Institute of Computer Science, Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Chair for Bioinformatics,
Ernst-Abbe-Platz 2, 07743 Jena, Germany and 1Genome Analysis, Institute of Molecular Biotechnology,
Beutenbergstr. 11, 07745 Jena, Germany
Received July 3, 2005; Revised August 19, 2005; Accepted September 9, 2005 DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank accession nos+
ABSTRACT
Most of the known alternative splice events have been
detected by the comparison of expressed sequence
tags (ESTs) and cDNAs. However, not all splice events
are represented in EST databases since ESTs have
severalbiases.Therefore,non-ESTbasedapproaches
are needed to extend our view of a transcriptome.
Here, we describe a novel method for the ab initio
prediction of alternative splice events that is solely
based on the annotation of Pfam domains. Further-
more, we applied this approach in a genome-wide
manner to all human RefSeq transcripts and pre-
dicted a total of 321 exon skipping and intron
retention events. We show that this method is very
reliable as 78% (250 of 321) of our predictions are con-
firmed by ESTs or cDNAs. Subsequent analyses of
splice events within Pfam domains revealed a signific-
ant preference of alternative exon junctions to be loc-
ated at the protein surface and to avoid secondary
structure elements. Thus, splice events within Pfams
are probable to alter the structure and function of a
domain which makes them highly interesting for
detailed biological investigation. As Pfam domains are
annotated in many other species, our strategy to pre-
dict exon skipping and intron retention events might
be important for species with a lower number of ESTs.
INTRODUCTION
The great majority of human multi-exon genes are estimated
to express several alternative splice forms (1,2). Alternative
splicing mainly contributes to proteome complexity (3,4)
and protein isoforms may differ in function or subcellular
localization (5–7). Numerous diseases are caused by
mis-splicing (8) and a change of the normal splicing pattern
is thought to contribute to cancer development (9). Thus,
alternative splicing is a very important step during the pro-
cessing of a pre-mRNA.
Almost all large-scale bioinformatics studies of alternative
splicing use the wealth of information stored in expressed
sequence tag (EST) databases and most alternative splice
forms are detected by the alignment of EST sequences to the
genome and to other ESTs/cDNAs (10–14). Despite more than
six million human ESTs in dbEST (release December 2004),
not all existing splice variants are represented in these data-
bases owing to several reasons. Firstly, the expression level of
a transcript must be sufficiently high to be sampled as an EST.
Therefore, low expressed splice forms are underrepresented.
However, minor splice forms can be very important. For
example, a minor splice variant of the RAC1 gene produces
Rac1b which constitutes a large portion of activated Rac1
proteins in a cell and might play a role in tumorgenesis
(15). Secondly, alternative splicing can be highly specific
for a tissue or a cell type, a developmental stage or an external
stimulus (16). Thus, such splice forms can only be detected
if ESTs are sampled from the right tissue, at the right time
and under the right condition. Moreover, tissue distribution
of ESTs is strongly biased with the brain having the highest
number of ESTs (17). Additionally, low expressed variants
have a tendency to be tissue specific (18) which makes their
detection even more difficult. Thirdly, ESTs are biased towards
the ends of transcripts, especially towards the 30 end. For
example, the first exons of CFTR or NRXN2 are not covered
by a single EST, whereas their 30-untranslated region (30-UTR)
is covered by 31 and 13 ESTs, respectively. Fourthly, many
ESTs are sampled from tumor libraries. In some cases, this led
to gene annotations based on tumor specific transcripts,
although another predominant splice form is expressed in nor-
mal tissue (9). Finally, owing to the single read nature, ESTs
are error-prone and false positive predictions may be included
in alternative splice databases (2).
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +49 3641 946454; Fax: +49 3641 946452; Email: hiller@inf.uni-jena.de
Correspondence may also be addressed to Rolf Backofen. Email: backofen@inf.uni-jena.de
+DQ0888983–DQ0888988
 The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 17 5611–5621
doi:10.1093/nar/gki870
 Published online October 4, 2005
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Apart from ESTs, microarrays with specific exon–exon
junction probes have been used to find alternative exons in
a genome-wide scale (1). Specific microarrays have also been
used to detect a variety of alternative splice events including
exon skipping, alternative donor/acceptor sites and mutually
exclusive exons by searching for tissue-specific changes in the
responses of certain microarray probes (19). Despite the power
of microarrays, the main problem remains since it is very hard
to test all combinations of tissues, developmental stages and
external stimuli. Furthermore, events like intron retention and
alternative donor/acceptor sites or additional exons that are
located in introns (relative to the given exon structure of the
gene for which probes are designed) can only be detected
if intronic probes are included in the microarray design.
Consequently, our current view of alternative splicing is
still incomplete and non-EST based methods for the prediction
of splice variants are needed to complete our knowledge of
the human transcriptome.
Recently, Sorek et al. (20) described a non-EST based
method which uses characteristic features of alternative exons
to discriminate between constitutive and alternative ones. The
most discriminative single-feature is a high conservation of
alternative exons and their flanking intron regions in mouse
(21). Additional features are an exon size divisible by three,
differences in tri-mer counts and the composition of the splice
sites (22). Comparative genomics were also successfully used
to predict exon skipping events in Drosophila (23). Yeo et al.
(24) described an approach ACESCAN that is able to identify
conserved exon skipping events in both human and mouse.
This approach also uses exonic and intronic conservation
as well as splice site scores, exon and intron lengths, and
oligonucleotide composition. Ohler et al. (25) demonstrated
that even alternative exons that are completely missed in
current gene annotations can be discovered by applying
a pair hidden Markov model algorithm to orthologous
human–mouse introns. These studies demonstrate that a clas-
sifier based on characteristic genomic features can reliably
predict exon skipping events ab initio.
Here, we present a different approach that is able to predict
exon skipping as well as intron retention events. This method
uses only information about protein domain families (Pfam)
(26) and, thus, it is independent of the existence of orthologous
sequences. Furthermore, we report the results of a genome-
wide application of this approach and demonstrate with
EST/cDNA searches and experiments that our predictions
are very reliable. We show that owing to the inclusion of
alternative exons, inserts within Pfam domain structures have
a significant preference to avoid secondary structure elements.
Since many Pfam domains can be identified in a large number
of species, our approach might be especially important for
genomes with a lower EST coverage than the human genome.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Algorithm
Briefly described, for the prediction of alternative splice events
we used an algorithm that extends the Viterbi algorithm in
order to allow exon skipping and intron retention during the
computation of the Pfam alignment. It is an optimal dynamic
programming procedure that finds the hypothetical splice form
with the highest score for a given Pfam. All ATG codons are
considered to be putative start codons, which allows us to find
reading frames that start within introns or in the annotated
50-UTR of the given transcript. Frameshifts are handled by
working at the mRNA level in all three reading frames
simultaneously. The algorithm only needs the pre-mRNA
sequence and the positions of the donor and acceptor sites.
More details and the complete recurrence equations are
described in (27). Here, we used a modified version that out-
puts only hypothetical splice forms that are not nonsense-
mediated mRNA decay (NMD) candidates (no stop codon
50 nt upstream the last exon–exon junction) (28). We accepted
only splice forms that increase the Pfam score by at least 10.
Genome-wide prediction
All transcripts were taken from the RefSeq annotations in the
UCSC Genome Browser (assembly hg17 with annotation
August 2004, http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/hg17/
database/refGene.txt.gz). We discarded single exon transcripts
and all transcripts with an erroneous open reading frame (ORF)
or ambiguous characters in their sequence. We translated all
transcripts and using hmmpfam from the HMMER package
(http://hmmer.wustl.edu/) we searched the human Pfam data-
base version 14 (ftp://ftp.sanger.ac.uk/pub/databases/Pfam/
current_release/Pfam_fs.gz) for all Pfams that match the pro-
teins with an E-value of 10 or less. These lists of Pfams were
given to our algorithm. We only considered predictions with a
Pfam score above the ‘gathering cut-off’ value as given in the
Pfam database. All numbers and statistics refer to unique genes,
that means, if a gene has two RefSeq transcripts and the same
prediction is made for both, we counted only one transcript.
Data evaluation
The EST/cDNA search for exon skipping was done with a 60 nt
search string from the flanking exons (30 nt from each side)
and BLAST against dbEST (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/
db/FASTA/est_human.gz) and against cDNA sequences down-
loaded from GenBank (December 2004). The EST/cDNA
search for exon inclusion was done with a search query that
comprises the exon in the middle and again 60 nt from the
flanking exons. Differences in the Pfam score were evaluated
with hmmpfam using the ‘gathering cut-off’ scores. Ortholog-
ous mouse exons were found using the Ensembl genome brow-
ser (http://www.ensembl.org/). To check whether the mouse
intron contains an orthologous exon or not, we used a local
alignment (water program from the Emboss package) and
checked the presence of splice sites. We aligned the ortholog-
ous exon pairs with the needle program from the Emboss
package (http://www.hgmp.mrc.ac.uk/Software/EMBOSS/).
Test if the algorithm identifies known alternative exons
To find exons that are skipped in a RefSeq transcript and whose
inclusion results in a lower score, we first extracted a set of
RefSeq exon pairs that together encode a Pfam domain. Then,
using BLAST we searched for EST hits with two separate high
scoring segment pairs and kept those ESTs that included an
alternative exon between the two RefSeq exons. We discarded
all those cases where the inclusion of these exons does not
result in a score decrease by at least 10. Then, we used the
algorithm with the splice sites of all exons of the RefSeq
5612 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 17
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
transcript and the splice sites of the alternative exon. The pre-
dicted splice form was compared with the RefSeq transcript.
Location of alternative and constitutive exon
junctions in Pfam domains
We considered all confirmed single peptide-cassette exons that
insert a sequence into a Pfam domain. We searched for pro-
teins with a known 3D structure that encode such a domain
using the Pfam websites (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Software/
Pfam/) and used the resulting proteins as a template. If avail-
able, we used a human protein. The pdb2pfam function of the
Pfam websites was used to compute the secondary structure
and the surface accessibility from the known domain structure.
Then, we compared the Pfam alignment of the RefSeq protein
with the Pfam alignment of the protein with the known struc-
ture to find the positions of the alternative and constitutive
exon junctions. If the exon–exon junction splits a codon, only
this amino acid was marked as the exon junction. If the exon
junction is located between two codons, we marked both neigh-
boring amino acids. The secondary structure assignment from
the eight DSSP states (H, G, I, E, T, S, C and B) was done as
described in (29): H, G, I helix, E sheet and T, S, C, B non-
regular with the correction that the combined occurrence of
states BC is converted to EE.
Experimental verification with RT–PCR
We designed primers that flank the predicted alternative
exon(s) or intron using Primer3 (Supplementary Table 6).
RT–PCR was done on pooled cDNA from different tissues
obtained by mixing equal volumes of cDNAs from the
HUMAN MTC Panels I and II (BD Biosciences, Palo Alto).
PCR setup was 3 ml of template, 10 pmol of each primer in a
volume of 25 ml using ReadyToGo PCR beads (Amersham).
Cycling conditions were 1 cycle of denaturation at 95C for
30 s, followed by 35 cycles of denaturing at 92C for 30 s,
annealing at 59C for 30 s and extension at 72C for 60 s;
1 cycle of final extension at 72C for 5 min. We separated
PCR products on a 1.5% agarose gel and sequenced them. We
inspected the sequence traces for overlaps at the exon–exon
boundaries and electropherograms for the presence of products
of the expected size. For verification we cloned (pCR-
TOPO2.1, Invitrogen) and sequenced the respective products.
RESULTS
Effect of alternative exons on Pfam domains
Our strategy to predict alternative splice events is solely based
on the annotation of Pfam domains. To investigate the differ-
ences in the contribution to Pfam domains between alternative
and constitutive exons, we constructed a set of 213 alternative
and 5 728 constitutive exons that are contained in the human
RefSeq annotation of the UCSC Genome Browser. We only
considered ‘peptide-cassette’ exons that do not introduce a
frameshift or a premature termination codon (PTC) when
skipped. Each exon encodes a complete Pfam domain or a
part of it. We consider an exon as constitutive if it has at least
six ESTs that show inclusion and no EST that shows skipping.
An alternative exon is skipped in at least three ESTs. Then,
we compared the Pfam score between the proteins with and
without these exons. From the 5 728 constitutive exons only 99
(1.7%) result in an increase of the Pfam score if they are not
included. In contrast, from the 213 alternative exons 34 (16%)
result in a Pfam score increase when skipped (Fisher’s exact
test: P < 0.0001). Furthermore, the average score increase of
13.4 for the 34 alternative exons is considerably higher than
the average increase of 2.9 for the 99 constitutive ones (t-test:
P < 0.0001). Therefore, we searched for a minimum score
increase that leads to a further separation of constitutive
and alternative exons. We decided to use 10 as a threshold
value since this constraint is fulfilled by only 6 (6% of 99) of
the constitutive exons but by 19 (56% of 34) of the alternative
exons. Thus, only 0.1% (6 of 5 728) of the constitutive but 9%
(19 of 213) of the alternative exons result in a Pfam score
increase of at least 10 when they are skipped. This suggests
that a genome-wide search for such exons can be used to
predict alternative exons with a high specificity.
Up to now, we have only considered peptide-cassette exons.
Most of these exons are aligned to gaps in a Pfam alignment
and exon skipping will increase the score since the number of
gaps is reduced (Figure 1A). A special case is the creation of a
domain by exon skipping if both sequence parts alone are not
recognized as parts of a Pfam (30). However, exons that are
not peptide-cassettes can also result in a Pfam score increase.
Firstly, the skipping of such an exon can lead to a frameshift
and the new protein sequence downstream can encode a longer
C-terminus of a Pfam domain or a completely new domain
(Figure 1B). Secondly, the skipping of an exon that encodes
PTCs can elongate the reading frame (Figure 1C). Such exons
most likely are alternative ones since Pfam domains usually
have a high sequence specificity and, thus, it is very unlikely
that the protein sequence in the other frame or downstream
of the PTC has a high similarity to a Pfam domain just by
chance. Apart from exon skipping, a retained intron can also
encode a new part of the domain or result in a frameshift, thus,
increasing the score. Therefore, we extend our strategy to
include skipping of non-peptide-cassette exons and retention
of introns.
Outline of the approach
Our approach can be summarized as follows. Given the exon
structure of a transcript and its pre-mRNA sequence, we search
for exon skipping and intron retention events that increase the
Pfam score for the respective protein by at least 10 (Figure 2).
Without the input of additional splice sites, like alternative
donors or acceptors, only the prediction of exon skipping and
intron retention events is possible.
Previously we have developed an efficient algorithm that
computes the hypothetical splice form with the maximal score
for a given Pfam domain (27). This algorithm allows (one or
more) exons to be skipped and introns to be retained during the
computation of the dynamic programming matrix. Usage of
the algorithm allows a computationally more efficient search
than considering single exon skipping and intron retention
events or combinations of them individually. To test if the
algorithm is able to identify alternative exons, we constructed
two test sets of alternative exons that are skipped in a RefSeq
transcript and retained in other EST/cDNA sequences. These
test sets consisted of 202 peptide-cassette and of 195 non-
peptide-cassette exons. Inclusion of these exons resulted in
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 17 5613
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
BA
C
STOP
STOP
STOP
STOP
gelddgvevdsge...rstLtkklyff
+| |+||++++|+...+|||++ ||+|
DETDRGVDQQDGK...CSTLCRHLYLFPGHPPT
VWPISCTLGATFGYVAGLVISPLWIYW...
eWPIpvvvGAllGyvvGlvislli
+|||++++||++|||+|||||+|+
Prediction
   |++|+|+++||||||| +|||||||+||
Pfam consensus
Pfam consensus
...LQITTISSFVGAWLGALPIPLDWERPWQMTVERKRSTYRSLHVPCRGLGTVKRefSeq protein
...lkvtAigaivGaWlGavviPLDWeRdWQ
   || + |||||++|||+|+|||||||
...LFDNANCPSLQNKPKMFFIQACRGGAIGSLGHLLLFTAATASLAL
...lFngdncpsLagKPKlfiiQACRGg
   || + |||||++|||+|+||||||
...LFDNANCPSLQNKPKMFFIQACRG
...lFngdncpsLagKPKlfiiQACRG
exon 8 exon 9 exon 12exon 11exon 10
Pfam consensus
Prediction
Pfam consensus
RefSeq protein
...pVLFGVFLYMGVaSLsGIQlfdRllLllMPaKhqPD...
...PVLYGVFLYMGVASLNGIQFWERCKLFLMPAKHQPD...
   |||+|||||||||||+|||+++|++|+|||||||||
...pVLFGVFLYMGVaSLsGIQ
   |||+|||||||||||+|||
...PVLYGVFLYMGVASLNGIQ
Pfam consensus
Pfam consensus
Prediction
RefSeq protein
exon 5 exon 6
exon 25 exon 26 exon 27
lfdRllLllMPaKhqPD...
+++|++|+|||||||||
FWERCKLFLMPAKHQPD...
 ++++++ + +++ ++
mgtggsefkiqkkltp
––––––––––––––––
frameshift
NMD
exon 7
...LQITTISSFVGAWLGALPIPLDWERPWQ
...lkvtAigaivGaWlGavviPLDWeRdWQ
   |++|+|+++||||||| +|||||||+||
Figure 1. Effect of alternative exons on Pfam domains. (A) SLC4A5 (NM_033323): exon 26 disrupts the Pfam domain PF00955 as shown by the gaps in the
alignment. Skipping of the exon increases the Pfam score from 1183 to 1208. (B) CASP2 (NM_001224): inclusion of exon 9 results in a reading frame with a stop
codon in exon 10 and this transcript should induce NMD. The skipping of exon 9 leads to a frameshift and a new C-terminal part of the Caspase domain PF00656
(score increase from 174 to 317). (C) PIGF (NM_173074): exon 6 encodes an in-frame stop codon 33 nt upstream of the last exon–exon junction which should not
elicit NMD. Skipping of exon 6 results in a new C-terminus encoded by exon 7 and a score increase for PF06699 from 299 to 362. Alternative exons are depicted in red,
exons that become coded in the predicted splice form are depicted in blue. Pfam alignments for the RefSeq protein are shown at the top, for the predictions at the
bottom. All exon skipping events are supported by several ESTs.
5614 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 17
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
a Pfam score decrease of at least 10. Then, given the exon
structure of the transcript with the alternative exon, we used
the algorithm to find the splice form with the highest Pfam
score. In 392 (99%) cases (200 peptide-cassette and 192 non-
peptide-cassette exons) the predicted splice form was equal to
the RefSeq transcript. This includes 18 cases where more than
one exon was skipped in a RefSeq transcript (4 cases with two
consecutive exons and 14 cases with two non-consecutive
ones). In the five remaining cases, other exons were skipped
in addition to the expected exon which gives an even higher
score. Thus, all alternative exons in our test sets can be found
by this algorithm.
Genome-wide application
To predict exon skipping and intron retention events in the
human genome, we applied this approach to all RefSeq tran-
scripts (August 2004). We only considered novel splice forms
that are not candidates for NMD (28) since the rationale
behind our strategy is that the novel splice variant is expressed
to be translated into a functional protein. In this genome-wide
scan, we predicted alternative exons and introns for 309
RefSeq transcripts. We distinguish five cases: (i) the skipping
of a single exon, (ii) the skipping of multiple consecutive
exons, (iii) the retention of an intron, (iv) hidden exon events,
and (v) complex events as any combination of (i)–(iv)
(Figure 3). These results are summarized in Table 1. Detailed
information about all predictions is given as Supplementary
Data.
Single skipped exons
We predicted a total of 183 single RefSeq annotated exons to
be alternative (Supplementary Table 1). To check if known
alternative exons are contained in this set, we searched dbEST
(December 2004) and cDNAs from GenBank and found exon
skipping evidence for 119 (65%) of those. Three further exons
are skipped in addition to alternative donor or acceptor usage
of one neighboring exon. If the score is increased by intro-
ducing a frameshift there are generally several possibilities to
introduce the frameshift. Our algorithm is only able to handle
frameshifts caused by exon skipping; however, the same
frameshift might be introduced by the usage of alternative
donor/acceptor sites or the inclusion of exons that are skipped
in the RefSeq transcript. Therefore, we examined frameshift
predictions in detail and found that in 22 cases the EST con-
firmed frameshift is not caused by exon skipping but by a
different splice event. Remarkably, the target reading frame
of the predicted shift is always identical to the confirmed one.
Thus, a frameshift prediction should be taken as a strong hint
that a frameshift event exists in the vicinity of the skipped
exon. These 22 predictions are not considered further. Alto-
gether only 39 (21%) predictions remain that can not be
confirmed by existing expressed sequences.
Pfam score: 100
intron retention:  score >= 110exon skipping:  score >= 110
Pfam domain exons
prediction
Figure 2. Schematic representation of the approach for non-EST based prediction of exon skipping and intron retention events. Given are four coding exons and the
respective intron sequences. Assume a Pfam domain is encoded by exons 1–4 and the respective Pfam score is 100. For the prediction, hypothetical novel splice
variants are checked to find those with a higher Pfam score by at least 10. Exons are shown as boxes; dashed lines indicate the splicing patterns; open red box: skipped
exon; and filled red box: retained intron.
STOP
Pfam
C
B
A
D
E
Figure 3. Classification of predicted alternative splice events. (A) Skipping of
a single exon. (B) Skipping of multiple consecutive exons (shown here for two
exons). (C) Intron retention (shown as red dashed box). (D) Hidden exon: the
algorithm found an ORF (start and stop codon are indicated) within an intron
that encodes a Pfam domain (blue box) which indicates the existence of a hidden
exon (gray dashed box). (E) Complex events involve any combination of
(A–D). Here, we show an example with two skipped exons. Exons are shown
as gray boxes and dashed lines indicate the splicing patterns.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 17 5615
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Then, we compared the number of ESTs that match the
upstream and downstream exon of confirmed and unconfirmed
predictions to see whether the exon skipping events in both
groups have an equal chance to be detected. The downstream
exon of the 119 confirmed alternatives is covered on average
by 81 ESTs, which is four times higher than the average
coverage of 20 for the unconfirmed predictions (median 14
versus 5). The upstream exon has similar EST counts in both
groups (average 77 versus 13). This suggests that insufficient
EST coverage may be the reason for the current lack of con-
firmation. Furthermore, we found that the unconfirmed exons
are on average 688 nt further upstream of the 30 mRNA end.
Given the average EST length of 530 nt and that most ESTs
are sampled from the 30 end, this may contribute to their lower
EST coverage.
To check which percentage of single exon skippings can be
expected by chance, we randomly chose 2 828 Pfam domain
exons. To exclude exons with an EST coverage too low for
detection of skipping events, we only considered exons with at
least 20 hits for the upstream and downstream exon which
gives a median coverage of 48 (note, this is very conservative
compared with 14 matches to the downstream exon of con-
firmed single exon skipping events). We only found for 15%
(424 of 2.828 exons) EST/cDNA evidence for exon skipping.
In contrast, 75% (119 of 158, excluding 25 with a different
confirmed event) of the predicted single exons are EST/cDNA
confirmed. This indicates that our predictions are signific-
antly enriched in real alternative exons (Fisher’s exact test:
P < 0.0001).
We compared the number of ESTs/cDNAs that contain or
miss a confirmed single exon. On average these exons are
skipped in 39 cases and included in only 8 (5:1 skipping-
inclusion ratio) which contributes to the high overall con-
firmation rate for predicted single-exon events. However,
the inclusion in several transcripts and at least one RefSeq
demonstrates that these exons are real. Alternative exons with
a low inclusion rate are often not conserved in mouse and such
exons are the result of exon creation or loss (18). Therefore,
we searched for their existence in the mouse genome by con-
sidering the exons as well as introns of the orthologous mouse
loci. For 15 single exons we failed to identify either an ortho-
logous mouse gene or the exons that flank the single exon. For
the remaining 104 exons, we only found an orthologous mouse
exon for 45 (43%) which is in agreement with (18). In recent
studies, Sorek et al. (20) and Yeo et al. (24) predicted a total of
952 and 2.092 exons to be alternative, respectively. Only 18%
(21 of 119) of the confirmed single exons predicted here are
contained in this combined exon set which may be attributed to
the fact that 42% (19 of 45) of the orthologous human–mouse
exon pairs have sequence identities of <95% [this cut-off was
used in (20)]. Moreover, the exons predicted by Yeo et al. (24)
have a tendency not to overlap InterPro domains which is in
contrast to most of our predictions. Thus, the exons addressed
by our Pfam based approach and the comparative methods
have different characteristics and both approaches comple-
ment each other.
Multiple skipped consecutive exons
In the genome-wide scan, we predicted 57 multiple exon skip-
ping events and found EST/cDNA evidence for 14 of them
(Supplementary Table 2). Similar to single exons, another 16
frameshift predictions are confirmed by different splice events,
and the remaining 27 predictions are unconfirmed (Figure 4A).
Again EST coverage of the downstream exon is lower for the
unconfirmed predictions (average 42 versus 23 and median 25
versus 7). Of all 57 predictions 30 events have two skipped
exons, 14 three skipped exons and 13 more than three exons.
We found that no prediction with more than three exons is
confirmed and that the percentage of unconfirmed predictions
increases with the number of skipped exons (Figure 4B). Thus,
it is conceivable that some predictions are false positives and
that the Pfam score is increased just by chance. This holds
especially for predictions with many skipped exons since the
number of possible exon–exon combinations goes up. Indeed,
we found that the average Pfam score increase for the uncon-
firmed predictions is lower than for the confirmed predictions
(19 versus 28) which suggests that an increase of the threshold
value with the number of skipped exons should eliminate
many false positive predictions.
Retained introns
We predicted 67 intron retention events and found EST/cDNA
evidence for 65 (97%) of them (Supplementary Table 3). Only
ESTs with a spliced intron upstream or downstream were
accepted to reduce the possibility of partially spliced ESTs.
We found that 36 (54% of 67) of these introns do not have
consensus splice sites (GT-AG or GC-AG). These introns can
be the result of annotation or mapping errors of the RefSeq
transcripts or the consequence of allele-specific splicing (31)
since some of those have splice sites that diverge from the
consensus in only a single mutation (e.g. an AA instead of an
AG acceptor site). Therefore, some of the predicted events do
not involve real introns which may contribute to this extremely
Table 1. Summary of the genome-wide scan
Number of
predictions
Confirmeda Different event
confirmedb
Unconfirmed
Single exon skipping 183 119 65% 25 14% 39 21%
Multiple exon skipping 57 14 25% 16 28% 27 47%
Intron retention 67 37 55% 28 42% 2 3%
Hidden-exon event 5 – – 5 100% – –
Complex event 9 – – 6 67% 3 33%
Sum 321 170 53% 80 25% 71 22%
aExactly the predicted event is confirmed.
bA different event is confirmed (alternative donor/acceptor, inclusion of an exon that is skipped in the given transcript, alternative transcription start); most of
these events involve frameshifts.
5616 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 17
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
high confirmation rate. However, 25 (81%) retention events
of the remaining 31 introns with consensus splice sites are
confirmed by other RefSeq transcripts which indicates that
they are real and not artifacts.
We classified predicted intron retentions into three groups
(Figure 5). In case of ‘I-introns’ the internal region of a Pfam is
encoded by the intron and both neighboring exons also con-
tribute to the domain. ‘N-introns’ encode a novel N-terminal
domain part and, thus, only the downstream exons add to the
Pfam. Likewise, ‘C-introns’ encode a novel C-terminal Pfam
part and only the upstream exons contributes to the domain. Of
the 67 predictions, 23 are I-introns and all are experimentally
confirmed. Of the 15 N-intron predictions, 13 are confirmed
by at least partial EST matches to one intron–exon boundary.
Eleven of them do not have a continuous ORF which is a strong
indication for the existence of alternative acceptor sites further
upstream of the Pfam encoding exons. Indeed, 10 of those have
a confirmed alternative acceptor and we found one alternative
transcription start. The remaining two N-introns with a con-
tinuous reading frame are confirmed by EST matches. Finally,
all of the 29 predicted C-intron retention events are confirmed
(12 intron retentions and 17 alternative donors). Interestingly,
a PTC owing to the retention of the last intron can not trigger
NMD and these splice events result in protein isoforms with an
altered Pfam domain at their C-terminus.
Hidden exon events
In the genome-wide scan, we also found seven predictions
that involve introns containing an ORF that encodes the com-
plete or a part of a Pfam without the neighboring exons
(Supplementary Table 4). Thus, it is possible that an exon
STOP
STOP
I-intron
N-intron
continuous reading frame non-continuous reading frame
C-intron
Figure 5. Classification of intron retention events. I-introns have a continuous reading frame and both neighboring exons also encode the Pfam domain. For N- and C-
introns only the downstream and upstream exon encode the Pfam domain, respectively, and they may not have a continuous reading frame. Exons are shown as gray
boxes with solid lines, introns as a line and a retained intron as a box with dashed lines. The position of the Pfam domain is shown as a blue box below the gene
structure. Stop codons in the non-continuous reading frames and splicing of an intron (dashed line) are indicated.
37%
33%
30%
2 skipped exons >3 skipped exons
23%
77%
unconfirmed
confirmed
different event
3 skipped exons
22%
14%64%
47%
25%
28%
B
A
Figure 4. Percentage of confirmed multiple-exon skipping events. (A) Percentage of confirmed, confirmed by a different splice event and unconfirmed predictions
with more than one skipped exon. (B) Percentage of confirmed, confirmed by a different splice event and unconfirmed predictions divided into the number of
skipped exons.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 17 5617
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
which is skipped in the given transcript is hidden in this intron.
Therefore, we examined these hits and for five of them we
found EST confirmation of hidden exons. For example, intron
5 of the NM_013954 transcript of NOX1 contains seven altern-
ative exons that encode parts of the ‘Ferric reductase like
transmembrane component’ domain (PF01794). These exons
are included in another transcript of NOX1 (NM_007052).
Manual inspection of the remaining two unconfirmed predic-
tions (NM_152476 intron 10, NM_206894 intron 5) with the
Ensembl genome browser revealed that these RefSeq tran-
scripts falsely span two non-overlapping genes and that the
predicted intronic parts are exons of the downstream genes.
Thus, these two cases are due to annotation errors and were
excluded.
Complex events
We also predicted nine complex events (Supplementary
Table 5). In each case the given transcript is a clear NMD
candidate and our prediction aims at maintaining a reading
frame. For six of the nine cases manual inspection revealed
other splice events like the multiple usage of alternative donor
and acceptor sites. For example, our prediction for the NMD
candidate NM_152247 of CPT1B is to skip exon 22 and 26
to restore the reading frame. Instead of skipping two exons, an
alternative acceptor 5 nt upstream of the beginning of exon
22 and an alternative donor 169 nt downstream of exon 26 is
used in another transcript of CPT1B (NM_152246) to produce
a non-NMD splice form.
Experimental verification of unconfirmed predictions
Using RT–PCR with primers from the flanking exons, we
tested 11 randomly chosen unconfirmed single-exon
skipping events in a pool of 16 human tissues (Supplementary
Table 6). In 27% (3 of 11) the predicted exon skipping was
observed (DHRS exon 7, CDH2 exon 11 and MYO9 exon 6).
Since multiple exon skipping events have a lower EST con-
firmation rate compared with single exon events and no case of
a four-exon skipping is EST confirmed, we selected three two-
exon, one three-exon and two four-exon skippings for experi-
mental verification. Furthermore, the two unconfirmed N-
introns were tested. We did not observe the expected splice
variants for these eight predictions. Alternatively to the pre-
dicted retention of intron 1 for ZFP37 (NM_003408), tran-
scription and/or translation can start in the first intron which
would have the same consequences for the Pfam domain, but
this putative transcript can not be amplified using a forward
primer for the annotated exon 1. In general, our experiments
may suffer from some of the problems mentioned above for
ESTs, since specific splice events can be restricted to narrow
windows in space and time.
Location of alternative peptide-cassette exons within
Pfam domain structures
Alternative splicing has a tendency to coincide with domain
boundaries and to avoid the interior of functional and struc-
tural domains (5,32). Since our single exon events might
interfere with the Pfam domain structure as indicated by
the low inclusion rate, we were interested in finding out where
confirmed peptide-cassette exons are located with respect to
the secondary structure and protein surface. The secondary
structures and the surface accessibility of residues were com-
puted from known 3D structures of Pfam domains. Since in
each case the structure does not include the alternative exon,
in the following, we consider the location of the exon–exon
junction of both neighboring exons. We mapped 28 alternative
exon junctions and, as a control group, 80 constitutive exon
junctions to these secondary structures. The residue at the exon
junction was classified as being located in an alpha-helix, in a
beta-sheet or in a non-regular element. We found a significant
difference between the alternative and constitutive junctions
(c2 ¼ 6.76, df ¼ 2 and P ¼ 0.034) with a striking preference
of alternative junctions for non-regular elements and the
avoidance of helices (Figure 6A). To rule out that this result
is biased by inaccuracies in the secondary structure assignment
which is sometimes problematic at the end of structural ele-
ments, we considered a broader context (±1 residue) around
the exon junction. We classified the context to be ‘inside a
structural element’ if all three residues are either in a helix
or in a sheet. If the three residues of the context are in two
different structural elements or if all are inside a non-regular
element, the context is classified as ‘outside a structural ele-
ment’. Again we found a significant preference of the altern-
ative exon junctions to be located outside structural elements
(c2 ¼ 4.39, df ¼ 1 and P ¼ 0.0362) (Figure 6B). An inter-
esting example is the BAR domain that consists of four long
helices. While the constitutive junctions of all exons of BIN1
that encode this domain are located within these helices, the
position of the alternative junction is in the loop between two
helices (Figure 6C). Furthermore, alternative junctions have a
tendency to be located at the protein surface (±1 residue con-
text, average 2.96 versus 2.36, higher values indicate exposed
residues). This clearly shows that alternative exon junctions
are non-randomly distributed within Pfam domain structures.
The preferred position at the surface and between secondary
structure elements argues against a destructive role of most of
these splice events.
DISCUSSION
We describe an approach that uses information about Pfam
domains to predict exon skipping and intron retention events
ab initio. Only the genomic sequence and gene structure
annotation are required. Our approach is able to predict altern-
ative exons regardless whether their size is divisible by three
or not and is independent of the existence of orthologs
in another species. We have shown that this approach can
reliably identify exon skipping and intron retention events
ab initio and that it complements existing comparative meth-
ods. Our approach has two limitations. First, it is restricted to
the regions of a gene that encode Pfam domains. However,
Pfam is one of the most comprehensive descriptions of func-
tional domains as Pfam domains match 75% of all proteins in
Swiss-Prot/TrEMBL and cover 53% of all residues (26). Apart
from Pfam domains, the general approach can use other func-
tional motif descriptions such as those contained in the
InterPro database. Additionally the constant growth of these
databases will lead to a higher coverage and more predictions.
Second, our approach is restricted to cases where the Pfam
score is increased because it is unlikely that this occurs just by
chance. Many splice events result in a deletion of functional
domains which decrease the overall Pfam score. Such events
5618 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 17
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
cannot be predicted by this approach since a strategy that
arbitrarily predicts an exon to be alternative will also result
in a lower Pfam score.
In this study, we considered a total of 18 572 human RefSeq
transcripts and made a prediction for 307 (1.7%) of them. We
only predicted exon skipping and intron retention events as no
other putative, alternative splice sites are given. However
indirectly, for a number of predictions that result in a frame-
shift, we found an alternative donor/acceptor site or an exon
that is skipped in the given transcript. These alternative splice
events cause the same frameshift that is predicted by our
algorithm. Therefore, we evaluated the prediction if the posi-
tions of the additional splice sites are given. In all examples
tested, the algorithm uses the additional splice sites and pro-
duces a splice form that equals the known transcript (data not
shown). Moreover, C-intron retentions and hidden exon pre-
dictions were only found for the last intron in the transcript,
since most of them do not have a continuous reading frame,
and we excluded hypothetical splice forms that are NMD
candidates. Numerous of these events in other introns can be
found by relaxing the NMD criterion. Again, such events can
be predicted if the corresponding alternative splice sites are
included. It seems promising to include other splice sites, e.g.
those derived from suboptimal exons which can be found
by gene prediction programs such as Genscan (33). This
will increase the number of predictions with alternative
alternative exon junction
constitutive exon junction
outside structural element
inside structural element
constitutive exon junctionsalternative exon junctions
25%
41%61%
14%
40%
19%
79%
21%
44%
56%
helix
sheet
Q9Y092                 QNLGKVDRTADEIFDDHLNNFNRQQASANRLQKEFNNYIRCVRAAQAASK
sec. struct            TTTTTTTTTHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH
Q9Y092                 TLMDSVCEIYEPQWSGYDALQAQTGASESLWADFAHKLGDQVLIPLNTYT
sec. struct            HHHHHHHHHTTTTTTTHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHTTTHHHHHHHH
Q9Y092                 GQFPEMKKKVEKRNRKLIDYDGQRHSFQNLQANANKRKDDVKLTKGREQL
sec. struct            HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHTTTTTTTEETTTTTTHHHH
Q9Y092                 EEARRTYEILNTELHDELPALYDSRILFLVTNLQTLFATEQVFHNETAKI
sec. struct            HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH
Q9Y092                 YSELEAIVDK
sec. struct HHHHHHHHHH
C
B
A nonregular
Figure 6. Location of alternative and constitutive exon junctions within Pfam domains. (A) Analysis of residues at the exon junction with respect to location in a
helix, in a sheet or in non-regular elements. (B) Analysis of the ±1 amino acid context around exon junctions. (C) BAR domain PF03114 as an example: The exon
junctions of BIN1 (NM_139345) are mapped to the secondary structure of the BAR domain using the known structure (PDB 1uru) of CG8604-PA (Swiss-Prot
Q9Y092) as a template. While all constitutive exon junctions are located within helices, the alternative junction is in the loop. If the exon junction splits a codon, only
this amino acid is highlighted and otherwise, if the junction is between two codons, both residues are highlighted. H: helix, E: sheet, T: non-regular.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 17 5619
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
donor/acceptor sites as well as exons that are hidden in introns
and whose inclusion is not seen in available expressed
sequences.
We have shown that sequence inserts inside Pfam domains
prefer to be located at the protein surface and strongly avoid a
position within secondary structure elements which is in line
with their negative impact on a Pfam domain (based on the
score), their low inclusion level and their low conservation in
mouse. This suggests that most of these inserts alter the
domain structure and function which is in contrast to other
alternative splice variants that delete an entire Pfam domain or
an essential part of it (5). A probable evolutionary scenario is
the exonization of a part of an intron followed by a selection
pressure assuring that the novel exon is rarely included to
produce enough amount of the functional protein. If the inclu-
sion of this exon has no drastic consequences for the domain
structure, it might aquire an important regulatory function that
can be used by the cell. Indeed, we found examples in the
literature where such splice events have important functional
consequences. For example, a splice form of TRAF2 with a
seven amino acid insert into a Ring finger domain acts as a
dominant negative inhibitor of TNFR2-dependent NFkB
activation (34). Alternatively spliced inserts modulate the
structure of loops at a protein interaction surface of Neurexin
Ib which influences the binding of protein ligands (35). How-
ever, even small inserts may result in a change of the overall
protein fold. For example, insertion of nine residues into the C2
domain of Piccolo owing to inclusion of exon 15 leads to a
rearrangement of the b-sheets which explains the drastic dif-
ferences in Ca2+ affinity for both splice forms (36). A 17 amino
acid insert for UAP1 modifies the architecture of the active site
and alters substrate specificity (37). We believe that many of
the splice forms found in this study are biologically interesting
as they affect a protein domain and presumably alter its struc-
ture and function.
Intron retention seems to be a rare splice event with an
estimated frequency of 6% (38) and they are difficult to detect
because of unspliced or partially spliced ESTs. Most of the
intron retentions predicted here contribute to Pfam domains
and the retention is confirmed by the existence of another
RefSeq transcript. Therefore, they are probable to represent
important alternative splice forms (39). Since nearly all
predicted intron retention and hidden exon events are EST
confirmed, we conclude that intronic ORFs encoding Pfam
domains are very likely to become exonic in another transcript.
Owing to a high number of human ESTs and intensive
biomedical research, the human transcriptome presumably is
the best characterized one. In contrast, the number of ESTs is
much lower for other species, e.g. chicken has <532 000 ESTs
and Drosophila <383 000. Even in the well-annotated genome
of Caenorhabditis elegans there are thousands of genes with-
out EST/cDNA support (40). As alternative splicing is
assumed to be equally frequent in other species (41), ab initio
prediction should be very useful for species with low EST
numbers. Therefore, we believe that the application of our
approach to other organisms will lead to the discovery of
numerous novel alternative splice events.
SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Supplementary Data are available at NAR Online.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Ivonne Go¨rlich for the expert technical assistance
and Anke Busch for critical reading of the manuscript. Funding
to pay the Open Access publication charges for this article was
provided by Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Johnson,J.M., Castle,J., Garrett-Engele,P., Kan,Z., Loerch,P.M.,
Armour,C.D., Santos,R., Schadt,E.E., Stoughton,R. and Shoemaker,D.D.
(2003) Genome-wide survey of human alternative pre-mRNA splicing
with exon junction microarrays. Science, 302, 2141–2144.
2. Modrek,B. and Lee,C. (2002) A genomic view of alternative splicing.
Nature Genet., 30, 13–19.
3. Graveley,B.R. (2001) Alternative splicing: increasing diversity in the
proteomic world. Trends Genet., 17, 100–107.
4. Hiller,M., Huse,K., Szafranski,K., Jahn,N., Hampe,J., Schreiber,S.,
Backofen,R. and Platzer,M. (2004) Widespread occurrence of alternative
splicing at NAGNAG acceptors contributes to proteome plasticity.
Nature Genet., 36, 1255–1257.
5. Kriventseva,E.V., Koch,I., Apweiler,R., Vingron,M., Bork,P.,
Gelfand,M.S. and Sunyaev,S. (2003) Increase of functional diversity by
alternative splicing. Trends Genet., 19, 124–128.
6. Resch,A., Xing,Y., Modrek,B., Gorlick,M., Riley,R. and Lee,C. (2004)
Assessing the impact of alternative splicing on domain interactions in the
human proteome. J. Proteome Res., 3, 76–83.
7. Stamm,S., Ben-Ari,S., Rafalska,I., Tang,Y., Zhang,Z., Toiber,D.,
Thanaraj,T.A. and Soreq,H. (2005) Function of alternative splicing.
Gene, 344, 1–20.
8. Garcia-Blanco,M.A., Baraniak,A.P. and Lasda,E.L. (2004) Alternative
splicing in disease and therapy. Nat. Biotechnol., 22, 535–546.
9. Xu,Q. and Lee,C. (2003) Discovery of novel splice forms and functional
analysis of cancer-specific alternative splicing in human expressed
sequences. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 5635–5643.
10. Brett,D., Hanke,J., Lehmann,G., Haase,S., Delbruck,S., Krueger,S.,
Reich,J. and Bork,P. (2000) EST comparison indicates 38% of human
mRNAs contain possible alternative splice forms. FEBS Lett., 474, 83–86.
11. Clark,F. and Thanaraj,T.A. (2002) Categorization and characterization of
transcript-confirmed constitutively and alternatively spliced introns and
exons from human. Hum. Mol. Genet., 11, 451–464.
12. Mironov,A.A., Fickett,J.W. and Gelfand,M.S. (1999) Frequent
alternative splicing of human genes. Genome Res., 9, 1288–1293.
13. Modrek,B., Resch,A., Grasso,C. and Lee,C. (2001) Genome-wide
detection of alternative splicing in expressed sequences of human genes.
Nucleic Acids Res., 29, 2850–2859.
14. Zavolan,M., Kondo,S., Schonbach,C., Adachi,J., Hume,D.A.,
Hayashizaki,Y. andGaasterland,T. (2003) Impact of alternative initiation,
splicing, and termination on the diversity of the mRNA transcripts
encoded by the mouse transcriptome. Genome Res., 13, 1290–1300.
15. Matos,P., Collard,J.G. and Jordan,P. (2003) Tumor-related alternatively
spliced Rac1b is not regulated by Rho-GDP dissociation inhibitors and
exhibits selective downstream signaling. J. Biol. Chem., 278,
50442–50448.
16. Stamm,S. (2002) Signals and their transduction pathways regulating
alternative splicing: a new dimension of the human genome.
Hum. Mol. Genet., 11, 2409–2416.
17. Yeo,G., Holste,D., Kreiman,G. and Burge,C.B. (2004) Variation in
alternative splicing across human tissues. Genome Biol., 5, R74.
18. Modrek,B. and Lee,C.J. (2003) Alternative splicing in the human, mouse
and rat genomes is associated with an increased frequency of exon
creation and/or loss. Nature Genet., 34, 177–180.
19. Le,K., Mitsouras,K., Roy,M., Wang,Q., Xu,Q., Nelson,S.F. and Lee,C.
(2004) Detecting tissue-specific regulation of alternative splicing as a
qualitative change in microarray data. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, e180.
20. Sorek,R., Shemesh,R., Cohen,Y., Basechess,O., Ast,G. and Shamir,R.
(2004) A non-EST-based method for exon skipping prediction.
Genome Res., 14, 1617–1623.
21. Sorek,R. and Ast,G. (2003) Intronic sequences flanking alternatively
spliced exons are conserved between human and mouse. Genome Res.,
13, 1631–1637.
5620 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 17
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
22. Dror,G., Sorek,R. and Shamir,R. (2005) Accurate identification of
alternatively spliced exons using support vector machine.
Bioinformatics, 21, 897–901.
23. Philipps,D.L., Park,J.W. and Graveley,B.R. (2004) A computational and
experimental approach toward a priori identification of alternatively
spliced exons. RNA, 10, 1838–1844.
24. Yeo,G.W., Van Nostrand,E., Holste,D., Poggio,T. and Burge,C.B. (2005)
Identification and analysis of alternative splicing events conserved in
human and mouse. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 102, 2850–2855.
25. Ohler,U., Shomron,N. and Burge,C.B. (2005) Recognition of unknown
conserved alternatively spliced exons. PLoS Comp. Biol., 1, e15.
26. Bateman,A., Coin,L., Durbin,R., Finn,R.D., Hollich,V., Griffiths-
Jones,S., Khanna,A., Marshall,M., Moxon,S., Sonnhammer,E.L. et al.
(2004) The Pfam protein families database. Nucleic Acids Res., 32,
D138–D141.
27. Hiller,M., Backofen,R., Heymann,S., Busch,A., Glaesser,T.M. and
Freytag,J.C. (2004) Efficient prediction of alternative splice forms using
protein domain homology. In Silico Biol., 4, 195–208.
28. Maquat,L.E. (2004) Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay: splicing,
translation and mRNP dynamics. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 5, 89–99.
29. Rost,B. and Sander,C. (1993) Prediction of protein secondary structure at
better than 70% accuracy. J. Mol. Biol., 232, 584–599.
30. Hiller,M., Huse,K., Platzer,M. and Backofen,R. (2005) Creation and
disruption of protein features by alternative splicing - a novel mechanism
to modulate function. Genome Biol., 6, R58.
31. Nembaware,V., Wolfe,K.H., Bettoni,F., Kelso,J. and Seoighe,C. (2004)
Allele-specific transcript isoforms in human. FEBS Lett., 577, 233–238.
32. Homma,K., Kikuno,R.F., Nagase,T., Ohara,O. and Nishikawa,K. (2004)
Alternative splice variants encoding unstable protein domains exist in the
human brain. J. Mol. Biol., 343, 1207–1220.
33. Burge,C. and Karlin,S. (1997) Prediction of complete gene structures in
human genomic DNA. J. Mol. Biol., 268, 78–94.
34. Brink,R. and Lodish,H.F. (1998) Tumor necrosis factor receptor
(TNFR)-associated factor 2A (TRAF2A), a TRAF2 splice variant with an
extended RING finger domain that inhibits TNFR2-mediated NF-kappaB
activation. J. Biol. Chem., 273, 4129–4134.
35. Rudenko,G., Nguyen,T., Chelliah,Y., Sudhof,T.C. and Deisenhofer,J.
(1999) The structure of the ligand-binding domain of neurexin Ibeta:
regulation of LNS domain function by alternative splicing. Cell,
99, 93–101.
36. Garcia,J., Gerber,S.H., Sugita,S., Sudhof,T.C. and Rizo,J. (2004)
A conformational switch in the Piccolo C2A domain regulated by
alternative splicing. Nature Struct. Mol. Biol., 11, 45–53.
37. Peneff,C., Ferrari,P., Charrier,V., Taburet,Y., Monnier,C., Zamboni,V.,
Winter,J., Harnois,M., Fassy,F. and Bourne,Y. (2001) Crystal structures
of two human pyrophosphorylase isoforms in complexes with
UDPGlc(Gal)NAc: role of the alternatively spliced insert in the enzyme
oligomeric assembly and active site architecture. EMBO J., 20,
6191–6202.
38. Thanaraj,T.A. and Stamm,S. (2003) Prediction and statistical analysis of
alternatively spliced exons. Prog. Mol. Subcell. Biol., 31, 1–31.
39. Galante,P.A., Sakabe,N.J., Kirschbaum-Slager,N. and de Souza,S.J.
(2004) Detection and evaluation of intron retention events in the
human transcriptome. RNA, 10, 757–765.
40. Wei,C., Lamesch,P., Arumugam,M., Rosenberg,J., Hu,P., Vidal,M. and
Brent,M.R. (2005) Closing in on the C. elegans ORFeome by cloning
TWINSCAN predictions. Genome Res., 15, 577–582.
41. Brett,D., Pospisil,H., Valcarcel,J., Reich,J. and Bork,P. (2002)
Alternative splicing and genome complexity. Nature Genet.,
30, 29–30.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 17 5621
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
