GenBank: update
Dennis A. Benson, Ilene Karsch-Mizrachi, David J. Lipman, James Ostell and
David L. Wheeler*
National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health,
Building 38A, 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894, USA
Received September 16, 2003; Revised and Accepted September 22, 2003
ABSTRACT
GenBank (R) is a comprehensive database that con-
tains publicly available DNA sequences for more
than 140 000 named organisms, obtained primarily
through submissions from individual laboratories
and batch submissions from large-scale sequencing
projects. Most submissions are made using the
BankIt (web) or Sequin program and accession
numbers are assigned by GenBank staff upon
receipt. Daily data exchange with the EMBL Data
Library in the UK and the DNA Data Bank of Japan
helps ensure worldwide coverage. GenBank is
accessible through NCBI's retrieval system, Entrez,
which integrates data from the major DNA and
protein sequence databases along with taxonomy,
genome mapping, protein structure and domain
information, and the biomedical journal literature
via PubMed. BLAST provides sequence similarity
searches of GenBank and other sequence data-
bases. Complete bimonthly releases and daily
updates of the GenBank database are available by
FTP. To access GenBank and its related retrieval
and analysis services, go to the NCBI home page at:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.
INTRODUCTION
GenBank (1) is a comprehensive public database of nucleotide
sequences and supporting bibliographic and biological anno-
tation, built and distributed by the National Center for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI), a division of the
National Library of Medicine (NLM), located on the campus
of the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) in Bethesda,
MD, USA.
NCBI builds GenBank primarily from the submission of
sequence data from authors and from the bulk submission of
expressed sequence tag (EST), genome survey sequence
(GSS) and other high-throughput data from sequencing
centers. The US Of®ce of Patents and Trademarks (USPTO)
also contributes sequences from issued patents. GenBank
incorporates sequences submitted to the EMBL Data Library
(2) in the UK and the DNA Data Bank of Japan (DDBJ) (3) as
part of a long-standing international collaboration between the
three databases in which data is exchanged daily to ensure a
uniform and comprehensive collection of sequence informa-
tion. NCBI makes the GenBank data available at no cost over
the internet, via FTP access and a wide range of web-based
retrieval and analysis services which operate on the GenBank
data (4).
ORGANIZATION OF THE DATABASE
GenBank continues to grow at an exponential rate with 9
million new sequences added over the past 12 months. As of
Release 137 in August 2003, GenBank contained over 33.9
billion nucleotide bases from 27.2 million individual
sequences. Complete genomes (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/Genomes/index.html) represent a growing portion of the
database, with over 40 of more than 130 complete microbial
genomes in GenBank deposited over the past year. The
number of eukaryote genomes for which coverage and
assembly are good continues to increase with over a dozen
such assemblies now available, including that of the reference
human genome.
Sequence-based taxonomy
Database sequences are classi®ed and can be queried using a
comprehensive sequence-based taxonomy (http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/taxonomyhome.html) developed by
NCBI in collaboration with EMBL and DDBJ and with the
valuable assistance of external advisors and curators. Over
140 000 species are represented in GenBank and new species
are being added at the rate of over 1700 per month. About 26%
of the sequences in GenBank are of human origin and 20% of
all sequences are human ESTs. After Homo sapiens, the top
species in GenBank in terms of number of bases are Mus
musculus, Rattus norvegicus, Danio rerio, Oryza sativa,
Drosophila melanogaster, Zea mays, Arabidopsis thaliana
and Gallus gallus.
GenBank records and divisions
Each GenBank entry includes a concise description of the
sequence, the scienti®c name and taxonomy of the source
organism, bibliographic references and a table of features
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/collab/FT/index.html) listing
areas of biological signi®cance, such as coding regions and
their protein translations, transcription units, repeat regions
and sites of mutation or modi®cation.
The ®les in the GenBank distribution have traditionally
been divided into `divisions' that roughly correspond to
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 301 435 5950; Fax: +1 301 480 9241; Email: wheeler@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue D23±D26
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkh045
taxonomic groups such as bacteria (BCT), viruses (VRL),
primates (PRI) and rodents (ROD). In recent years, divisions
have been added to support speci®c sequencing strategies.
These include divisions for EST, GSS, high-throughput
genomic (HTG) and high-throughput cDNA (HTC) sequen-
ces, making a total of 17 divisions. For convenience in ®le
transfer, the larger divisions, such as the EST and PRI, are
partitioned into multiple ®les when posting the bimonthly
GenBank releases on the NCBI's FTP site.
ESTs
ESTs continue to be the major source of new sequence records
and gene sequences. Over the past year the number of ESTs
has increased by over 45% to a total of 18.1 million sequences
representing over 580 different organisms. The top ®ve
organisms represented in the EST division are H.sapiens
(5.4 million records), M.musculus (3.8 million records),
R.norvegicus (540 000 records), Triticum aestivum (500 000
records) and Ciona intestinalis (490 000 records). As part of
its daily processing of GenBank EST data, the NCBI identi®es
through BLAST searches all homologies for new EST
sequences and incorporates that information into the compan-
ion database, dbEST (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/dbEST/
index.html) (5). The data in dbEST is further processed to
produce the UniGene database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
UniGene/) of gene-oriented sequence clusters described more
fully in (4).
Sequence-tagged sites (STSs) and GSSs
The STS division of GenBank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
dbSTS/index.html) contains over 240 000 sequences including
anonymous STSs based on genomic sequence as well as gene-
based STSs derived from the 3¢ ends of genes and ESTs. These
STS records usually include primer sequences, annotations
and PCR conditions.
The GSS division of GenBank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/dbGSS/index.html) has grown over the past year by 73%
to a total of 6.4 million records with over 2.0 billion
nucleotides. GSS records represent `random' genomic
sequences, and are predominantly single reads from bacterial
arti®cial chromosomes (`BAC-ends') used in a variety of
genome sequencing projects. The most highly represented
species in the GSS division are Z.mays (1.3 million records),
M.musculus (952 000 records), H.sapiens (893 000 records)
and Brassica oleracea (595 000 records). Human data have
been used (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/clone) along
with the STS records in tiling the BACs for the Human
Genome Project (6).
HTG and HTC sequences
The HTG division of GenBank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
HTGS/) contains un®nished large-scale genomic records that
are in transition to a ®nished state (7). These records are
designated as Phase 0±3 depending on the quality of the data.
Upon reaching Phase 3, the ®nished state, HTG records are
moved into the appropriate organism division of GenBank. As
of release 137 of GenBank, the HTG division comprised some
12 billion bp of sequence.
The HTC division of GenBank accommodates high-
throughput cDNA sequences. HTCs are of draft quality, but
may contain 5¢-UTRs and 3¢-UTRs, partial coding regions and
introns. HTC sequences that are ®nished and of high quality
are moved to the appropriate organism GenBank division.
GenBank release 137 contained more than 148 000 HTC
sequences totaling over 200 million bases. A recent project
generating HTC data has been described (8) and other projects
are listed at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/¯cdna/.
Sequence identi®ers and accession numbers
Each GenBank record, consisting of both a sequence and its
annotations, is assigned a stable and unique identi®er, the
accession number, which remains constant over the lifetime of
the record even when there is a change to the sequence or
annotation. The DNA sequence within a GenBank record is
also assigned a unique identi®er, called a `GI', that appears on
the VERSION line of GenBank ¯at®le records following
the accession number. A third identi®er of the form
`Accession.version', also displayed on the VERSION line of
¯at®le records, consolidates the information present in the GI
and accession numbers. An entry appearing in the database for
the ®rst time has an `Accession.version' identi®er equivalent
to the ACCESSION number of the GenBank record followed
by `.1' to indicate the ®rst version of the sequence for the
record, e.g. ACCESSION AF000001 VERSION AF000001.1
GI: 987654321. When a change is made to a sequence given in
a GenBank record, a new GI number is issued to the sequence
and the version extension of the `Accession.version' identi®er
is incremented. The accession number for the record as a
whole remains unchanged and the older sequence remains
available under the old `Accession.version' identi®er and GI.
A similar system tracks changes in the corresponding
protein translations using `Accession.version' identi®ers com-
prised of a protein accession number, e.g. AAA00001,
followed by a version number. These identi®ers appear as
quali®ers for CDS features in the FEATURES table portion of
a GenBank entry, e.g. /protein_id=`AAA00001.1' Protein
sequence translations also receive their own unique GI
number, which appears as a second quali®er on the CDS
feature: /db_xref=`GI:1233445'.
BUILDING THE DATABASE
The data in GenBank, and the collaborating databases EMBL
and DDBJ, are submitted primarily by individual authors to
one of the three databases, or by sequencing centers as batches
of ESTs, STSs, GSSs, HTCs or HTGs. Data are exchanged
daily with DDBJ and EMBL so that the daily updates from
NCBI servers incorporate the most recently available
sequence data from all sources.
Direct submission
Virtually all records enter GenBank as direct electronic
submissions (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Genbank/index.
html), with the majority of authors using the BankIt or
Sequin program. Many journals require authors with sequence
data to submit the data to a public database as a condition of
publication.
GenBank staff can usually assign an accession number to a
sequence submission within two working days of receipt, and
do so at a rate of almost 700 per day. The accession number
serves as con®rmation that the sequence has been submitted
and allows readers of articles in which the sequence is cited to
D24 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue
retrieve the relevant data. Direct submissions receive a quality
assurance review that includes checks for vector contamin-
ation, proper translation of coding regions, correct taxonomy
and correct bibliographic citations. A draft of the GenBank
record is passed back to the author for review before it enters
the database. Authors may ask that their sequences be kept
con®dential until the time of publication. Since GenBank
policy requires that deposited sequence data be made public
when the sequence or accession number is published, authors
are instructed to inform GenBank staff of the publication date
of the article in which the sequence is cited in order to ensure
timely release of the data. Although only the submitting
scientist is permitted to modify sequence data or annotations,
all users are encouraged to report lags in releasing data or
possible errors or omissions to GenBank at update@ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov.
The NCBI works closely with sequencing centers to ensure
timely incorporation of bulk data into GenBank for public
release. GenBank offers special batch procedures for large-
scale sequencing groups to facilitate data submission, includ-
ing the program `fa2htgs' and other tools (9).
Third party annotation
Third party annotation (TPA) refers to the annotation by third
party authors of nucleotide sequences derived or assembled
from public primary sequence data found in the DDBJ/EMBL/
GenBank International Nucleotide Sequence Collaboration
Databases. Examples of TPA submissions include an mRNA
sequence assembled from overlapping ESTs, or the annotation
of exons, introns and coding regions on an unannotated
genomic sequence. Trace data sequences or whole genome
shotgun (WGS) sequences in DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank may
also be used as the basis of a TPA submission, but data from
secondary sources such as NCBI Reference sequences, or
primary data from proprietary databases may not be used.
The format of a TPA record (e.g. BK000016) is similar to
that of a conventional GenBank record but includes the label
`TPA:' at the beginning of each de®nition line and the
keywords `Third Party Annotation; TPA' in the Keywords
®eld. The Comment ®eld of TPA records lists all primary
sequences used to assemble the TPA sequence; the Primary
®eld provides the base ranges of the primary sequences that
contribute to the TPA sequence.
TPA submissions to GenBank may be made using either
BankIt or Sequin, but TPA sequences are not released to the
public until their accession numbers or sequence data and
annotation appear in a peer-reviewed biological journal. For
more information on TPA, see http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
Genbank/tpa.html.
BankIt
About a third of author submissions are received through the
NCBI's Web-based data submission tool, BankIt (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BankIt). Using BankIt, authors enter
sequence information directly into a form, edit as necessary
and add biological annotation such as coding regions or
mRNA features. Free-form text boxes, list boxes and pull-
down menus allow the submitter to further describe the
sequence without having to learn formatting rules or use
restricted vocabularies. BankIt validates submissions, ¯agging
many common errors, and checks for vector contamination
using a variant of BLAST called Vecscreen, before creating a
draft record in GenBank ¯at ®le format for the submitter to
review. BankIt is the tool of choice for simple submissions,
especially when only one or a small number of records is to be
submitted (7). BankIt can also be used by submitters to update
their existing GenBank records.
Sequin
The NCBI has developed a stand-alone multi-platform
submission program called Sequin (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/Sequin/index.html) that can be used interactively with
other NCBI sequence retrieval and analysis tools. Sequin
handles simple sequences such as a cDNA, as well as
segmented entries, phylogenetic studies, population studies,
mutation studies, environmental samples and alignments for
which BankIt and other web-based submission tools are not
well suited. Sequin has convenient editing and complex
annotation capabilities and contains a number of built-in
validation functions for quality assurance. In addition, Sequin
is able to accommodate large sequence records, such as the
Escherichia coli genome of 5.6 Mb, and read in a full
complement of annotations via simple tables. Versions for
Macintosh, PC and Unix computers are available via
anonymous FTP at `ftp.ncbi.nih.gov' in the `sequin' directory.
Once a submission is completed, submitters can email the
Sequin ®le to the address: gb-sub@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.
RETRIEVING GENBANK DATA
The ENTREZ system
The sequence records in GenBank are accessible via Entrez
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Entrez/), a robust and ¯exible
database retrieval system that accesses DNA and protein
sequence data, genome mapping data, population sets,
phylogenetic sets, environmental sample sets, gene expression
data, the NCBI taxonomy, protein domain information,
protein structures from the Molecular Modeling Database,
MMDB (10) and MEDLINE references via PubMed. The
Entrez sequence databases are taken from a variety of sources
and therefore include more sequence data than are available
within the GenBank DNA sequence database alone.
BLAST sequence-similarity searching
Sequence-similarity searches are the most frequent and basic
type of analysis performed on the GenBank data. NCBI offers
the BLAST (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST/) family of
programs to locate regions of similarity between a query
sequence and database sequences (11,12). BLAST searches
may be performed on the NCBI's website, or using a set of
stand-alone programs distributed by FTP. BLAST is discussed
in more detail in a separate article in this issue (4).
Obtaining GenBank by FTP
NCBI distributes the GenBank releases in the traditional ¯at-
®le format as well as in the Abstract Syntax Notation (ASN.1)
format used for internal maintenance. The full bimonthly
GenBank release and the daily updates, which also incorporate
sequence data from EMBL and DDBJ, are available by
anonymous FTP from the NCBI at ftp.ncbi.nih.gov as well as
from two mirror sites, at the San Diego SuperComputer Center
Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue D25
(ftp://genbank.sdsc.edu/pub/) and at the University of Indiana
(ftp://bio-mirror.net/biomirror/genbank/). The full release in
¯at-®le format is available as compressed ®les in the directory,
`genbank' with a non-cumulative set of updates contained in
`daily-nc'. A script is provided on the FTP site to convert a set
of daily updates into a cumulative update.
MAILING ADDRESS
GenBank, National Center for Biotechnology Information,
Building 38A, Room 8S-803, 8600 Rockville Pike,
Bethesda, MD 20894, USA. Tel: +1 301 496 2475;
Fax: +1 301 480 9241.
ELECTRONIC ADDRESSES
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ (NCBI home page), gb-sub@
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov (submission of sequence data to GenBank),
update@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov (revisions to GenBank entries and
noti®cation of release of `con®dential' entries), info@ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov (general information about NCBI and services).
CITING GENBANK
If you use GenBank as a tool in your published research, we
ask that this paper be cited.
REFERENCES
1. Benson,D.A., Karsch-Mizrachi,I., Lipman,D.J., Ostell,J. and
Wheeler,D.L. (2003) GenBank. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 23±27.
2. Stoesser,G., Baker,W., van den Broek,A., Garcia-Pastor,M., Kanz,C.,
Kulikova,T., Leinonen,R., Lin,Q., Lombard,V., Lopez,R. et al. (2003)
The EMBL nucleotide sequence database. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 17±22.
3. Miyazaki,S., Sugawara,H., Gojobori,T. and Tateno,Y. (2003) DNA Data
Bank of Japan (DDBJ) for genome scale research in life science. Nucleic
Acids Res., 31, 23±27.
4. Wheeler,D.L., Church,D.M., Federhen,S., Lash,A.E., Madden,T.L.,
Pontius,J.U., Schuler,G.D., Schriml,L.M., Sequeira,E., Tatusova,T.A.
et al. (2003) Database resources of the National Center for
Biotechnology. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 28±33.
5. Boguski,M.S., Lowe,T.M. and Tolstoshev,C.M. (1993) dbESTÐ
database for `expressed sequence tags'. Nature Genet., 4, 332±333.
6. Smith,M.W., Holmsen,A.L., Wei,Y.H., Peterson,M. and Evans,G.A.
(1994) Genomic sequence sampling: a strategy for high resolution
sequence-based physical mapping of complex genomes. Nature Genet.,
7, 40±47.
7. Kans,J.A. and Ouellette,B.F.F. (2001) Submitting DNA sequences to the
databases. In Baxevanis,A. and Ouellette,B.F.F. (eds), Bioinformatics: A
Practical Guide to the Analysis of Genes and Proteins. John Wiley and
Sons, Inc., New York, pp. 65±81.
8. Hayashizaki,Y. (2001) Functional annotation of a full-length mouse
cDNA collection. Nature, 409, 685±690.
9. Ouellette,B.F.F. and Boguski,M.S. (1997) Database divisions and
homology search ®les: a guide for the perplexed. Genome Res., 7,
952±957.
10. Chen,J., Anderson,J.B., DeWeese-Scott,C., Fedorova,N.D., Geer,L.Y.,
He,S., Hurwitz,D.I., Jackson,J.D., Jacobs,A.R., Lanczycki,C.J. et al.
(2003) MMDB: Entrez's 3D-structure database. Nucleic Acids Res., 31,
474±477.
11. Altschul,S.F, Madden,T.L., Schaffer,A.A., Zhang,J., Miller,W. and
Lipman,D.J. (1997) Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation
of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res., 25, 3389±3402.
12. Zhang,Z., Schaffer, A.A., Miller,W., Madden,T.L., Lipman,D.J.,
Koonin,E.V. and Altschul,S.F. (1998) Protein sequence similarity
searches using patterns as seeds. Nucleic Acids Res., 26, 3986±3991.
D26 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue
