The Subsystems Approach to Genome Annotation and
its Use in the Project to Annotate 1000 Genomes
Ross Overbeek1, Tadhg Begley16, Ralph M. Butler10, Jomuna V. Choudhuri3,
Han-Yu Chuang17, Matthew Cohoon12, Vale´rie de Cre´cy-Lagard13, Naryttza Diaz3,
Terry Disz12,, Robert Edwards1,7,8, Michael Fonstein1,18, Ed D. Frank2, Svetlana Gerdes1,
Elizabeth M. Glass2, Alexander Goesmann3, Andrew Hanson14, Dirk Iwata-Reuyl15,
Roy Jensen5, Neema Jamshidi17, Lutz Krause3, Michael Kubal12,, Niels Larsen11,
Burkhard Linke3, Alice C. McHardy3, Folker Meyer3, Heiko Neuweger3, Gary Olsen9,
Robert Olson12, Andrei Osterman1,8, Vasiliy Portnoy17, Gordon D. Pusch1,
Dmitry A. Rodionov6, Christian Ru¨ckert4, Jason Steiner17, Rick Stevens2,12,
Ines Thiele17, Olga Vassieva1, Yuzhen Ye8, Olga Zagnitko1 and Veronika Vonstein1,*
1Fellowship for Interpretation of Genomes, 15W155 81st Street, Burr Ridge, IL 60527, USA, 2Mathematics and
Computer Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL 60439, USA, 3Center for Biotechnology,
4International NRW Graduate School in Bioinformatics & Genome Research, Institute for Genome Research, Bielefeld
University, 33594 Bielefeld, Germany, USA, 5Emerson Hall, University of Florida, PO Box 14425, Gainesville, FL
32604, USA, 6Institute for Information Transmission Problems, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia,
7Center for Microbial Sciences, San Diego State University, San Diego, CA 92813, USA, 8The Burnham Institute,
San Diego CA 92037, USA, 9Department of Microbiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL
61801, 10Computer Science Dept, Middle Tennessee State University, Murfreesboro, TN 37132, USA, 11Danish
Genome Institute, Gustav Wieds vej 10 C, DK-8000 Aarhus C, Denmark, 12Computation Institute, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA, 13Departments of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida, Gainesville,
FL 32611, USA, 14Department of Horticultural Science, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA,
15Department of Chemistry, Portland State University, Portland, OR 97207, USA, 16Department of Chemistry and
Chemical Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY14853, USA, 17University of California, San Diego, CA 92093, USA
and 18Cleveland BioLabs, Inc., Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
Received June 9, 2005; Revised and Accepted September 8, 2005
ABSTRACT
The release of the 1000th complete microbial genome
will occur in the next two to three years. In anticipation
of this milestone, the Fellowship for Interpretation
of Genomes (FIG) launched the Project to Annotate
1000 Genomes. The project is built around the prin-
ciple that the key to improved accuracy in high-
throughput annotation technology is to have experts
annotate single subsystems over the complete col-
lection of genomes, rather than having an annotation
expert attempt to annotate all of the genes in a single
genome. Using the subsystems approach, all of the
genes implementing the subsystem are analyzed by
an expert in that subsystem. An annotation environ-
ment was created where populated subsystems are
curated and projected to new genomes. A portable
notion of a populated subsystem was defined, and
tools developed for exchanging and curating these
objects. Tools were also developed to resolve con-
flicts between populated subsystems. The SEED
is the first annotation environment that supports
this model of annotation. Here, we describe the sub-
system approach, and offer the first release of our
growing library of populated subsystems. The initial
release of data includes 180 177 distinct proteins
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 630 325 4178; Fax: +1 630 325 4179; Email: Veronika@theFIG.info
 The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 17 5691–5702
doi:10.1093/nar/gki866
 Published online October 7, 2005
with 2133 distinct functional roles. This data comes
from 173 subsystems and 383 different organisms.
INTRODUCTION
In the 10 years since the first complete bacterial genome was
released in 1995 (1) there has been an exponential growth in
the number of complete genomes sequenced. More than 200
complete genomes have been released, and based on past
growth we anticipate that the 1000th genome will be sequenced
at some point during 2007 (Figure 1). This rapid release of data
reinforces the need for high-throughput annotation systems
that provide reliable and accurate results.
In response to these challenges the Fellowship for Inter-
pretation of Genomes (FIG) launched the ‘Project to Annotate
a 1000 Genomes’. The Project embodies a specific strategic
view of how to approach high-throughput annotation: the
effort is organized around subsytem experts, individuals
who master the details of a specific subsystem and then
analyze and annotate the genes that make up that given sub-
system over an entire collection of genomes.
We argue that a subsystems based approach provides many
benefits compared to more traditional techniques of genome
annotation:
(i) The analysis of a single subsystem over a large collection
of genomes produces far more accurate annotations than
the common approach of annotating the genes within a
single organism. In fact the usual ‘gene-by-gene’ approach
ensures that in most cases the individual annotating an
entire genome lacks specific expertise related to the role
of each gene.
(ii) The annotation of protein families rather than an organ-
ism at a time brings to bear specialized expertise and con-
sequently leads to improvements over ‘gene-by-gene’
annotations of one genome. Just as the analysis of families
offers a significant improvement over the annotation of
individual genes, the analysis of sets of related protein
families (i.e. those containing genes that make up a single
biological subsystem) is more productive than the analysis
of single families in isolation. Indeed, the fact that ‘The
presence or absence of metabolic pathways and structures
provides a context that makes protein annotation far more
reliable’ (2) has now become clearly established.
(iii) It is both more straightforward and less error prone to
automatically project annotations from a set of populated
subsystems covering a diverse set of organisms than to
project individual annotations using the existing auto-
mated pipelines. This is leading to the development of
rule-based extension systems that will quite probably
achieve superior accuracy (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/
swissprot/Publications/dagstuhl.html).
(iv) A collection of annotations organized around specific
subsystems covering a large number of diverse
organisms represents a central resource for other
bioinformatics efforts such as metabolic reconstruction,
stoichiometric modeling and gene discovery (3).
This paper describes the subsystem-based approach to high-
throughput genome annotation. The broad concepts of this
approach are described and several examples of annotated
subsystems are provided. Supplementary online material
consisting of 173 subsystems has been released. Additionally,
our open-source software for their creation and curation is
provided.
WHAT IS A SUBSYSTEM
A subsystem is a set of functional roles that together imple-
ment a specific biological process or structural complex
Figure 1. Accumulation of complete archaeal and bacterial genome sequences at NCBI 1994–2004, and prediction of the release of genomes through 2010. Data
from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/lproks.cgi was extracted and plotted by year as shown with the crosses. Data from 2004–2010 is projected by the power
law and is represented by open circles. At the current rate of growth, the 1000th complete microbial genome will be released in late 2007 or early 2008.
5692 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 17
(Table 1). A subsystem may be thought of as generalization
of the term pathway. Thus, just as glycolysis is composed of
a set of functional roles (glucokinase, glucose-6-phosphate
isomerase and phosphofuctokinase, etc.) a complex like the
ribosome or a transport system can be viewed as a collection
of functional roles. In practice, we put no restriction on how
curators select the set of functional roles they wish to group
into a subsystem, and we find subsystems being created to
represent the set of functional roles that make up pathogenic-
ity islands, prophages, transport cassettes and complexes
(although many of the existing subsystems do correspond to
metabolic pathways). The concept of populated subsystem is
an extension of the basic notion of subsystem—it amounts to
a subsystem along with a spreadsheet depicting the exact
genes that implement the functional roles of the subsystem
in specific genomes. The populated subsystem specifies which
organisms include operational variants of the subsystem
and which genes in those organisms implement the functional
roles that make up the subsystem. Each column in the spread-
sheet corresponds to a functional role from the subsystem,
each row represents a genome, and each cell identifies the
genes within the genome that encode proteins which imple-
ment the specific functional role within the designated
genome (Figure 2).
The act of populating the subsystem amounts to adding
rows (i.e. genomes) to the spreadsheet.
Since these concepts are fundamental to our discussion
we are illustrating them in Figure 2.
Note that each row in the spreadsheet has an associated
variant code. The set of roles that make up the example sub-
system include all of the functional roles needed to encode
three common variants of the pathway. The variant codes dis-
tinguish three alternative means of converting N-formimino-
L-glutamate to L-glutamate.
We have adhered to the position that experts encoding
subsystems must decide exactly which functional roles to
include (and exactly how to express each functional role),
as well as what variant codes to use. We have restricted the
use of two variant codes: 0 to represent work in progress
and 1 to represent no operational variant.
A FRAMEWORK FOR DEVELOPING A PRECISE
VOCABULARY FOR FUNCTIONAL ROLES
Controlled vocabularies have often been proposed in
computer-assisted annotations and data mining (4,5). Sub-
systems technology supports the definition of a controlled
vocabulary for gene function. Domain experts, by defining
the functional roles that make up the subsystems that they
curate, impose a precise vocabulary for assignment of func-
tion to the genes that implement the subsystem. Since the
term ‘gene function’ has come to have several meanings, it
is important to distinguish between four concepts:
(i) A functional role is an abstract function such as
‘Aspartokinase (EC 2.7.2.4)’. Subsystems are sets of
such abstract functions.
(ii) The notion of product name refers to a short text string
that someone has used to represent the function of the
protein encoded by a gene. There are no constraints on
the strings used as product names, and it is common to
see the same abstract function denoted by numerous simi-
lar expressions such as ‘Aspartokinase, Aspartokinase II,
aspartate kinase’ etc.
(iii) By the term protein family we mean a collection of pro-
teins that have been grouped by some curation team.
The UniProt effort is producing one particularly valuable
collection of families. Within that effort, the protein
family represents a set of proteins that share a common
domain structure. That is, they may actually implement
the same or multiple functional roles. Within our work,
there is no explicit concept of protein family; the closest
notion would be ‘the set of genes within a single column
of the spreadsheet in a populated subsystem’. However,
a single column often contains proteins with distinct
domain structure (e.g. both unifunctional and multifunc-
tional proteins often occur within a single column), and in
some cases genes encoding non-homologous proteins,
which implement a single function have been included
within a single column. We have developed tools to sup-
port comparison between protein families from a variety
of sources and the proteins encoded by the genes in a
Table 1. Glossary
Annotation An unstructured text string associated with specific genes and/or proteins.
Clearinghouse A site for publish-request type peer-to-peer exchange of subsystems in a system independent manner.
Functional role An abstract function that a protein performs. Subsystems developers specify a single, precise text string to represent each
functional role.
Functional variants Different combinations of functional roles that represent distinct operational forms of a subsystem.
Missing gene A gene, that is predicted to be present in the genome of an organism but has not been identified yet.
Populated subsystem A subsystem along with a spreadsheet in which each column represents a functional role for the subsystem, each row represents
a specific genome, and each cell contains those genes from the specific organism that have a subsystem connection to the
specific functional role.
Product name A short text string used to represent the function of the protein encoded by a gene. No constraints are placed on the strings
used as product names, and it is common to see the same abstract function denoted by numerous similar expressions.
Protein family A collection of proteins that were grouped by a curator. Proteins may be grouped based on domain structure, similarity, or some other
characteristic. Proteins within a family may implement the same or multiple functional roles.
Subsystem A Subsystem is a collection of functional roles, which together implement a specific biological process or structural complex.
There is no distinction between metabolic subsystems and non-metabolic subsystems.
Subsystem connections The set of functional roles that tie protein-encoding genes to different subsystems. Most protein encoding genes currently
have a single subsystem connection.
Variant code Numeric codes used to distinguish different functional variants.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 17 5693
Figure 2. Subsystem and Populated Subsytem. The Histidine Degradation Subsystem was used as an example to demonstrate relevant terms. (A) The subsystem
comprises of 7 functional roles (e.g. Histidine ammonia-lyase (EC 4.3.1.3), Urocanate hydratase (EC 4.2.1.49) etc.). Together with the spreadsheet it becomes the
‘Populated subsystem’. (B) The Subsystem Spreadsheet is populated with genes from 8 organisms (simplified from the original subsystem) where each row
represents one organism and each column one of the functional roles of the subsystem. Genes performing the specific functional role in the respective organism
populate the respective cell. Gray shading of cells indicates proximity of the respective genes on the chromosomes. (C) The Subsystem Diagram illustrates the
populated subsystem: key intermediates (circles with roman numerals), connected by enzymes (boxes with abbreviations matching the spreadsheet abbreviations)
and reactions (arrows). There are three distinct variants of Histidine Degradation presented in this populated subsystem. Variant 1 (green shading) is present in
Caulobacter crescentus, Pseudomonas putida and Xanthomonas campestris. N-Formimino-L-Glutamate (IV) is converted to L-Glutamate (VI) via N-Formyl-L-
Glutamate (V) by enzymatic activities of Formiminoglutamic iminohydrolase (EC 3.5.3.13) (ForI) and of N-formylglutamate deformylase (EC 3.5.1.68) (NfoD).
Variant 2 (yellow shading) is present in Halobacterium sp., Deinococcus radiodurans and Bacillus subtilis. In this variant the conversion from intermediate IV to VI
is performed by Formiminoglutamase (EC 3.5.3.8) (HutG). Variant 3 (blue shading) is present in Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron and Desulfotela psychrophila.
Here the Glutamate formiminotransferase (EC 2.1.2.5) (GluF) performs the conversion from intermediate IV to VI.
5694 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 17
single column in a populated subsystem. These compar-
isons are valuable but it is important to realize that we are
producing sets of genes that encode proteins capable of
implementing a single functional role, while the underly-
ing restrictions on what make up a protein family often
differ markedly from this notion.
(iv) The notation of annotation is often used to refer to an
unstructured text string associated with specific genes
and/or proteins.
To illustrate our use of these terms, consider the product name
‘Lysine-sensitive aspartokinase III’. It implements the func-
tional role ‘Aspartokinase (EC 2.7.2.4)’, which a curator
has included in the subsystem ‘Lysine_Biosynthesis_DAP_
Pathway’. The curator may have well attached the annotation
‘Cassan et al., 1986 Nucleotide sequence of lysC gene encod-
ing the lysine-sensitive aspartokinase III of Escherichia coli
K12. Evolutionary pathway leading to three isofunctional
enzymes, J. Biol. Chem., 261, 1052–1057’ for the respective
E.coli K12 gene, justifying the use of this specific product
name.
To this mix of concepts we add the notion subsytem con-
nection. A gene can be connected to one or more functional
roles, which induces connections to specific subsystems
(those that contain the specific functional roles). In the
example above it would be the connection to the subsystem
‘Lysine_Biosynthesis_DAP_Pathway’.
Although product names often include special properties
(e.g. ‘thermostable’ or ‘lysine-sensitive’), and occasionally
clues of function (e.g. ‘similar to death associated protein
kinase’), subsystem connections unambiguously reference spe-
cific functional roles included in the definition of a subsystem.
Initially, the number of populated subsystems grew rapidly
including numerous metabolic pathways, as well as non-
metabolic subsystems ranging from flagella (http://www.
theseed.org/annocopy/FIG/subsys.cgi?ssa_name=Flagellum&
request=show_ssa, pathogenicity islands, http://www.theseed.
org/annocopy/FIG/subsys.cgi?ssa_name=Mannose-sensitive_
hemagglutinin_type_4_pilus&request=show_ssa), and secret-
ory systems [http://www.theseed.org/annocopy/FIG/subsys.
cgi?ssa_name=General_secretory_pathway_(Sec-SRP)_
complex_(TC_3.A.5.1.1)&request=show_ssa] through
complexes like the ribosome and proteosome. As both sub-
systems and the consequent subsystem connections matured
there was considerable overlap between subsystems. Users
developing subsystems on their own machines and sharing
them through the clearinghouse exacerbated the differences
in style, and hence conflicts between subsystems. For example,
functional roles corresponding to the notion of aconitase exist
in at least three distinct subsystems: the TCA cycle (http://
www.theseed.org/annocopy/FIG/subsys.cgi?ssa_name=
TCA_Cycle&request=show_ssa), the methylcitate cycle
(http://www.theseed.org/annocopy/FIG/subsys.cgi?ssa_name=
Methylcitrate_cycle&request=show_ssa), and glyoxylate syn-
thesis (http://www.theseed.org/annocopy/FIG/subsys.cgi?ssa_
name=Glyoxylate_Synthesis&request=show_ssa) developed
independently by different curators. In at least one instance
a curator wished to carefully distinguish three distinct forms of
the enzyme. Initially each curator annotated the same protein-
encoding genes with different functional roles, however this
quickly became untenable—i.e. conflicts arose. To support
uniform terminology required that the conflicts be detected,
and be resolved by renaming functional roles to a consistent
vocabulary employed consistently by all three subsystems.
Rather than impose a centralized mechanism for resolving
such conflicts, a completely decentralized approach was used.
To facilitate coordination and communication between end
users, to aid with conflict resolution, and to eliminate red-
undancy, a multi-author website was developed using Wiki
technology (http://www-unix.mcs.anl.gov/SEEDWiki/moin.
cgi/MoinMoin). The subsystem bulletin board (http://www.
theseed.org/wiki/moin.cgi/SubsystemBulletinBoard) provides
an overview of the subsystems and highlights individual
researcher’s efforts. For a more detailed discussion of each
of the subsystems, a Forum was developed using vBulletin
technology (http://www.vbulletin.com/). The Forum (http://
www.subsys.info) has subsystems separated by class, and
each subsystem has a discussion arena for the deposition of
comments, questions, suggestions and ideas. In addition to
these resources, interactive conflict detection and resolution
software was developed for the installation of subsystems in
the SEED database.
Ultimately the success of our approach has been based on
the good will and common desire to produce a consistent,
precise vocabulary for functional roles, and we feel that
this has worked well. It has produced a situation in which,
at any given time, conflicts may exist because new subsystems
are being developed or existing ones extended. But the atten-
tion of curators is being alerted to those instances by the
development of tools that point to the conflicts. No centralized
authority is being employed (although, in fact, on occasion
curators do settle disagreements by consulting with outside
experts). Conflicts can be of various types ranging from simple
differences in spelling of functional roles to disagreements
relating to specificity and numerous other issues. In all cases
curators have reached settlements through discussions that
lead to either consensus names or extended names. Once
agreement has been reached and consistency established,
changing the precise string of text that describes a functional
role at some later point in time is trivial.
The result has been a vocabulary for functional roles that
is precise, reasonably consistent, and rapidly improving.
Our strategy for coupling this vocabulary with widely prac-
ticed ontologies such as GO will be to attach GO terms to
each of the functional roles (inducing connections to genes via
subsystem connections).
SUBSYSTEMS: A TECHNOLOGY INDEPENDENT
OF ANNOTATION SYSTEMS
The subsystems technology described herein was developed
with two primary goals in mind.
The first goal was to define a simple, portable text repres-
entation of a populated subsystem. This allowed populated
subsystems to be exchanged, archived and updated over the
Internet.
And the second goal to develop a clearinghouse where
curators can publish populated subsystems for exchange
with other users. The clearinghouse is available for direct
querying from within a program (http://clearinghouse.
theseed.org/) or via a web-browser (http://clearinghouse.
theseed.org/clearinghouse_browser.cgi).
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 17 5695
5696 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 17
The development of this technology ensured that the
subsystems information could be shared in a platform-
independent manner, without requiring any centralized
resource (such as a pathway collection). Any annotation
environment can be developed or modified to support the
creation and curation of subsystems using the clearinghouse
(or, a local clearinghouse, if desired) as a repository.
THE SEED TECHNOLOGY TO SUPPORT
SUBSYSTEMS
The SEED annotation environment is the first annotation
environment that supports the creation, curation, population
and exchange of subsystems. It supports publishing subsys-
tems to a clearinghouse, and the downloading and installation
of subsystems developed at other sites.
The SEED was developed by an international collaboration
led by members of FIG and Argonne National Laboratory (6).
The software is being made available as open source software
released under the GNU public license (GPL) from the ftp site
ftp://ftp.theseed.org/SEED.
Only a few enhancements would have to be added to any
existing annotation system to support analysis of subsystems,
and this functionality would extend existing software. The
software would have to be extended to encode populated sub-
systems as objects and decode the populated subsystems as
they are retrieved from the clearinghouse. Software would
need to be included to publish and request populated subsys-
tems from the clearinghouse. The software would have to be
able to define the functional roles in initial subsystems, and to
establish the subsystem connections between protein-encoding
genes, functional roles and subsystems.
EXAMPLE POPULATED SUBSYSTEMS
Our populated subsystems were assembled into a single
collection with a consistent formulation of functional roles
and released via the web (http://www.theseed.org/Release1_
Subsystems/index.html). An open source collection of soft-
ware tools has been released via FTP ftp://ftp.theseed.org/
SEED. To illustrate the advantages of subsystem based
annotations over ‘traditional’ annotation systems several sub-
systems are described below:
Leucine Degradation and HMG-CoA Metabolism
(http://www.theseed.org/annocopy/FIG/subsys.cgi?ssa_
name¼Leucine_Degradation_and_HMG-CoA_
Metabolism&request=show_ssa)
The populated subsystem presenting the leucine catabolism/
HMG-CoA synthesis is depicted in Figure 3. An earlier
analysis of some parts of this subsystem was presented
elsewhere (7).
In humans leucine catabolism is coupled to sterol biosyn-
thesis via a hydroxymethylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA)
intermediate. The pathway is well characterized because
defects in individual steps cause hereditary metabolic dis-
orders like isovaleric acidemia, methylcrotonylglycinuria,
methylglutaconic aciduria and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaric
aciduria (8,9,10). Moreover, the human enzyme HMG-CoA
reductase is a target in cardiovascular disease therapy because
of its rate-limiting role in sterol biosynthesis (11). In contrast,
only the early catabolic steps had been characterized in bac-
terial genomes—no genes were directly connected to enzym-
atic steps beyond isovaleryl-CoA (metabolite II in Figure 3B).
Attempts to project from known eukaryotic genes based
exclusively on homology searches produced ambiguous res-
ults because most of the enzymes in this pathway are members
of large families of paralogs.
A combination of functional and genome context ana-
lysis, as depicted in the populated subsystem spreadsheet
(Figure 3C) provided convincing evidence for the presence
of the entire pathway of leucine catabolism in a number of
diverse bacteria. A large conserved gene cluster containing
reliable bacterial orthologs of two known human genes com-
mitted to this pathway was observed (Figure 3D). The gene
yngH present in Bacillus and other bacteria is an ortholog of
the human Methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase carboxyl trans-
ferase subunit (EC 6.4.1.4) while the neighboring gene yngG
is an ortholog of HMG-CoA lyase (EC 4.1.3.4). This obser-
vation enabled the refinement of functional annotations for
two additional bacterial genes in the same cluster (yngJ, an
ortholog of Isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase (EC 1.3.99.10)
and yngF, an ortholog of Methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase
biotin-containing subunit (EC 6.4.1.4). Because these were
weak homologs they could not be accurately characterized
without considering the chromosomal neighborhood. The pre-
diction (neither the bacterial nor the eukaryotic versions
of methylglutaconyl-CoA hydratase were sequenced at that
point) of yngG performing this function was projected from
Bacillus to the human homolog. Later this prediction was
proven correct by two independent publications that provided
the experimental verification of the function encoded by this
human gene (12,13).
Another functional inference from the analysis of this
subsystem was a connection between leucine catabolism
and acetoacetate metabolism (as illustrated in Figure 3B).
This observation suggested a physiologically relevant
extension of the HMG-CoA subsystem beyond its traditional
boundaries. Two forms of yngF (encoding the methylcrotonyl-
CoA carboxylase biotin-containing subunit (EC 6.4.1.4) were
observed—the most common form, a fusion of biotin car-
boxylase and a C-terminal biotin carboxylase carrier protein
domain and a rare form, in which the biotin carboxylase and
the downstream biotin carboxylase carrier protein-encoding
gene are separate (as in B.subtilis). The subsystems
Figure 3. Leucine Degradation and HMG-CoA Metabolism Subsystem. Functional roles, abbreviations, key intermediates and reactions in the pathway diagram are
presented using the same conventions as in Figure 2. (A) Functional roles in the subsystem. (B) The Subsystem diagram shows the presence of genes assigned with
respective functions for B.melitensis and G.metallireducens, using color-coded highlighting as explained in the panel. (C) Subsystem spreadsheet showing presence
of genes with functions is shown by gene names for B.subtilis or by ‘+’ for all other genomes (modified from a regular SEED display showing all gene IDs).
Highlighting by a matching color indicates proximity on the chromosome. (D) Clustering on the chromosome of genes involved in the Subsystem (large yellow
cluster) demonstrated by alignment of the chromosomal contigs of respective genomes around a signature pathway gene, yngG. Homologous genes are shown
by arrows with matching colors and numbers corresponding to functional roles in panel A. B.subtilis genes are marked by gene names. Other genes (not conserved
within the cluster) are colored gray.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 17 5697
5698 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 17
approach allows for different variants of enzymes as shown in
Figure 3.
Panels B and C in Figure 3 illustrates the analysis of
functional variants of a subsystem. Most of the subsystem
protein-encoding genes are conserved in those species that
have a functional (‘nonzero’) variant. However, E.coli and
Staphylococcus aureus do not have a functional variant lead-
ing to the inference that they are incapable of catabolizing
leucine using this pathway. Consequently, they were marked
‘1’ in the subsystem spreadsheet (Figure 3C). A distinction
between the functional variants 1–3 was made based on the
downstream component of the subsystem: the alternative
routes of conversion of acetoactetate to succinate (inter-
mediate V in Figure 3B). This was either via Succinyl-
CoA:3-ketoacid-coenzyme A transferase subunits A and B
(EC 2.8.3.5) (variant 2; e.g. Brucella melitensis) or via
Acetoacetyl-CoA synthetase (EC 6.2.1.16) (variant 3; e.g.
Geobacter metallireducens and Shewanella oneidensis).
Both routes were possible in variant 1, as exemplified by
both human and B.subtilis, although clustering on the
chromosome suggests that in the latter species an AACS-
dependent reaction may be preferred or co-regulated with
the other components of the subsystem.
This example illustrates how prokaryotic chromosomal
clustering can influence the interpretation of pathways,
prediction of missing genes and projection of annotations
between prokaryotic and eukaryotic genes. The observations
also contributed to interpretation of the evolutionary history
of a large and diversified group of proteins. More such
examples have been published elsewhere (3,14).
Coenzyme A biosynthesis subsystem (http://www.
theseed.org/annocopy/FIG/subsys.cgi?ssa_name=
Coenzyme_A_Biosynthesis&request=show_ssa)
Coenzyme A (CoA) is a universal and essential cofactor in all
forms of cellular life (15). Earlier bioinformatics analysis of
CoA biosynthesis revealed a number of interesting variations
between species (3,16,17). In the respective SEED subsystem
(see Figure 4), this analysis was extended to >250 diverse
genomes. A five-step pathway from pantothenate (vitamin B5)
to CoA is the universal component of the subsystem conserved
in the majority of species. The most variable aspect
of this pathway is pantothenate kinase (PANK). Three non-
orthologous forms of PANK are presently known, and, in
some cases, two alternative forms are present in the same
organism. A recently identified and characterized CoaX-like
(type III) pantothenate kinase (PANK3) appears to be more
common in the bacterial world than the ‘classic’ PANK1 (18).
Nevertheless, in most genomes, homologs of PANK3 have
misleading annotations (e.g. ‘BVG accessory factor’). The
populated subsystem allows one to suggest reliable annota-
tions for these proteins in many bacterial genomes, strongly
supported by the strict requirement of PANK for CoA bio-
synthesis. The eukaryotic-like PANK2 was predicted (19)
and subsequently verified (20) as the only PANK in all
Staphylococcus species.
A possible fourth non-orthologous form of PANK can be
inferred from the analysis of Archaea. The candidate for
the missing archaeal PANK is a member of the GHMP
kinase family which clusteres on the chromosome with several
other CoA biosynthetic genes in some Archaea (i.e. PAE3407
of Pyrobaculum aerophilum). Another conserved family
(represented by PAE1629 of P.aerophilum) may fulfill the
role of dephospho-CoA kinase (DPCK), which is still
‘missing’ in all Archaea. This conjecture is based on a
long-range sequence similarity with bacterial and eukaryotic
enzymes (as suggested by the tentative annotation of
COG0237 at NCBI http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/old/
palox.cgi?COG0237).
Both functional predictions [also suggested by (17)] require
experimental verification. Among other problems within this
subsystem is a missing aspartate decarboxylase in a number of
genomes with an otherwise complete set of genes for the de
novo synthesis.
Several examples illustrating major functional variants
of the subsystem are outlined in Figure 4. An algorithm of
semi-automated variant classification and a brief analysis of
the key operational variants of CoA biosynthesis were recently
published (21). Most species implement either complete
de novo biosynthesis (variants 1–3) or a five-step pantothen-
ate salvage (variant 4). A relatively small group of bacteria,
most notably obligate intracellular pathogens and symbionts,
display a variety of truncated pathways. For example, a dis-
rupted pattern (missing PANK, PPCS and PPCDC) observed
in Buchnera aphidicola suggests a possible metabolic
exchange between this endosymbiont and the aphid host
cell. According to this hypothesis, pantothenate produced
but not utilized by B.aphidicola may be fed directly into
the universal pathway of the host. The latter may pay back
by providing a phosphopantetheine intermediate required for
the last two steps of CoA synthesis in B.aphidicola. Several
other interesting aspects of this subsystem are discussed
in the supplementary materials (http://www.theseed.org/
Release1_Subsystems/index.html).
Figure 4. CoA Biosynthesis Subsystem. Functional roles, abbreviations, key intermediates and reactions in the pathway diagram are presented using the same
conventions as in Figure 2. Background colors in the diagram illustrate the comparison of subsystem variants by highlighting functional roles asserted in two
organisms: E.coli (yellow) and H.sapiens (blue). Shared functional roles are highlighted green. The lower panel is a modification of the subsystem spreadsheet. It
shows a classification of major subsystem variants representing a substantially different reaction topology revealed by semi-automated graph analysis as described
in (21). Selected genomes unambiguously associated with each variant are shown after variant description (e.g. De novo, complete/100). Patterns of functional
roles which constitute each functional variant are generalized by: ‘+’, presence of a gene (for a given role) is required; ‘±’, optional; ‘?’, function is inferred by
pathway analysis but a gene is unknown or ‘missing’ (i.e. can not be located by similarity). Typical sub-variants characterized by the same topology but relying on
alternative (non-orthologous) forms of specific enzymes (e.g. PANK) are illustrated by the following genomes: E.coli K12 [NCBI taxonomy ID 83333.1],
D.radiodurans R1 [243230.1], S.aureus subsp. aureus N315 [158879.1], S.oneidensis MR-1 [211586.1], G.metallireducens [28232.1], Saccharomyces cerevisiae
[4932.1], P.aerophilum str. IM2 [178306.1], Streptococcus pneumoniae R6 [171101.1], Thermoanaerobacter tengcongensis [119072.1], H.sapiens [9606.2],
B.aphidicola str. APS (Acyrthosiphon pisum) [107806.1], Treponema pallidum subsp. pallidum str. Nichols [243276.1] and Chlamydia trachomatis D/UW-3/
CX [272561.1]. Genes assigned with respective functional roles are shown by SEED unique IDs for all illustrated genomes (except E.coli where common gene
names are used). Matching background colors highlight genes that occur close to each other on the chromosome.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 17 5699
Ribosomal proteins (http://www.theseed.org/
SubsystemStories/Ribosomal_proteins/abstract.htm)
Historically, ribosomal proteins were identified in several
important experimental organisms, including E.coli, Bacillus
species, yeast, rat and Halobacterium. In each case, a unique
nomenclature was developed. More recently, several groups
sought unified nomenclatures given the availability of so many
sequences. In the cases of Bacteria and Eukarya, these efforts
were hugely successful. The most problematic aspects of the
conventions were (i) the failure to uniformly indicate whether
a given label is based upon the bacterial or the eukaryal
numbering, and (ii) the linking of equivalent eukaryal and
bacterial terms. There are only two proteins (S3 and L3)
for which the bacterial and eukaryal numbers are the same.
This created a particularly confusing situation when the bac-
terial nomenclature was applied to Archaea, except when no
bacterial homolog existed, in which case the eukaryal label
was applied.
To address these problems a dual labeling was applied in
which bacterial proteins were given the bacterial label (always
explicitly including the ‘p’, e.g. S5p), followed by the desig-
nation of the corresponding eukaryal protein in parentheses
(always with the explicit ‘e’, e.g. S2e). Similarly, in the case of
eukarya, the eukaryal protein designation is given first, fol-
lowed by the bacterial label in parentheses. In the case of
Archaea, in all but a few cases the proteins are clearly of
the eukaryal genre, and the eukaryal term is given first.
One of the most important consequences of this nomenclature
is that a text-based search is always unambiguous as to
whether the bacterial or eukaryal numbering is desired. For
example, a search for L11p will return bacterial L11 and
eukaryal L12, but not bacterial L5 (the equivalent of eukaryal
L11). A second key decision was to use the terms LSU and
SSU to distinguish the subunits, rather than 30S, 40S, 50S
and 60S. In addition to further unifying the nomenclature,
it avoids two key sources of confusion. Several eukaryal
ribosomes (especially organellar ribosomes) have been
assigned to ‘non-standard’ sizes. Thus, searching for 50S
and/or 60S was not sufficient to ensure that all ribosomes
were distinguished. But more importantly, it avoids the temp-
tation to use 50S to designate the LSU of a eukaryal mito-
chondrial ribosome. Instead, we have explicitly identified all
organellar proteins by ‘mitochondrial’ or ‘chloroplast’.
The development of this nomenclature demonstrated
the power of the subsystems approach for encoding non-
metabolic pathways, and the utility of functional roles in
describing a controlled vocabulary for gene product function.
THE IMPACT OF POPULATED SUBSYSTEMS
As demonstrated by the examples above, populated sub-
systems can be used to support two broad categories of
research: advancing research in the populated subsystems
themselves and addressing numerous fundamental problems
within bioinformatics.
It is important to note that there are large and ongoing
efforts that address similar objectives—most notably the
KEGG (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/kegg2.html) (22,23), GO
(http://www.geneontology.org/) (5) and MetaCyc (http://
metacyc.org/) (24) projects. These represent substantial pro-
jects, and we have in many ways built upon their work.
Perhaps, the most obvious difference between our work
and these projects is that we have made it possible for all
researchers to immediately develop detailed encodings of
their particular area of expertise, to make these new encod-
ings available to the research community, and to import the
work of others in constructing a customized collection of
subsystems covering their specific needs. This radically
decentralized effort offers a different set of incentives for
domain experts to participate, which is precisely what will
be needed to improve existing annotations.
The primary utility of annotated subsystems relates to the
fact that a populated subsystem often supports substantially
more accurate assignments of function to genes.
In addition the analysis of the populated subsystem allows
one to arrive at a precise notion of which forms (i.e. which
variants) of the subsystem exist in which organisms.
Further, the spreadsheet included in an populated subsystem
often makes it vividly clear that a gene implementing a specific
functional role is very likely to exist, even though it has not yet
been identified. These so-called missing gene problems occur
with surprising frequency. In the two metabolic examples
presented in this paper and in various instances published
in the Supplemental Material we show in detail a few instances
in which conjectures could easily be formulated once the
actual presence of a missing gene had been identified.
Finally, the presence of an extensive set of annotated sub-
systems lays the foundation for an accurate characterization
of the metabolic network present in each organism.
The existence of a collection of populated subsystems
also has an impact on a number of important topics in
bioinformatics:
(i) Over and over as we performed our analysis we found that
genes that appeared to actually be missing in an annotated
subsystem were, in fact, present within an open reading
frame (ORF), but eluded identification by a gene-calling
algorithm. For the functional roles represented in popu-
lated subsystems, it becomes possible to directly search
for instances of these roles in cases in which there is
reason to believe that such a gene must exist.
(ii) Once ORFs containing genes have been identified, the
problem of accurately identifying the start of the gene
remains. The most successful attempts have been based
on alignments. We argue that use of genes that are both
similar and believed to implement the same functional
role will lead to substantial improvements over existing
estimates. A team at Middle Tennessee State University
has brought up a website (http://torvalds.cs.mtsu.edu/cgi-
bin/starts/starts.cgi) with initial results.
(iii) The search for regulatory sites in upstream regions of
related genes has often led to success (25). Regulon ana-
lysis in combination with other techniques of comparat-
ive genomics was allowed to improve interpretation and to
generate functional predictions in a number of metabolic
subsystems (26,27). With the release of our initial set of
annotated subsystems, we are making data available to
support such analysis. For each annotated subsystem,
we are providing sequences of upstream regions for
each prokaryotic genome. Each sequence contains
300 bp of upstream sequence depicting the boundary
of the adjacent gene (delimiting the intergenic gap), as
well as 100 bp of the gene sequence itself.
5700 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 17
(iv) The development of carefully curated protein families
has historically been a key goal of bioinformatics for
obvious reasons. The limitations of existing formulations
relate to ambiguities in function assignment, a problem
that is directly addressed by annotated subsystems.
We have used this initial collection to create a list of
refinements of UniProt annotations, and we will work
to make sure that our analysis directly supports both
the UniProt and other efforts to produce clean, com-
prehensive collections of protein families.
(v) Some of the most successful applications of bioinfor-
matics technology relate to context analysis (3,28,29).
In numerous cases, the clues that led to conjectures of
function were based on the fact that related genes tend
to cluster on prokaryotic chromosomes, tend to fuse and
to co-occur. The annotated subsystems offer a frame-
work for establishing the statistical properties needed to
effectively exploit these tendencies.
(vi) The long-term goal of the subsystems approach is to
bring every subsystem to a point where it has been care-
fully curated by one or more experts in the biological
process encoded by the given subsystem. This approach
will lead to the construction of an accurate phylogenetic
context for each of the proteins within the subsystem,
resulting in the ability to accurately trace the evolutionary
histories of the catalytic domains that make up each
subsystem [for a detailed illustration of this style of
analysis, see ref. (30)].
(vii) Subsystems have also provided an approach for under-
standing the metabolism of environmental samples. A
comparison of statistically significantly different subsys-
tems present in different large environmental (metagen-
ome) samples yielded unprecedented insights into the
biology of these environments and lead to the generation
of novel hypotheses to be tested by field biologists
(R. Edwards, unpublished data).
THE RELEASE
Concurrent with the publication of this paper, an initial snap-
shot release of our collection of populated subsystems (which
was a subset of those available via the SEED clearinghouse)
was made. This subset is available in a format that makes the
data easily accessible for use in other systems or as raw data.
The current release of 173 populated subsystems is available
without restriction via the web. The supplementary online
subsystems material includes three main components:
(i) A set of 48 example subsystems. These constitute exam-
ples that have been curated in somewhat more detail and
have led to interesting conjectures or research results in a
number of cases. For each of these examples, we include
the complete subsystem ‘frozen’ at the time of release,
abstracts, presentations or summaries providing more
detail about the subsystem and suitable for classroom
use or lectures.
(ii) A set of 173 populated subsystems ‘frozen’ at the time of
release that cover a large swath of central metabolism
and other cellular processes.
(iii) Links to the current status of each subsystem. Each of the
subsystems is continually being curated and populated
as new genomes are added to the SEED and new com-
parisons become available. These links provide access
to the most up-to-date annotations.
Each provided sequence was packaged with as many IDs
as possible. For example, identifiers from FIG, UniProt,
KEGG and NCBI (including GI number, gene number, UI
or RefSeq ID), as well as identifiers from sequencing labor-
atories were included to ensure portability. The SEED release
is itself open source software and can be acquired via FTP
ftp://ftp.theseed.org/SEED. The system was developed to run
on both Mac OSX systems and Linux systems.
CONCLUSIONS
Within 2–3 years we will all have access to over a thousand
sequenced genomes. This data will grow to become the central
resource in modern biology. Annotating this collection is the
core challenge of modern bioinformatics. In this paper we
describe a new approach to annotation based on idea of sub-
systems that promises to dramatically improve the quality and
utility of annotations. This approach is central to the Project to
Annotate 1000 genomes and has been implemented in a suite
of tools for genome annotation. The approach and technology
provide one way to involve many domain experts in the gen-
ome annotation process. The technology for developing these
subsystems now exists, the technologies for supporting auto-
mated addition of new genomes to the collection of populated
subsystems is now being developed, and the initial collection
is being made available to the research community.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this
article was provided by the Fellowship for Interpretation of
Genomes.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Fleischmann,R.D., Adams,M.D., White,O., Clayton,R.A., Kirkness,E.F.,
Kerlavage,A.R., Bult,C.J., Tomb,J.F., Dougherty,B.A., Merrick,J.M.
et al. (1995) Whole-genome random sequencing and assembly of
Haemophilus influenzae Rd. Science, 269, 496–512.
2. Haft,D.H., Selengut,J.D., Brinkac,L.M., Zafar,N. and White,O. (2005)
Genome Properties: a system for the investigation of prokaryotic
genetic content for microbiology, genome annotation and comparative
genomics. Bioinformatics, 21, 293–306.
3. Osterman,A. and Overbeek,R. (2003) Missing genes in metabolic
pathways: a comparative genomics approach. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol.,
7, 238–251.
4. Overbeek,R., Larsen,N., Smith,W., Maltsev,N. and Selkov,E. (1997)
Representation of function: the next step. Gene, 191, GC1–GC9.
5. Ashburner,M.,Ball,C.A.,Blake,J.A., Botstein,D., Butler,H., Cherry,J.M.,
Davis,A.P., Dolinski,K., Dwight,S.S., Eppig,J.T. et al. (2000) Gene
ontology: tool for the unification of biology. The gene ontology
consortium. Nature Genet, 25, 25–29.
6. Overbeek,R., Disz,T. and Stevens,R. (2004) The SEED: a peer-to-peer
environment for genome annotation. Commun. ACM, 47, 46–51.
7. Overbeek,R., Devine,D. and Vonstein,V. (2003) Curation is forever:
comparative genomics approaches to functional annotation. Targets,
2, 138–146.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 17 5701
8. Tanaka,K., Ikeda,Y., Matsubara,Y. and Hyman,D.B. (1987)
Molecular basis of isovaleric acidemia and medium-chain acyl-CoA
dehydrogenase deficiency. Enzyme, 38, 91–107.
9. Weyler,W., Sweetman,L., Maggio,D.C. and Nyhan,W.L. (1977)
Deficiency of propionyl-Co A carboxylase and methylcrotonyl-Co
A carboxylase in a patient with methylcrotonylglycinuria. Clin. Chim.
Acta., 76, 321–328.
10. Gibson,K.M., Lee,C.F. and Hoffmann,G.F. (1994) Screening for
defects of branched-chain amino acid metabolism. Eur. J. Pediatr.,
153, S62–67.
11. Marz,W. and Wieland,H. (2000) HMG-CoA reductase inhibition:
anti-inflammatory effects beyond lipid lowering? Herz, 25, 117–125.
12. Loupatty,F.J., Ruiter,J.P., L,I.J.1st, Duran,M. and Wanders,R.J. (2004)
Direct nonisotopic assay of 3-methylglutaconyl-CoA hydratase in
cultured human skin fibroblasts to specifically identify patients with
3-methylglutaconic aciduria type I. Clin. Chem., 50, 1447–1450.
13. Ly,T.B., Peters,V., Gibson,K.M., Liesert,M., Buckel,W., Wilcken,B.,
Carpenter,K., Ensenauer,R., Hoffmann,G.F., Mack,M. et al. (2003)
Mutations in the AUH gene cause 3-methylglutaconic aciduria type I.
Hum. Mutat., 21, 401–407.
14. Jordan,I.K., Henze,K., Fedorova,N.D., Koonin,E.V. and Galperin,M.Y.
(2003) Phylogenomic analysis of the Giardia intestinalis
transcarboxylase reveals multiple instances of domain fusion and fission
in the evolution of biotin-dependent enzymes. J Mol. Microbiol.
Biotechnol., 5, 172–189.
15. Begley,T.P., Kinsland,C. and Strauss,E. (2001) The biosynthesis of
coenzyme A in bacteria. Vitam. Horm., 61, 157–171.
16. Gerdes,S.Y., Scholle,M.D., D’Souza,M., Bernal,A., Baev,M.V.,
Farrell,M., Kurnasov,O.V., Daugherty,M.D., Mseeh,F., Polanuyer,B.M.
et al. (2002) From genetic footprinting to antimicrobial drug targets:
examples in cofactor biosynthetic pathways. J. Bacteriol., 184,
4555–4572.
17. Genschel,U. (2004) Coenzyme A biosynthesis: reconstruction of the
pathway in archaea and an evolutionary scenario based on comparative
genomics. Mol. Biol. Evol., 21, 1242–1251.
18. Brand,L.A. and Strauss,E. (2005) Characterization of a new pantothenate
kinase isoform from Helicobacter pylori. J. Biol. Chem., 280,
20185–20188.
19. Daugherty,M., Polanuyer,B., Farrell,M., Scholle,M., Lykidis,A.,
de Crecy-Lagard,V. and Osterman,A. (2002) Complete reconstitution of
the human coenzyme A biosynthetic pathway via comparative genomics.
J. Biol. Chem., 277, 21431–21439.
20. Choudhry,A.E., Mandichak,T.L., Broskey,J.P., Egolf,R.W., Kinsland,C.,
Begley,T.P., Seefeld,M.A., Ku,T.W., Brown,J.R., Zalacain,M. et al.
(2003) Inhibitors of pantothenate kinase: novel antibiotics for
staphylococcal infections. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother., 47,
2051–2055.
21. Ye,Y., Osterman,A., Overbeek,R. and Godzik,A. (2005) Automatic
detection of subsystem/pathway variants in genome analysis.
Bioinformatics, 21, 478–486.
22. Kanehisa,M. (1997) A database for post-genome analysis.
Trends Genet, 13, 375–376.
23. Kanehisa,M. and Goto,S. (2000) KEGG: kyoto encyclopedia of
genes and genomes. Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 27–30.
24. Krieger,C.J., Zhang,P., Mueller,L.A., Wang,A., Paley,S., Arnaud,M.,
Pick,J., Rhee,S.Y. and Karp,P.D. (2004) MetaCyc: a multiorganism
database of metabolic pathways and enzymes. Nucleic Acids Res.,
32, D438–442.
25. Gelfand,M.S., Novichkov,P.S., Novichkova,E.S. and Mironov,A.A.
(2000) Comparative analysis of regulatory patterns in bacterial genomes.
Brief Bioinform., 1, 357–371.
26. Rodionov,D.A., Vitreschak,A.G., Mironov,A.A. and Gelfand,M.S.
(2002) Comparative genomics of thiamin biosynthesis in procaryotes:
new genesand regulatorymechanisms. J. Biol. Chem., 277, 48949–48959.
27. Rodionov,D.A., Mironov,A.A. and Gelfand,M.S. (2002) Conservation of
the biotin regulon and the BirA regulatory signal in eubacteria and
archaea. Genome. Res., 12, 1507–1516.
28. Koonin,E.V. and Galperin,M.Y. (2002) Sequence-Evolution-Function:
Computational Approaches in Comparative Genomics. 1st Edn
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston.
29. Huynen,M.A., Snel,B., von Mering,C. and Bork,P. (2003) Function
prediction and protein networks. Curr. Opin. Cell. Biol., 15,
191–198.
30. Xie,G., Keyhani,N.O., Bonner,C.A. and Jensen,R.A. (2003) Ancient
origin of the tryptophan operon and the dynamics of evolutionary change.
Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev., 67, 303–342.
5702 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 17
