The MPI Bioinformatics Toolkit for protein
sequence analysis
Andreas Biegert*, Christian Mayer, Michael Remmert, Johannes So¨ding and
Andrei N. Lupas
Department of protein Evolution, Max-Planck-Institute for Developmental Biology, Spemannstrasse 35,
72076 Tubingen, Germany
Received February 14, 2006; Revised and Accepted March 24, 2006
ABSTRACT
The MPI Bioinformatics Toolkit is an interactive
web service which offers access to a great variety
of public and in-house bioinformatics tools. They
are grouped into different sections that support
sequence searches, multiple alignment, secondary
and tertiary structure prediction and classification.
Several public tools are offered in customized ver-
sions that extend their functionality. For example,
PSI-BLAST can be run against regularly updated
standard databases, customized user databases or
selectable sets of genomes. Another tool, Quick2D,
integrates the results of various secondary structure,
transmembrane and disorder prediction programs
into one view. The Toolkit provides a friendly and
intuitive user interface with an online help facility.
As a key feature, various tools are interconnected
so that the results of one tool can be forwarded to
other tools. One could run PSI-BLAST, parse out a
multiple alignment of selected hits and send the
results to a cluster analysis tool. The Toolkit frame-
work and the tools developed in-house will be pack-
aged and freely available under the GNU Lesser
General Public Licence (LGPL). The Toolkit can be
accessed at http://toolkit.tuebingen.mpg.de.
INTRODUCTION
As this special issue shows, the number of public bioinform-
atic tools and web servers is growing quickly. However, the
wealth of powerful tools and servers is, in our opinion, only
utilized by a fraction of biologists who would be able to profit
from them. Especially for non-experts it can be very time-
consuming to find out which services exist, what they can or
cannot do, how to use them and how to feed results from one
service to the next in the right format. This has spawned the
development of two classes of servers. The first class, exem-
plified by PredictProtein (1), accepts a single sequence as
input, runs a whole set of standard protein analysis tools
and returns the bare, concatenated results in a single Email
or Web page, requiring users to be familiar with the tools and
their output format. The second class offers a collection of web
interfaces to local versions of public bioinformatic tools. For
instance, PAT (protein analysis toolkit) (2) facilitates the com-
bination of different analysis methods by automating repetit-
ive data processing tasks. However, its user interface and the
lack of an integrated help system make PAT, suited primarily
for users with biocomputing experience. Two further servers
designed as toolboxes for sequence analysis are the Biology
Workbench (3), which has not been updated for quite some
time, and AnaBench (4), which is more geared toward analysis
of DNA data.
The primary aim in developing the MPI Bioinformatics
Toolkit was to offer a web service that is as easy to use as
possible and that integrates a selected set of most useful
methods for the analysis of protein sequences. From our
own experience as users of the toolkit, its main advantages
are as follows:
 In-house tools: Several programs developed in our group are
available only through our toolkit, e.g. HHpred (5), HHrep
(6), HHsenser (7), REPPER (8), CLANS (9) and Blammer
(10) (see Table 1).
 Enhanced functionality of public tools: Many tools offer
additional functionality compared with the original public
server (see tool descriptions below).
 User databases: Users may upload customized databases
which are then accessible throughout the whole toolkit
(upload once, use many times).
 Interconnectivity: Most of the tools in the Toolkit are inter-
connected, allowing job results of one tool to be forwarded
as input to others.
 Streamlined, uniform user interface: Input forms are kept as
simple and self-explanatory as possible with a uniform
design and logic for all tools.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +49 7071 601 342; Fax +49 7071 601 349; Email: andreas.biegert@tuebingen.mpg.de
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue W335–W339
doi:10.1093/nar/gkl217
 Straightforward navigation: Tools are grouped into color-
coded sections that are easily accessible via tabs.
 Job management: A dedicated jobs sidebar provides infor-
mation and quick access to all job results of the current
session.
 Personal work space: Users may register and log in to gain
access to a personal work space featuring long-term storage
of jobs.
WEB INTERFACE
Currently, 30 bioinformatics tools and utilities can be
launched from the MPI Bioinformatics Toolkit (Table 1).
All tool sections are accessible from a tabbed menu bar located
at the top of the page (Figure 1). Each tab reveals a submenu
containing the section-specific tools, an overview page with
brief descriptions for each tool and a list of selected
links. Located on the left of the screen is a sidebar pane
that holds a status and section-coded list of all recent jobs
in the current session. One can click on previously submitted
jobs to check their status and view their results. Users can
also choose their own job names to organize their work. Each
tool has a separate input page with a web form, in which
the user can input sequence data, upload sequence files, and
specify options.
TOOL SECTIONS
The search section contains popular search tools, such as
NucleotideBLAST, ProteinBLAST (11), PSI-BLAST (12),
and HMMER (13), as well as our in-house developments
such as HHpred, HHsenser and PatternSearch. In comparison
Table 1. Overview of tools
Tool Source references Description
Search
NucleotideBLAST† Altschul et al. (11) Sequence search against nucleotide databases (blastn, tblast, tblastx)
ProteinBLAST† Altschul et al. (11) Sequence search against protein databases (blastpgp1, blastx)
PSI-BLAST† Altschul et al. (12) Iterated sequence search against protein databases
fastHMMER† Eddy (13) Fast profile HMM search tool derived from HMMER
HHpred* So¨ding et al. (5) Sensitive protein homology detection, function and structure prediction by HMM-HMM comparison
HHsenser* So¨ding et al. (7) Sensitive iterative sequence search based on HMM-HMM comparison
PatternSearch* Unpublished Search for sequences containing a given pattern
Alignment
ClustalW Thompson et al. (14) Multiple alignment program for protein and DNA sequences
MUSCLE Edgar (16) Multiple alignment program for protein sequences
ProbCons Do et al. (15) Multiple alignment program for protein sequences
MAFFT Katoh et al. (17) Multiple alignment program for protein and DNA sequences
Blammer* Frickey and Lupas (10) Converts BLAST/PSI-BLAST output to a multiple alignment by realigning gapped regions
with Clustal and removing local inconsistencies through comparison to a HMM
HHalign* So¨ding (30) Comparison of two alignments using HMMs
Sequence Analysis
HHrep* So¨ding et al. (6) Sensitive de novo repeat identification in protein sequences by HMM-HMM comparison
PCOILS* Lupas et al.(31) Coiled-coil prediction
REPPER* Gruber et al. (8) Identification of repeats and their periodicity by Fourier transform and internal
sequence comparisons
TPRpred* Unpublished Prediction of TPRs (Tetratrico Peptide Repeats) and related repeats (Pentatrico Peptide Repeats
and SEL1-like)
Aln2Plot* Unpublished Graphical overview of average hydrophobicity and side chain volume in a multiple alignment
Secondary Structure
Quick2D* Unpublished Concise overview of secondary structure prediction by PSIPRED (18), JNET (19) and
PROFKing (20); of coiled-coils by COILS (31); of transmembrane helices by MEMSAT2 (21)
and HMMTOP (22) and of natively disordered regions by DISOPRED2 (23)
Alignment Viewer* Unpublished Annotate an alignment with individual PSIPRED (18) and MEMSAT2 (21) predictions
Tertiary Structure
Modeller† Sali et al. (24) Comparative protein structure modeling by satisfying of spatial restraints
HHpred* So¨ding et al. (5) Sensitive protein homology detection, function and structure prediction by HMM-HMM comparison
Classification
PHYLIP-NEIGHBOR Felsenstein (27) Modules of the phylogenetic analysis package Phylip which allow the construction of
distance-based, neighbor-joining trees
CLANS* Frickey and Lupas (9) Clustering tool based on all-against-all BLAST comparisons
ANCESCON Cai et al. (28) Distance-based phylogenetic inference and reconstruction of ancestral protein sequences
Utilities
Reformat* Unpublished Sequence reformatting utility
6FrameTranslation* Unpublished Six-frame translation of nucleotide sequences
Extract_gis* Unpublished Extraction of gi-numbers from BLAST files
RetrieveSeq* Unpublished Sequence retrieval from the nr or nt database using a list of identifiers
gi2Promotor* Unpublished Extraction of nucleotide sequences upstream of genes identified by the gi-numbers of their
encoded proteins
Backtranslator* Unpublished Reverse translation of amino acids into nucleotide sequences
An asterisk after the toolname indicates that the tool was developed in our group.
A dagger indicates a public tool with extended functionality.
W336 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue
Figure 1. Input and result pages of PSI-BLAST with overlaid windows for genome databases and Jalview alignment viewer (32).
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue W337
with the NCBI server, our BLAST tools offer greater flexib-
ility and functionality: searches can be run against uploaded
personal databases or selectable sets of genomes (updated
weekly from NCBI and ENSEMBL), databases can be
switched between PSI-BLAST runs, alignments can be extrac-
ted, viewed online or forwarded to other tools, and two graphs
show matched regions and E-value distributions. The
fastHMMER tool performs HMMER searches of all standard
sequence databases in 10% of the time by reducing the
database with one iteration of PSI-BLAST at a cut-off
E-value of 10 000. PatternSearch identifies sequences contain-
ing a user-defined Prosite pattern or regular expression.
HHpred is a new server for protein structure and function
prediction (5). It takes a query sequence as input and searches
user-selected databases for homologs with a new and very
sensitive method based on pairwise comparison of hidden
Markov models (HMMs). Available databases, among others,
are InterPro, CDD and an aligment database we build from
Protein Data Bank (PDB) sequences and which can be used for
3D structure prediction. HHsenser is a transitive search
method based on HMM-HMM comparison (7). This method
utilizes a sequence as input and builds an alignment with as
many near or remote homologs as possible, often covering the
whole protein superfamily.
The alignment section includes the well-known, popular
multiple alignment program ClustalW (14), together with
the more recently developed multiple alignment methods
ProbCons (15), MUSCLE (16) and MAFFT (17). Also in
this section is Blammer (10), which converts BLAST or PSI-
BLAST output to a multiple alignment by realigning gapped
regions using ClustalW and removing local inconsistencies
through comparison with an HMM. HHalign aligns two align-
ments with each other by pairwise comparison of HMMs and
displays similarities in a profile–profile dotplot.
In the sequence analysis section, we have grouped tools for
repeat identification and analysis of periodic regions in pro-
teins. HHrep is a server for de novo repeat detection that is
very sensitive in finding proteins with strongly diverged
repeats, such as TIM barrels and b-propellers (6). REPPER
(8) analyzes regions with short gapless repeats in protein
sequences. It finds periodicities by Fourier transform and
internal sequence similarity. The output is complemented
by coiled-coil prediction and secondary structure prediction
using PSIPRED (18). Aln2Plot shows a graphical overview of
average hydrophobicity and side chain volume in a multiple
alignment.
In the secondary structure section, Quick2D integrates the
results of various secondary structure prediction programs,
such as PSIPRED (18), JNET (19) and PROFKing (20), the
transmembrane prediction of MEMSAT2 (21) and HMMTOP
(22) and the disorder prediction of DISOPRED (23) into a
single colored view. The AlignmentViewer clusters sequences
by a sequence idenity criterion, annotates groups of sequences
using PSIPRED and MEMSAT2 predictions of a multiple
alignment and graphically displays the results in an interactive
Java applet.
The tertiary structure section contains Modeller (24) and
HHpred (5). Modeller is a very popular program for compar-
ative modeling. It generates a 3D structural model from a
sequence alignment of a protein sequence with one or more
structural templates. In contrast to the standalone version of
Modeller, the input format does not need to be PIR but can also
be FASTA or most other standard multiple alignment formats.
Modeller is tightly integrated with HHpred, allowing selected
hits of HHpred results to be used as templates for subsequent
comparative modeling. On the results page, models can be
evaluated by using a browser-embedded 3D-viewer and charts
with output from several model quality assessment programs
are provided. This allows fast interactive refinement cycles of
the underlying multiple sequence alignment. The page also
provides a link to the iMolTalk server, which offers several
additional tools for the detailed analysis of structures and
models (25,26).
In the classification section, we offer modules of the
widely used phylogenetic analysis suite PHYLIP (27), the
ANCESCON package (28) for distance bases phylogenetic
analysis and CLANS (9). CLANS clusters user-provided
sequences based on BLAST pairwise similarities (29). The
results can be analysed with a CLANS Java applet or can
br exported to CLANS format.
Finally, in the utilities section there is a collection of tools
which help to perform simple tasks that the user will often be
confronted with. It includes a sequence reformatting utility, a
six-frame translation tool for nucleotide sequences, Extra-
ct_gis for the extraction of gi-numbers from BLAST files,
the RetrieveSeq tool for identifier-based sequence retrieval
from the non-redundant protein or nucleotide databases at
NCBI, gi2Promotor for the extraction of nucleotide sequences
upstream of genes identified by the gi-numbers of their
encoded proteins and a backtranslation tool.
FUTURE PLANS
Our own research on protein evolution now heavily depends
on the toolkit server. We will therefore continue to integrate
new tools as they become available and improve the usability
of the toolkit. For instance, a project manager will be added
that will further facilitate the organization and long-term stor-
age of job results. On the technical side, we are currently in the
process of porting the Toolkit to a new Rails-based web frame-
work that permits shorter development cycles and more flex-
ible tool interactions. The new architecture is fully object
oriented and renders the Toolkit easily installable. We will
package the Toolkit framework together with our in-house
tools and distribute it freely under the GNU LGPL.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Pawel Szczesny for contributing Aln2Plot and
Tancrd Frickey for many fruitful discussions and developing
various tools. We thank all users who helped to improve our
server with their questions, feedback, bug reports and tool
suggestions. Funding to pay the Open Access publication
charges for this article was provided by the Max-Planck
society.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Rost,B. and Liu,J. (2003) The PredictProtein server. Nucleic Acids Res.,
31, 3300–3304.
W338 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue
2. Gracy,J. and Chiche,L. (2005) PAT: a protein analysis toolkit for
integrated biocomputing on the web. Nucleic Acids Res., 33 (Suppl. 2),
W65–W71.
3. Subramaniam,S. (1998) The biology workbench—a seamless database
and analysis environment for the biologist. Proteins, 32, 1–2.
4. Badidi,E., De Sousa,C., Lang,B. and Burger,G. (2003) Anabench: a
web/corba-based workbench for biomolecular sequence analysis. BMC
Bioinformatics, 4, 63.
5. So¨ding,J., Biegert,A. and Lupas,A.N. (2005) The HHpred interactive
server for protein homology detection and structure prediction.
Nucleic Acids Res., 33, W244–W248.
6. So¨ding,J., Remmert,M. and Biegert,A. (2006) HHrep: de novo protein
repeat detection and the origin of TIM barrels. Nucleic Acids Res.
7. So¨ding,J., Biegert,A., Remmert,M. and Lupas,A. (2006) HHsenser:
exhaustive transitive profile search using HMM-HMM comparison.
Nucleic Acids Res.
8. Gruber,M., So¨ding,J. and Lupas,A. (2005) REPPER—repeats and their
periodicities in fibrous proteins. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, W239–W243.
9. Frickey,T. and Lupas,A. (2004) CLANS: a Java application for
visualizing protein families based on pairwise similarity.
Bioinformatics, 20, 3702–3704.
10. Frickey,T. and Lupas,A.N. (2004) PhyloGenie: automated phylome
generation and analysis. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, 5231–5238.
11. Altschul,S., Gish,W., Miller,W., Meyers,E. and Lipman,D. (1990) Basic
Local Alignment Search Tool. J. Mol. Biol., 215, 403–410.
12. Altschul,S., Madden,T., Schaffer,A., Zhang,J., Zhang,Z., Miller,W.
and Lipman,D. (1997) Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new
generation of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res.,
25, 3389–3402.
13. Eddy,S. (1998) Profile hidden Markov models. Bioinformatics, 14,
755–763.
14. Thompson,J., Higgin,D. and Gibson,T. (1994) CLUSTALW: improving
the sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through
sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix
choice. Nucl. Acids Res., 22, 4673–4680.
15. Do,C.B., Mahabhashyam,M.S., Brudno,M. and Batzoglou,S. (2005)
ProbCons: probabilistic consistency-based multiple sequence alignment.
Genome Res., 15, 330–340.
16. Edgar,R.C. (2004) MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high
accuracy and high throughput. Nucl. Acids Res., 32, 1792–1797.
17. Katoh,K., Misawa,K., Kuma,K.-I. and Miyata,T. (2002) MAFFT: a
novel method for rapid multiple sequence alignment based on fast
Fourier transform. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 3059–3066.
18. Jones,D. (1999) Protein secondary structure prediction based on
position-specific scoring matrices. J. Mol. Biol., 292, 195–202.
19. Cuff,J. and Barton,G. (2000) Application of multiple sequence
alignment profiles to improve protein secondary structure prediction.
Proteins, 40, 502–511.
20. Ouali,M. and King,R. (2000) Cascaded multiple classifiers for
secondary structure prediction [In Process Citation]. Protein Sci., 9,
1162–1176.
21. Jones,T., Taylor,W. and Thornton,J. (1994) A model recognition
approach to the prediction of all-helical membrane protein structure and
topology. Biochemistry, 33, 3038–3049.
22. Tusna´dy,G. and Simon,I. (1998) Principles governing amino acid
composition of integral membrane proteins: application to topology
prediction. J. Mol. Biol., 283, 489–506.
23. Ward,J., Sodhi,J., McGuffin,L., Buxton,B. and Jones,D. (2004)
Prediction and functional analysis of native disorder in proteins from the
three kingdoms of life. J. Mol. Biol., 337, 635–645.
24. Sali,A., Potterton,L., Yuan,F., vanVlijmen,H. and Karplus,M. (1995)
Evaluation of comparative protein modeling by MODELLER. Proteins,
23, 318–326.
25. Diemand,A.V. and Scheib,H. (2004) MolTalk—a programming library
for protein structures and structure analysis. BMC Bioinformatics, 5, 39.
26. Diemand,A.V. and Scheib,H. (2004) iMolTalk: an interactive,
internet-based protein structure analysis server. Nucleic Acids Res., 32,
W512–W516.
27. Felsenstein,J. (1989) PHYLIP—Phylogeny Inference Package (Version
3.2). Cladistics, 5, 164–166.
28. Cai,W., Pei,J. and Grishin,N.V. (2004) Reconstruction of ancestral
protein sequences and its applications. BMC Evol. Biol., 4, 33.
29. Frickey,T. and Lupas,A.N. (2004) Phylogenetic analysis of AAA
proteins. J. Struct. Biol., 146, 2–10.
30. So¨ding,J. (2005) Protein homology detection by HMM-HMM
comparison. Bioinformatics, 21, 951–960.
31. Lupas,A., Van Dyke,M. and Stock,J. (1991) Predicting Coiled Coils
from Protein Sequences. Science, 252, 1162–1164.
32. Clamp,M., Cuff,J., Searle,S.M. and Barton,G.J. (2004) The Jalview Java
alignment editor. Bioinformatics, 20, 426–427.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue W339
