Multiplex amplification enabled by selective
circularization of large sets of genomic DNA fragments
Fredrik Dahl, Mats Gullberg, Johan Stenberg, Ulf Landegren and Mats Nilsson*
Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Se-75185 Uppsala, Sweden
Received February 11, 2005; Revised and Accepted April 1, 2005
ABSTRACT
We present a method to specifically select large sets
of DNA sequences for parallel amplification by PCR
using target-specific oligonucleotide constructs,
so-called selectors. The selectors are oligonucleotide
duplexes with single-stranded target-complementary
end-sequences that are linked by a general sequence
motif. In the selection process, a pool of selectors is
combined with denatured restriction digested DNA.
Each selector hybridizes to its respective target, form-
ing individual circular complexes that are covalently
closed by enzymatic ligation. Non-circularized frag-
ments are removed by exonucleolysis, enriching for
the selected fragments. The general sequence that is
introduced into the circularized fragments allows
them to be amplified in parallel using a universal pri-
mer pair. The procedure avoids amplification artifacts
associated with conventional multiplex PCR where
two primers are used for each target, thereby reducing
the number of amplification reactions needed for
investigating large sets of DNA sequences. We dem-
onstrate the specificity, reproducibility and flexibility
of this process by performing a 96-plex amplification
of an arbitrary set of specific DNA sequences, fol-
lowed by hybridization to a cDNA microarray.
Eighty-nine percent of the selectors generated PCR
products that hybridized to the expected positions
on the array, while little or no amplification artifacts
were observed.
INTRODUCTION
The PCR (1) along with Sanger sequencing (2) are the two
molecular techniques that have contributed the most to our
understanding of genomes. Today, the vast majority of meth-
ods for identifying sequences in the human genome involve
target sequence amplification through PCR.
PCR is a bimolecular mechanism to probe and copy DNA,
which performs optimally with single target sequences.
Increasingly, however, large numbers of sequences are under
investigation and procedures have therefore been developed
for parallel amplification. Non-specific amplification of
whole genomes is possible using methods such as PEP- and
DOP-PCR (3,4) or by multiple-displacement amplification (5).
A few methods exist that permit the user to amplify subsets of
genomes using variants of so-called adaptor PCR (6–8). For
example, Kennedy et al. (6) present a technique for fragment
selection and complexity reduction through adaptor ligation
of digested genomic DNA samples, followed by PCR. The
method is optimized to amplify fragments in particular size
ranges, but it is difficult to control the composition of the
amplified sets of fragments. Adaptor PCR methods are also
used to in vitro clone individual amplicons on microbeads or
in microwells (9,10). Currently, the only way to amplify many
defined sequences in the same reaction is by combining
several different PCR primer pairs. A crucial problem with
this approach is the appearance of amplification artifacts, such
as primer-dimers, truncated fragments or amplification pro-
ducts of irrelevant target sequences. The risk of generating
such artifacts in a multiplex PCR tends to increase roughly as
the square of the number of added primer pairs (11). Even with
careful attention paid to the design of the primers, PCR is
usually limited to about 10 simultaneous amplification reac-
tions before the analysis of the resulting amplification product
is significantly compromised (12,13). Impressive results
have been obtained with simultaneous amplification of sets
of 10 long-range PCR products (14), but it has proven difficult
to greatly increase the number of simultaneously amplified
fragments. Therefore, large numbers of separate PCRs are
typically performed whenever many genomic sequences
need to be analyzed.
Here, we present an approach to enable robust amplification
of large sets of selected DNA sequences. The procedure
is based on the hybridization of oligonucleotide constructs,
called selectors, to defined target nucleic acid sequences.
The selectors contain target-complementary end-sequences,
joined by a general linking sequence, and they act as ligation
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +46 018 471 4816; Email: Mats.nilsson@genpat.uu.se
The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors
ª The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 8 e71
doi:10.1093/nar/gni070
templates to direct circularization of target DNA fragments.
These circularized targets are then amplified in multiplex
using one universal PCR primer pair specific for the general
linking sequence in the selectors. We demonstrate the method
by performing a 96-plex amplification reaction and we argue
that this method will perform well at still greater levels of
multiplexing.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Oligonucleotides and design
Ninety-six cDNA clone sequences from a cDNA microarray
were chosen in a UU pattern. Corresponding genomic target
sequences for selector design were found by sequence simil-
arity search using BLAST (15). For each cDNA sequence, the
genomic sequence yielding the highest-scoring hit was used
as a target sequence. The target sequences and an additional
700 nt of sequence information on both sides were down-
loaded and in silico restriction digested. Restriction fragments
were considered suitable for selection if they contained at least
70 consecutive nucleotides complementary to the cDNA and
they were between 140 and 750 nt in length. Selector probes
were designed against one suitable genomic fragment for each
target. The selectors, 50-phosphorylated vector, and primers
were from DNA Technology (Aarhus, Denmark). Sequences
are shown in the Supplementary Table S1.
Circularization and amplification of 96 fragments
Genomic DNA was extracted from human blood samples
(Flexigene, Qiagen). Two combinations of restriction
enzymes, FH: 10 U of Fsp I (Fermentas) and 10 U of
HpyCH4 V (New England Biolabs); AC: 10 U of Acu I
(New England Biolabs) and 10 U of CviA II (New England
Biolabs), were added to two different aliquots of 10 mg
genomic DNA and 0.5 mg BSA, in a total volume of 50 ml
NEBuffer 4. The restriction digestion was performed at 37C
for 1 h. Two different circularization reactions containing
1.6 pM of each of 87 and 9 different selectors were combined
with 1 mg of DNA from the restriction digestion reactions
FH and AC, respectively. The circularization reactions
were performed in PCR buffer (Invitrogen) supplemented
with 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM NAD and 3.2 nM of vector oli-
gonucleotide, using 2.5 U Platinum Taq DNA polymerase
(Invitrogen) and 5 U Ampligase (Epicentre) in a volume of
25 ml. The circularization reactions were incubated at 95C for
15 min, 60C for 20 min, followed by 50C overnight. To
enrich for circularized DNA by degrading linear strands
including selectors, 10 ml of the circularization mixtures
(0.4 mg DNA) were then added to a 10 ml mixture of 5 U
Exonuclease I (New England Biolabs), 110 mM Tris–HCl,
pH 9.0, 3 mM MgCl2 and 0.2 mg BSA and incubated for
2 h at 37C, followed by 95C for 10 min. Amplification
was performed using 4 ml of each exonuclease-treated circu-
larization reaction (80 ng DNA each) added to 17 ml mixture
of 1· PCR buffer (Invitrogen), supplemented with 0.5 U
Platinum Taq DNA polymerase (Invitrogen), 0.25 mM dNTP,
0.4 mM Cy-3-labeled forward and reverse primer, respectively,
and 2 mM MgCl2. Cycling was performed as follows: 95
C
for 2 min, followed by 40 cycles of 95C for 30 s, 55C for
30 s and 72C for 20 s.
Array hybridization
cDNA arrays were obtained from the microarray core facility
at Uppsala University. Arrays were prepared according to
the manufacturer’s recommendations. In brief, 7776 cDNA
clones were obtained from the Sequence Verified Known
Genes Collection (Research Genetics). Clone inserts were
prepared using the standard protocol and printed in dupli-
cate on UltraGAPS slides (Corning Life Sciences) using a
Cartesian Prosys 5510A (Cartesian Technologies) printer.
Slides were cross-linked with 450 mJ ultraviolet light using
UV-Stratalinker 1800 (Stratagen). To verify the quality of the
array, a Cy-3-labeled random 9mer (Operon) was hybridized
to one of the arrays. An aliquot of 25 ml of amplification
reaction was hybridized to a cDNA array together with 25 ml
MICROMAX hybridization buffer (NEN) at 55C overnight.
The array was washed in 0.02· SSC and 0.1% Triton X-100
for 2 min, transferred to 0.1 mM NaCl2 for 5 s, and then
scanned using a GenePix 4000B (Axon Instruments). Images
were analyzed using GenePix Pro 5.0 (Axon Instruments).
Signals were defined as positive if the ratio of fluorescence
to local background exceeded a threshold value for both
duplicate spots. This threshold was set so that <1% of the
7680 spots outside the UU pattern were scored as positive.
In silico restriction digestion
Sequence data for the first 2 kb of every 100 kb of the first
100 Mb of each of the human chromosomes 1–6 were extrac-
ted from the NCBI genome database. These sequences were
randomly allocated into five sets of 1000 sequences each. The
sequences were in silico digested with the PieceMaker pro-
gram (16), using a set of 20 commercially available restriction
enzymes and all combinations of two of these enzymes.
Enzymes are presented in Supplementary Table S2.
RESULTS
Selectors provide a means to choose a large number of defined
target sequences for amplification in parallel. Each selector
contains two oligonucleotides: one selector probe with two
end sequences complementary to the target sequence to be
selected for amplification, separated by a general primer-
pair motif, and one vector oligonucleotide complementary
to the general primer-pair motif (Figure 1A). As a first step
in the circularization reaction, a DNA sample is digested by
restriction enzymes to generate target fragments with defined
ends. The digested DNA sample is then denaturated to allow
the selector to hybridize to the restriction fragments and tem-
plate ligation to the vector oligonucleotide, forming single-
stranded circular DNA molecules. This step can be performed
in two different ways (Figure 1B). (i) When the ends of a
targeted restriction fragment hybridize to the appropriate
selector probe, the ends become juxtaposed to the vector
oligonucleotide guided by the selector probe. Next, a ligase
joins the restriction fragment to the vector oligonucleotide
generating a circular DNA strand. (ii) Alternatively, the
30 end segment of the selector probe is designed to hybridize
to the 30 end of a targeted restriction fragment as above, but
the 50 end segment of the selector probe is designed to hybrid-
ize to an internal sequence in the target fragment, forming a
branched structure. This structure serves as substrate for the
e71 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 8 PAGE 2 OF 7
endonucleolytic activity of Taq polymerase, resulting in an
invasive cleavage (17). The reaction product is then converted
to a circular molecule as under (i) above. In the second
procedure, the 50 end of the target, and also the size of the
amplified sequence, can be defined without being limited
by the presence of restriction sites. Both procedures require
two hybridization and ligation events in order to circularize
a target sequence, while procedure (ii) also requires an invas-
ive cleavage. These strict requirements should provide suffi-
cient specificity to allow analysis of unique sequences in
human genomic DNA. After the circularization reaction, lin-
ear sample DNA is degraded by exonucleolysis. Thereby, the
sample is enriched for circularized DNA fragments, having
the general vector oligonucleotide inserted. These fragments
are then amplified in a PCR using a universal primer pair
specific for the vector oligonucleotide (Figure 1B).
We assessed the performance of the method by selecting
an unbiased set of 96 genomic fragments for amplification,
and then analyzing the product by hybridization to an array of
7500 spotted human cDNA sequences. To demonstrate that
we can amplify a defined set of targets, we choose targets in
the genome that corresponded to cDNA sequences at 96 posi-
tions on the array in the pattern of UU (as in Uppsala Uni-
versity). The first step in the design of the 96 selectors was to
perform an in silico restriction digestions of the human
genomic DNA sequence to find a combination of restriction
enzymes that generated suitable fragments for all targets. We
chose two different restriction enzyme combinations, each
with two different enzymes (FH: Fsp I/HpyCH4 V; AC:
Acu I/CviA II), which formed suitable fragments for 87 and
9 targets, respectively. The selector probes were designed for
strategy (i) if the fragments were of the desired size (140–
160 bp), and for strategy (ii) if they were larger, to generate
amplification products of 190 bp (Figure 2A). The selector
probes were purchased as a standard 96-plate synthesis and
mixed in two pools, one containing 87 selector probes (FH)
and the other containing 9 selector probes (AC). Each pool
was then combined with DNA from the appropriate digested
genomic DNA sample in two separate circularization reac-
tions. These were then subjected to exonuclease treatment,
combined and amplified in a single PCR with a universal
Cy3-labeled primer pair. The PCR product was analyzed on
a 1.5% agarose gel (Figure 2A). The gel analysis showed one
sharp band of 190 bp, demonstrating the specificity of the
amplification. The PCR product was then hybridized to the
7.5 k cDNA microarray (Figure 2B).
To evaluate the reproducibility of the method, the experi-
ment was repeated using five different DNA samples. First,
to verify the quality of the array, a Cy-3-labeled random 9mer
was hybridized to an array from the same spotting session.
This analysis showed that 7 of the 96 selected spots lacked
cDNA (data not shown), limiting the number of positions that
we could analyze to 89. Next, the samples were hybridized
to five different slides and a threshold value was defined for
each slide, such that 76 of 7684 (1%) spots were scored
positive outside the UU pattern. These spots could represent
false amplification products or be due to misprinting or cross
hybridizations. Seventy-nine (89%) of the selected fragments
generated positive signals in at least three of five experiments,
and 71 (80%) were scored positive in all five experiments. The
average signal intensities of the 79 positive fragments are
shown in Figure 3. The signal intensities were reproducible
with an average variation (CV) of 24%. We further verified the
inter- versus intra-experimental reproducibility in dual-color
co-hybridization experiments, comparing a pair of reactions
using the same genomic sample, and a pair of reactions using
two different samples. We found that the correlation coeffi-
cients in the two comparisons were very similar, indicating
that the intra- and inter-experimental variation is similar
(Supplementary Figure S3).
Applying the selector method requires finding restriction
enzymes, or combinations of enzymes, that generate DNA
fragments suitable for the particular application. To investig-
ate whether this process is scalable, we performed in silico
Figure 1. Selector construct and circularization reaction principles. (A) The
selector consists of two oligonucleotides, one selector probe of 70 nt and one
general vector oligonucleotide of 34 nt. The selector probe has two target-
specific ends (black) of 18 nt complementary to the selected target and a
primer-pair motif (gray) of 34 nt. The vector oligonucleotide is complementary
to the primer-pair motif (gray). (B) The circularization procedure starts with
digestion of the DNA to generate targets with defined ends. The digested DNA
is then combined with selectors and the mixture is denaturated, allowing the
selectors to hybridize to their respective targets. This can be performed in two
different ways: (i) a selector probe hybridizes to both ends of the selected target
and the ends are connected to the vector by ligation, or (ii) a selector probe
hybridizes with one end to the 30 end of the selected target and the other end
to an internal sequence of the target, forming a branched structure that can be
cleaved by the endonucleolytic activity of Taq DNA polymerase. Both ends
of the selected single-stranded target are now ready for ligation to the vector
oligonucleotide, forming a closed circular molecule. The circularization
mixture is then exonuclease-treated and finally PCR-amplified using a common
primer pair.
PAGE 3 OF 7 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 8 e71
AB
Figure 2. Multiplex selector PCR. A total of 96 sequences were selected from a 7.5 k cDNA array in a pattern of a UU. Ninety-six selectors were then designed to
select and amplify the corresponding targets from the human genome. The circularization reaction was performed as described in Figure 1B, where three fragments
were circularized using procedure (i) and 93 using procedure (ii). A multiplexed PCR with a Cy3-labeled primer pair was then performed. (A) The PCR product from
the 96-plex PCR was analyzed on a 1.5% agarose gel. The gel was loaded with a 100 bp ladder (left lane), PCR product from circularization reaction with ligase
(middle lane) and PCR product from a circularization reaction without ligase. A histogram showing the expected length distribution of the 96 PCR products plotted
against relative frequency (%). (B) The PCR product was also hybridized to the cDNA array. Fluorescence intensity is represented as a pseudo-color gradient ranging
from green to red.
e71 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 8 PAGE 4 OF 7
restriction digestions on increasing the number of sequences
from five different sets of arbitrarily chosen target sequences
from the human genome. In this simulation, 20 commercially
available restriction enzymes were used in either one or two
reactions, each with one or two restriction enzymes. Design
parameters were selected to be similar to those used in the
96-plex experiment presented. The design success rates of
these different restriction digestions are presented in
Figure 4. The results show that the rate of success does not
tend to decrease with increasing number of targets.
DISCUSSION
We present a strategy for multiplex PCR amplification of
large sets of specifically selected DNA fragments from
total genomic DNA using oligonucleotide selectors. Current
investigations where many gene sequences must be amplified
by PCR require multiple separate amplification reactions, and
therefore tend to be time-consuming, expensive and require
large amounts of target DNA. In contrast, selector-based amp-
lification permits amplification of multiple specific DNA
sequences in individual reactions, requiring fewer amplifica-
tion reactions and less sample material.
Selector design requires that combinations of restriction
enzymes are found that generate suitable fragments for
as many target sequences as possible, while minimizing the
number of separate digestion reactions. For the demonstrated
96-plex PCR, two digestion reactions using two different
restriction enzymes each were required to achieve a 100%
design success rate. In an accompanying paper, design criteria
are discussed in more detail and a computer program is
described that guides the choice of selectors and restriction
enzymes for given sets of amplicons (16).
The selector-based amplification method requires a single
70mer oligonucleotide for each amplicon, compared with
the two oligonucleotides of 20 or so nucleotides each used
in conventional PCR. It may be possible to reduce the cost of
generating a multitude of selectors by using microarray-based
oligonucleotide synthesis methods (18).
A single sharp band of 190 bp was seen upon gel analysis.
No evidence of non-specific amplification was observed, as
this would be expected to generate differently sized fragments.
The array-based analysis demonstrated that 89% of the selec-
ted targets were amplified. By analyzing the intensity of the
array signals, we further found that the amplification efficiency
of each fragment was highly reproducible with an average
signal variation of 24% (CV). However, we cannot determine
to what extent the amplification efficiency differs between
the selected fragments since the variation in signal intensities
between different spots on the array does not directly reflect
Figure 3. Reproducibility of selector PCR. The selection reaction described in Figure 2 was performed using DNA from five different individuals to investigate the
reproducibility of the method. The graph demonstrates the variation in signal for each of the 78 selected fragments that were defined as positive. Signals were
normalized relative to the total intensity of the spots in the UU pattern. Fragments are ordered with increasing average signal with bars representing 1 SD.
PAGE 5 OF 7 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 8 e71
the concentration of the selected fragments, due to the
semi-quantitative nature of cDNA array analyses. The failure
to demonstrate hybridization to 10 of the targets on the array
could potentially be due to poor oligonucleotide quality. To
investigate this, we repeated the experiment using high-
performance liquid chromatography purified selector probes
for the failed fragments, but none of them was rescued (data
not shown). Another potential cause of failure is the presence
of polymorphic sequences influencing restriction digestion,
but we found no known polymorphisms in SNP databases
that could explain these failures. However, we did find a cor-
relation between the failure rate and the GC content of the
targets. The success rate for targets of <60% GC content was
95%, while for targets with >60% GC content the success rate
was only 71%. We are currently investigating ways to improve
the selection and amplification protocol to further increase the
efficiency of amplification of GC-rich targets.
It has previously been shown that thousands of oligonuc-
leotide probes can selectively be circularized and then amp-
lified in parallel using a universal PCR primer pair (19–21).
Unlike this probe amplification method, which distinguishes
single-nucleotide variation among DNA samples, the selectors
guide amplification of the target DNA, enabling analysis of
longer sequences. On the other hand, since the selector method
is based on selective circularization of DNA molecules and a
universal PCR amplification, similar to the probe amplification
method, we expect that the selector technique can be applied
for higher levels of multiplexing than the 96 shown in this
paper. We have further demonstrated that the selector design
can be extended to far larger numbers of amplicons. As an
alternative to PCR, circle-to-circle amplification (C2CA) can
be used to amplify the selected DNA circles (22). The C2CA
procedure has been shown to yield greater amounts of indi-
vidual amplicons than PCR, potentially enabling even higher
levels of multiplexing. The C2CA process has also been shown
to amplify different amplicons more evenly than PCR (22),
and should furthermore introduce fewer polymerase errors in
the amplified sequences (23).
As discussed, the selector-based amplification procedure is
suitable for highly parallel DNA analysis and can be applied
for, for example, parallel large-scale resequencing. Currently,
considerable efforts are invested in developing the so-called
ultra low cost sequencing (ULCS) methods, with the goal of
sequencing the entire human genome for US $1000, a 4–5-log
improvement over current methods (24). A more realistic goal
in the shorter term is to sequence only parts of the genome of
particular interest, e.g. all exons and promoters. The use of
selectors for parallel amplification could prove of value for
several of the ULCS methods, whether based on sequencing by
hybridization (14,25) or sequencing by synthesis (9,10,26,27).
Selectors could also reduce time and cost required for analyses
in PCR-based genotyping (13) and in other mutation detection
methods (28).
In conclusion, we present a new method for multiplexed
amplification of selected DNA fragments by PCR. The method
provides a robust mechanism and a simple protocol that should
be of great value for a wide range of PCR-based applications.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Material is available at NAR Online.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Lena Spa˚ngberg provided technical assistance. Dr A. Isaksson
kindly provided cDNA arrays and we appreciate the technical
support provided by Nicklas Olsson. The work was supported
by the Swedish Research Councils for Medicine and for Natural
and Engineering Sciences, Wallenberg Consortium North for
Functional Genomics, the Uppsala BioX, and the EU-FP6
integrated project MolTools. Funding to pay the Open Access
publication charges for this article was provided by the
MolTools project.
Conflict of interest statement. F. Dahl, M. Gullberg,
U. Landegren and M. Nilsson have licensed the commercial
rights to the technology to Olink AB (Uppsala, Sweden),
a company in which M. Gullberg, U. Landegren and
M. Nilsson also hold stock. J. Stenberg declares no conflict
of interest.
REFERENCES
1. Saiki,R.K., Scharf,S., Faloona,F., Mullis,K.B., Horn,G.T., Erlich,H.A.
and Arnheim,N. (1985) Enzymatic amplification of beta-globin genomic
sequences and restriction site analysis for diagnosis of sickle cell
anemia. Science, 230, 1350–1354.
Figure 4. Design simulation demonstrating scalability of the method. Selector
design was performed on five arbitrary sets of human genomic sequences.
The figure shows the average design success rate for increasing numbers of
fragments. Bars represent 1 SD. Line I represents one digestion reaction with
one restriction enzyme, line II represents one digestion reaction with two
restriction enzymes, line III represents two digestion reactions with one
restriction enzyme in each reaction and line IV represents two digestion
reactions with two restriction enzymes in each reaction. Arbitrarily selected
2 kb fragments containing 250 bp long sequences of interest were chosen as
targets. After in silico digestion with different enzymes and combinations
thereof, those target–enzyme combinations resulting in at least one fragment
fulfilling the design parameters were considered successful. The parameters for
the restriction fragments were set to a content of at least 50 bp of the desired
sequence, a maximum flap length of 500 bp, and size of the selected fragment
of 100–200 bp.
e71 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 8 PAGE 6 OF 7
2. Sanger,F., Nicklen,S. and Coulson,A.R. (1977) DNA sequencing with
chain-terminating inhibitors. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 74, 5463–
5467.
3. Zhang,L., Cui,X., Schmitt,K., Hubert,R., Navidi,W. and Arnheim,N.
(1992) Whole genome amplification from a single cell: implications for
genetic analysis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 89, 5847–5851.
4. Telenius,H., Carter,N.P., Bebb,C.E., Nordenskjold,M., Ponder,B.A. and
Tunnacliffe,A. (1992) Degenerate oligonucleotide-primed PCR:
general amplification of target DNA by a single degenerate primer.
Genomics, 13, 718–725.
5. Dean,F.B., Hosono,S., Fang,L., Wu,X., Faruqi,A.F., Bray-Ward,P.,
Sun,Z., Zong,Q., Du,Y., Du,J. et al. (2002) Comprehensive human
genome amplification using multiple displacement amplification.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 99, 5261–5266.
6. Kennedy,G.C., Matsuzaki,H., Dong,S., Liu,W.M., Huang,J., Liu,G.,
Su,X., Cao,M.,Chen,W.,Zhang,J. et al. (2003) Large-scale genotyping of
complex DNA. Nat. Biotechnol., 21, 1233–1237.
7. Shapero,M.H., Zhang,J., Loraine,A., Liu,W., Di,X., Liu,G. and
Jones,K.W. (2004) MARA: a novel approach for highly multiplexed
locus-specific SNP genotyping using high-density DNA oligonucleotide
arrays. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, e181.
8. Matsuzaki,H., Loi,H., Dong,S., Tsai,Y.Y., Fang,J., Law,J., Di,X.,
Liu,W.M., Yang,G., Liu,G. et al. (2004) Parallel genotyping of over
10,000 SNPs using a one-primer assay on a high-density oligonucleotide
array. Genome Res., 14, 414–425.
9. Brenner,S., Johnson,M., Bridgham,J., Golda,G., Lloyd,D.H.,
Johnson,D., Luo,S., McCurdy,S., Foy,M., Ewan,M. et al. (2000)
Gene expression analysis by massively parallel signature sequencing
(MPSS) on microbead arrays. Nat. Biotechnol., 18, 630–634.
10. Leamon,J.H., Lee,W.L., Tartaro,K.R., Lanza,J.R., Sarkis,G.J.,
deWinter,A.D., Berka,J. and Lohman,K.L. (2003) A massively parallel
PicoTiterPlate based platform for discrete picoliter-scale polymerase
chain reactions. Electrophoresis, 24, 3769–3777.
11. Landegren,U. and Nilsson,M. (1997) Locked on target: strategies for
future gene diagnostics. Ann. Med., 29, 585–590.
12. Hacia,J.G., Sun,B., Hunt,N., Edgemon,K., Mosbrook,D., Robbins,C.,
Fodor,S.P., Tagle,D.A. and Collins,F.S. (1998) Strategies for mutational
analysis of the large multiexon ATM gene using high-density
oligonucleotide arrays. Genome Res., 8, 1245–1258.
13. Syvanen,A.C. (2001) Accessing genetic variation: genotyping single
nucleotide polymorphisms. Nature Rev. Genet., 2, 930–942.
14. Patil,N., Berno,A.J.,Hinds,D.A.,Barrett,W.A., Doshi,J.M.,Hacker,C.R.,
Kautzer,C.R., Lee,D.H., Marjoribanks,C., McDonough,D.P. et al.
(2001) Blocks of limited haplotype diversity revealed by
high-resolution scanning of human chromosome 21. Science,
294, 1719–1723.
15. Altschul,S.F., Gish,W., Miller,W., Myers,E.W. and Lipman,D.J. (1990)
Basic local alignment search tool. J. Mol. Biol., 215, 403–410.
16. Stenberg,J., Dahl,F., Landegren,U. and Nilsson,M. (2005) PieceMaker:
selection of DNA fragments for selector-guided multiplex amplification.
Nucleic Acids Res., vol 33, e72.
17. Lyamichev,V., Brow,M.A. and Dahlberg,J.E. (1993) Structure-specific
endonucleolytic cleavage of nucleic acids by eubacterial DNA
polymerases. Science, 260, 778–783.
18. Zhou,X., Cai,S., Hong,A., You,Q., Yu,P., Sheng,N., Srivannavit,O.,
Muranjan,S., Rouillard,J.M., Xia,Y. et al. (2004) Microfluidic PicoArray
synthesis of oligodeoxynucleotides and simultaneous assembling of
multiple DNA sequences. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, 5409–5417.
19. Baner,J., Isaksson,A., Waldenstrom,E., Jarvius,J., Landegren,U. and
Nilsson,M. (2003) Parallel gene analysis with allele-specific padlock
probes and tag microarrays. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, e103.
20. Hardenbol,P., Baner,J., Jain,M., Nilsson,M., Namsaraev,E.A.,
Karlin-Neumann,G.A., Fakhrai-Rad,H., Ronaghi,M., Willis,T.D.,
Landegren,U. et al. (2003) Multiplexed genotyping with
sequence-tagged molecular inversion probes. Nat. Biotechnol.,
21, 673–678.
21. Hardenbol,P., Yu,F., Belmont,J., Mackenzie,J., Bruckner,C.,
Brundage,T., Boudreau,A., Chow,S., Eberle,J., Erbilgin,A. et al. (2005)
Highly multiplexed molecular inversion probe genotyping: over 10,000
targeted SNPs genotyped in a single tube assay. Genome Res., 15,
269–275.
22. Dahl,F., Baner,J., Gullberg,M., Mendel-Hartvig,M., Landegren,U. and
Nilsson,M. (2004) Circle-to-circle amplification for precise and sensitive
DNA analysis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 101, 4548–4553.
23. Esteban,J.A., Salas,M. and Blanco,L. (1993) Fidelity of phi 29 DNA
polymerase. Comparison between protein-primed initiation and
DNA polymerization. J. Biol. Chem., 268, 2719–2726.
24. Shendure,J., Mitra,R.D., Varma,C. and Church,G.M. (2004) Advanced
sequencing technologies: methods and goals. Nature Rev. Genet., 5,
335–344.
25. Chee,M., Yang,R., Hubbell,E., Berno,A., Huang,X.C., Stern,D.,
Winkler,J., Lockhart,D.J., Morris,M.S. and Fodor,S.P. (1996) Accessing
genetic information with high-density DNA arrays. Science, 274,
610–614.
26. Mitra,R.D., Butty,V.L., Shendure,J., Williams,B.R., Housman,D.E. and
Church,G.M. (2003) Digital genotyping and haplotyping with
polymerase colonies. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 100,
5926–5931.
27. Dressman,D., Yan,H., Traverso,G., Kinzler,K.W. and Vogelstein,B.
(2003) Transforming single DNA molecules into fluorescent magnetic
particles for detection and enumeration of genetic variations.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 100, 8817–8822.
28. Fakhrai-Rad,H., Zheng,J., Willis,T.D., Wong,K., Suyenaga,K.,
Moorhead,M., Eberle,J., Thorstenson,Y.R., Jones,T., Davis,R.W. et al.
(2004) SNP discovery in pooled samples with mismatch repair
detection. Genome Res., 14, 1404–1412.
PAGE 7 OF 7 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 8 e71
