EchoBASE: an integrated post-genomic database
for Escherichia coli
RajuV.Misra,RichardS.P.Horler,WolfgangReindl, Igor I.Goryanin1 andGavinH. Thomas*
Department of Biology (Area 10), University of York, PO Box 373,York, YO10 5YW, UK and 1Scientific Computing
and Mathematical Modelling, GlaxoSmithKline, Gunnels Wood Road, Stevenage, SG1 2NY, UK
Received August 13, 2004; Accepted September 21, 2004
ABSTRACT
EchoBASE (http://www.ecoli-york.org) is a relational
database designed to contain and manipulate
information from post-genomic experiments using
the model bacterium Escherichia coli K-12. Its aim
is to collate information from a wide range of sources
to provide clues to the functions of the approximately
1500 gene products that have no confirmed cellular
function. The database is built on an enhanced
annotation of the updated genome sequence of strain
MG1655 and the association of experimental data
with the E.coli genes and their products. Experi-
ments that can be held within EchoBASE include
proteomics studies, microarray data, protein–protein
interaction data, structural data and bioinformatics
studies. EchoBASE also contains annotated informa-
tion on ‘orphan’ enzyme activities from this microbe
to aid characterization of the proteins that catalyse
these elusive biochemical reactions.
INTRODUCTION
The bacterium Escherichia coli K-12 is the most thoroughly
studied free-living organism and the completion of the genome
sequence of strain MG1655 in 1997 was a landmark event in
the study of this model organism (1). Our understanding of this
species has been boosted by the genome sequences of the
pathogenic strains E.coli O157:H7 (2,3) and E.coli CFT073
(4). The genome sequence has provided the opportunity of
being able to identify all the potential components of the
cell, and the annotation of E.coli K-12 strain MG1655 has
recently been updated with some sequence and resulting
gene annotation changes. One striking fact remains 7 years
after the sequence was finished: the physiological functions of
nearly 35% of its gene products are unknown, while almost
20% of the genome contains genes for which we cannot make
a confident prediction of function (functionally unknown or
FUN genes) (5–7).
Data is continuously being generated about FUN genes
using many traditional and post-genomic research techniques,
including proteomics, biochemical studies, microarrays, struc-
tural and bioinformatics approaches. At present, tracing all the
published data on a particular FUN gene is difficult and time
consuming and there is a need to collate and organize such data
into a manageable and efficient database system. Integration of
a wide range of information about a particular FUN gene can
work synergistically to help in prediction of its function.
We describe herein the creation of EchoBASE, a new data-
base that integrates information from post-genomic experi-
ments into a single resource. For basic curation of gene
product information, the database relies on features from
other selected E.coli databases, its novelty being the linkage
of curated experimental data to individual genes and ability to
manipulate data from genome-wide experiments. While we
aim to predict biological functions for uncharacterized gene
products, there are existing lists of biochemical activities that
have been identified in E.coli but not mapped to a gene prod-
uct, so-called ‘orphan enzymes’. To complete our knowledge
of metabolic pathways in E.coli, it is essential to identify the
genes that encode these ‘orphan’ enzymes and we describe our
curation and analysis of ‘orphan’ enzymes in E.coli as a com-
ponent of EchoBASE.
EchoBASE is the major evolution of a simple HTML cata-
logue of functional updates of uncharacterized gene products
that was begun in 1998 (7), and is a component of the E.coli
index WWW site (http://ecoli.bham.ac.uk/) (8).
DESCRIPTION OF EchoBASE
EchoBASE is a relational database that was designed and
implemented using the MySQL database management system
and Macromedia ColdFusion MX server technology. The ori-
ginal version was launched in January 2004 and this paper
describes version 1.2, released on September 1. Although the
database focuses on holding data from post-genomic experi-
ments, it also provides a basic annotation of the E.coli K-12
genome. This annotation was based on EcoGene 16, which we
considered the most accurate annotation in 2003 (9). However,
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +44 1904 328678; Fax: +44 1904 328825; Email: ght2@york.ac.uk
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use permissions, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org.
ª 2005, the authors
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 33, Database issue ª Oxford University Press 2005; all rights reserved
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D329–D333
doi:10.1093/nar/gki028
in version 1.2, we have added a number of changes to the
sequence as a result of additional sequence data presented in
version m56 of the GenBank entry U00096, the first movement
towards a single united annotation of the MG1655 genome
sequence which will be held in the ASAP database (10).
Each gene record contains a functional description of the
product, the location and direction of the gene on the chromo-
some and predictions of the properties of the gene product
(Figure 1). The nucleotide and amino acid sequences are also
held in the database. A simple graphical genome navigation
tool has been incorporated into the gene page in version 1.2,
which shows information relating to relative gene size, chro-
mosomal position and uses a colour coding scheme that
reflects the type of features being illustrated, e.g protein-
coding sequence, rRNA, sRNA. For additional information
on gene products, EchoBASE links out to a suite of other
databases that provide a variety of complementary data. For
existing literature we link to EcoGene (9), for information on
transcription units and metabolic pathways we link to EcoCyc
(11), for data on protein modules and families we link to
GenProtEC (12) and for comparative genomics tools we
link to coliBASE (13).
We have added some novel in-house whole-genome annota-
tion, the most useful being a genome-wide survey of pre-
dicted subcellular location, the EchoLOCATION feature.
The subcellular location of a protein can often provide insight
into its functional role in the cell, and we have combined and
manually processed data from SignalP v. 2.0 (14), LipoP v. 1.0
(15), TMHMM v. 2.0 (16) and HMMTOP (17) to make a
prediction for each gene product.
CURATION OF EXPERIMENTAL INFORMATION
The focus of EchoBASE is on the integration of post-genomic
data to provide greater insight into the potential functions of
the many FUN genes. Currently, data is manually curated
from published experimental research and sorted into one of
the following ‘types’ of experiments: proteomics; microarray;
transcript level; genetics; biochemistry; bioinformatics,
protein–protein interactions and structure. Each of these
experiment types have been created to hold a wide range of
different data types that are commonly determined in each of
the different experiment types. The bioinformatics experiment
type is the most generic schema due to the large variety of data
types that could be usefully included in the database. After an
experiment is sorted into an experiment type, it is then handled
differently depending on whether it is a ‘single or few gene
experiment’ which provides data for up to 15 different gene
products, or a ‘genome-wide’ experiment. Data from the
Figure 1. Screenshot of theEchoBASE gene page for cueO. The gene and protein sequence are linked from the gene name (top box). There are a number of different
experiments associated with this gene and information for a proteomics experiment by Link et al. is displayed (top right box). This is the experiment overview page,
with details of the experiment and our basic comment, and below this are the options for displaying different subsets of the data from this paper and to rank this by
particular properties. Specific information in this paper that relates to CueO can be viewed in detail by following another linkwhich includes our full annotation of the
papers and all relevant information for the selected gene (right box).
D330 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
former type are usually manually curated into the database like
the previous catalogue version (7), and data from the latter
are parsed from data sets either provided directly within the
publication, from supplementary information available from
the publisher’s WWW site, or from direct contact with the
authors.
SEARCHING AND MANIPULATING
EXPERIMENTAL DATA IN EchoBASE
The data held within EchoBASE can be navigated either by
browsing/searching different experiment types or by searching
for a particular gene. Browsing different experiment types
Figure 2. Screenshot of the EchoORPHAN page from the database. The initial page displays the ‘Enzyme rating’, its current status and the EC code linking to
BRENDA (14). This ranked list is superimposed with the detail page for the orphan enzyme aminobutyraldehyde dehydrogenase which was our highest scoring
orphan enzyme and has recently been mapped to the ydcW gene product.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D331
returns a summary list of all experiments of a particular type,
e.g. proteomics, from which one can be selected to view our
full annotation of the paper. As well as a textual description of
the paper and the methods used, the data presented in the
manuscript can be displayed in a number of ways. For exam-
ple, for a proteomics experiment, the data can be sorted by
different molecular properties, such as pI observed or relative
abundance. This allows the user new ways to look at published
results to enable faster sorting and extraction of data useful to
them. Once an interesting piece of data has been spotted for a
gene of interest, the data relating to this particular gene and
experiment can then be viewed in full.
An alternative route into the database is through a particular
researcher. All experimental annotations are linked to indi-
vidual principle investigators and the data can be browsed to
see which experiments from a particular group are contained
within the database. Currently, there are over 400 research
groups in the database, which has been built from a list pre-
viously compiled in the E.coli index (8).
In version 1.2, we have implemented the ‘Complex search’
which increases the power of the database by allowing com-
plex questioning of the data set. For example, if a researcher
was looking for candidate gene for a periplasmic binding
protein involved in transporting an alternative nitrogen source,
they could search the data for proteins that were (i) predicted to
be periplasmic binding proteins (bioinformatics), (ii) demon-
strated to be located in the periplasm (proteomic) and (iii)
induced during nitrogen limiting conditions (microarray).
This could be combined with searches for proteins of a certain
molecular weight range that are encoded by genes located at a
certain position on the genome sequence.
ORPHAN ENZYMES
Information on orphan enzymes in E.coli has been extracted
from three sources, which were initially merged into a single
comprehensive list. Data was taken from a list published by
Riley and Serres (18), a list from the EcoCyc database (11) and
a list used to construct an in silico metabolic genotype by
Edwards and Palsson (19). This list had 100 different
enzyme/protein names that could be considered to be orphan
enzymes, and 36 of these were immediately removed as they
had actually been linked to genes. To assess the remaining
64 activities, a marking scheme was created (out of 100) that
was used to estimate how strong the evidence was to support
each orphan enzyme. Details of the scheme can be found in the
database, but consider factors like whether the activity had
been purified with a known molecular weight and whether the
locus linked to the activity had been mapped to a region on the
genome. A score was given to 57 of the activities, varying
between 3 and 83. Since creating the list in July 2003, 4 orphan
enzymes have been mapped to their genes and 3 of these are in
the top 7 scoring orphan enzymes in our list, strongly support-
ing our scoring system. The fourth activity that has been
mapped was surprisingly rank order 29, mainly due to the
only evidence coming from mapping the locus to a small
region on the genome.
Given the likelihood that some of these activities are side
reactions of known enzymes and that some probably are
not present in MG1655, we estimate that there are around
25 genuine orphan enzymes to be mapped to genes in
E.coli K-12 MG1655. The list is continuously updated and
newly mapped orphan enzymes are highlighted within the list
and a link to the appropriate gene is created (Figure 2).
ADDITIONAL FEATURES OF EchoBASE
One feature we consider important is data tracking within the
database so that all changes can be traced. Therefore most
pages in the database contain an ‘Annotation history’ field.
EchoBASE will be one of the first databases to have imple-
mented the new sequence and annotation of the E.coli genome
(version m56), a significant sequence and annotation change
released in 2004. All the sequence changes that alter coding
regions, which number over 150, can be found associated with
each gene and also have been described in the ‘Annotation’
page of the database that keeps a record of all changes to
genes. Sequence changes result in addition and removal of
Blattner numbers as genes are split and fused, changes in
lengths of coding sequences as gene starts and stops are
changed, and amino acid changes that have occurred as a result
of base substitutions within protein-encoding genes.
EchoBASE also has a series of help pages to guide the user
around the database and can provide data sets for other users
that relate our unique identifier (the EB number) to those of the
other resources we link out to from the gene page (Figure 1).
Currently, we encourage researchers to send us details of their
discoveries that we curate, but eventually we would like to
move to a more community-based annotation.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to acknowledge CNAP and the University
of York for technical support and hosting EchoBASE, and
Louise Fairweather for collecting information for
EchoLOCATION during her MRes project. We thank
GlaxoSmithKline and the BBSRC for financial support.
REFERENCES
1. Blattner,F.R., Plunkett,G., III, Bloch,C.A., Perna,N.T., Burland,V.,
Riley,M.,Collado-Vides,J., Glasner,J.D., Rode,C.K.,Mayhew,G.F. et al.
(1997)ThecompletegenomesequenceofEscherichia coliK-12.Science,
277, 1453–1474.
2. Perna,N.T., Plunkett,G., III, Burland,V., Mau,B., Glasner,J.D.,
Rose,D.J., Mayhew,G.F., Evans,P.S., Gregor,J., Kirkpatrick,H.A. et al.
(2001) Genome sequence of enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli
O157:H7. Nature, 409, 529–533.
3. Hayashi,T., Makino,K., Ohnishi,M., Kurokawa,K., Ishii,K.,
Yokoyama,K., Han,C.G., Ohtsubo,E., Nakayama,K., Murata,T. et al.
(2001) Complete genome sequence of enterohemorrhagic Escherichia
coli O157:H7 and genomic comparison with a laboratory strain K-12.
DNA Res., 8, 11–22.
4. Welch,R.A., Burland,V., Plunkett,G., III, Redford,P., Roesch,P.,
Rasko,D., Buckles,E.L., Liou,S.R., Boutin,A., Hackett,J. et al. (2002)
Extensive mosaic structure revealed by the complete genome sequence
of uropathogenic Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 99,
17020–17024.
5. Hinton,J.C. (1997) The Escherichia coli genome sequence: the end of an
era or the start of the FUN? Mol. Microbiol., 26, 417–422.
6. Serres,M.H., Gopal,S., Nahum,L.A., Liang,P., Gaasterland,T. and
Riley,M. (2001) A functional update of the Escherichia coli K-12
genome. Genome Biol., 2, RESEARCH0035.
D332 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
7. Thomas,G.H. (1999)Completing theE. coli proteome: a database of gene
products characterised since the completion of the genome sequence.
Bioinformatics, 15, 860–861.
8. Thomas,G.H. and Bettelheim,K.A. (1998) Escherichia coli on the
WWW. Lett. Appl. Microbiol., 27, 122–123.
9. Rudd,K.E. (2000)EcoGene: agenomesequencedatabase forEscherichia
coli K-12. Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 60–64.
10. Glasner,J.D., Liss,P., Plunkett,G., III, Darling,A., Prasad,T., Rusch,M.,
Byrnes,A., Gilson,M., Biehl,B., Blattner,F.R. et al. (2003) ASAP, a
systematic annotation package for community analysis of genomes.
Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 147–151.
11. Karp,P.D., Riley,M., Saier,M., Paulsen,I.T., Collado-Vides,J.,
Paley,S.M., Pellegrini-Toole,A., Bonavides,C. and
Gama-Castro,S. (2002) The EcoCyc Database. Nucleic Acids Res.,
30, 56–58.
12. Serres,M.H., Goswami,S. and Riley,M. (2004) GenProtEC: an updated
and improved analysis of functions of Escherichia coli K-12 proteins.
Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D300–D302.
13. Chaudhuri,R.R., Khan,A.M. and Pallen,M.J. (2004) coliBASE:
an online database for Escherichia coli, Shigella and
Salmonella comparative genomics. Nucleic Acids Res., 32,
D296–D299.
14. Nielsen,H., Engelbrecht,J., Brunak,S. and vonHeijne,G. (1997) A neural
network method for identification of prokaryotic and eukaryotic signal
peptides and prediction of their cleavage sites. Int. J. Neural Syst.,
8, 581–599.
15. Juncker,A.S., Willenbrock,H., von Heijne,G., Brunak,S., Nielsen,H.
and Krogh,A. (2003) Prediction of lipoprotein signal peptides in
Gram-negative bacteria. Protein Sci., 12, 1652–1662.
16. Sonnhammer,E.L., vonHeijne,G. andKrogh,A. (1998)AhiddenMarkov
model for predicting transmembrane helices in protein sequences.
Proc. Int. Conf. Intell. Syst. Mol. Biol., 6, 175–182.
17. Tusnady,G.E. and Simon,I. (2001) The HMMTOP
transmembrane topology prediction server. Bioinformatics., 17,
849–850.
18. Riley,M. and Serres,M.H. (2000) Interim report on genomics
of Escherichia coli. Annu. Rev. Microbiol., 54, 341–411.
19. Edwards,J.S. and Palsson,B.O. (2000) The Escherichia coliMG1655 in
silicometabolic genotype: its definition, characteristics, and capabilities.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 97, 5528–5533.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D333
