The MAPPER database: a multi-genome catalog of
putative transcription factor binding sites
Voichita D. Marinescu, Isaac S. Kohane and Alberto Riva*
Children’s Hospital Informatics Program, Children’s Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School, Enders Research
Building EN-150.9, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA
Received August 15, 2004; Revised October 6, 2004; Accepted October 14, 2004
ABSTRACT
We describe a comprehensive map of putative tran-
scription factor binding sites (TFBSs) across mul-
tiple genomes created using a search method that
reliesonhiddenMarkovmodelsbuilt fromexperimen-
tally determined TFBSs. Using the information in
the TRANSFAC and JASPAR databases, we built
1134models forTFBSsandused themtoscan regions
10 kb upstream of the start of the transcript for all
known genes in the human, mouse and Drosophila
melanogaster genomes. The results, together with
homology information on clusters of ortholog genes
across the threegenomes,wereused tocreateamulti-
organism catalog of annotated TFBSs. The catalog
can be queried through a web interface accessible
at http://bio.chip.org/mapper that allows the identifi-
cation, visualization and selection of TFBSs occur-
ring in the promoter of a gene of interest and also
the common factors predicted to bind across the
cluster of orthologs that includes that gene.
Alternatively, the interface allows the user to retrieve
binding sites for a single transcription factor of inter-
est inasinglegeneor inallgenesof thehuman,mouse
or fruit fly genomes.
INTRODUCTION
The precisely coordinated temporal and spatial control of gene
expression that is key to development and differentiation is
accomplished by the interplay of multiple regulatory mechan-
isms. Transcription factors (TFs)—regulatory proteins that
bind short DNA motifs called transcription factor binding
sites (TFBSs), play a central role in this context by recruiting
the transcriptional machinery at the promoter of the genes and
leading to the initiation of their transcription (1). TFBSs often
occur in close proximity to each other forming cis-regulatory
modules that suggest the existence of a combinatorial
code for transcriptional regulation (2). The importance of
understanding this code and the availability of the complete
genome sequence for many organisms has motivated the
development of algorithms and search engines for the identi-
fication of TFBSs (3–7) and the creation of databases contain-
ing information about the TFs and their binding sites in target
genes (8–10). Moreover, sequence conservation of regions
containing regulatory elements in ortholog genes across spe-
cies was used to select regulatory elements that are more likely
to be functional, a method called ‘phylogenetic footprinting’
that has been widely used in computational approaches for
TFBS identification (11–14).
One of the most popular ways of abstracting the character-
istics of a TFBS is to use a multiple sequence alignment of
experimentally determined binding sites for a given TF to
generate a nucleotide weight matrix (NWM) that describes
the probability distribution of the four nucleotides at each
position in the site (15). The NWM model assumes that
nucleotides that form a binding site are independent of each
other and their contribution to the specificity of the site is
additive (16). To test this assumption experimentally, key
positions in the binding sites for two TFs [nucleotides at posi-
tions 16 and 17 in the Mnt repressor protein binding site (17),
and the central nucleotide triplet in the mouse EGR1 protein
binding site (18)] were systematically mutated to all possible
combinations and the binding affinity of the respective TFs (or
its mutants) for these sites was determined. These data pointed
out that nucleotides within a TFBS are not independent and
that even though NWMs do not capture those dependences
they represent a good enough approximation for modeling the
site (16,17). However, it is generally recognized that using
NWMs to search for putative TFBSs often leads to the retriev-
ing of a very high number of false positives (15).
An alternative way of modeling a TFBS is by using profile
hidden Markov models (HMMs) that, in addition to capturing
the probability distribution of the nucleotides at each position,
can model insertions or deletions and allow fragment matches
to the model in the search procedure (19). HMMs have been
used in several bioinformatics applications owing to their
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 617 355 2178; Fax: +1 617 730 0921; Email: Alberto.Riva@tch.harvard.edu
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use permissions, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org.
ª 2005, the authors
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 33, Database issue ª Oxford University Press 2005; all rights reserved
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D91–D97
doi:10.1093/nar/gki103
increased statistical power in capturing the characteristics of a
motif. These applications include generating the extensive
Pfam database of conserved protein motifs (20) and, for a
very limited number of cases, modeling TFBSs (21–23).
To develop the MAPPER database, we used the curated
information on experimentally determined binding sites con-
tained in the TRANSFAC and JASPAR databases (8,9) in
conjunction with the statistical power of HMMs to generate
a library of 1134 models corresponding to 863 TFs with dis-
tinct names. We then used these models to scan the upstream
sequences of all known genes in the human, mouse and
Drosophila genomes, and we collected the resulting predicted
TFBSs in a relational database. The database can be queried
via a web-based interface publicly available at http://bio.chip.
org/mapper.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Building the profile HMM database
The flat files of the TRANSFAC Professional database
(version 8.1) were parsed to extract the sequences of the bind-
ing sites used to generate the TRANSFAC nucleotide weight
matrices. We called the alignments generated based on these
sites matrix-derived alignments; the HMM models based on
them have identifiers starting with ‘M’ and are referred to as
matrix-derived models. The TRANSFAC flat files were also
parsed to extract the binding sites referenced in the description
of the TRANSFAC factors. We called the alignments gener-
ated based on these sites factor-derived alignments; the HMM
models based on them have identifiers starting with ‘T’ and are
referred to as factor-derived models.
The matrix-derived alignments were used directly to build
HMMs, while the factor-derived ones were first aligned with
ClustalW. As a consequence, the factor-derived models
usually have a lower quality than the matrix-derived ones;
however, they increase considerably the search power com-
pared to TRANSFAC as the sites they are based on are not
used in TRANSFAC to build NWMs but are only listed in the
description of the factors. In addition, the binding sites used to
generate several of the high-quality JASPAR matrices were
downloaded from http://jaspar.cgb.ki.se and were aligned with
ClustalW. The hmmbuild and hmmcalibrate functions of the
HMMER package (24) were used to build HMMs based on all
retrieved alignments.
Large-scale multi-genome scans
Genome sequences and annotations for human (version hg17),
mouse (version mm5) and Drosophila (version dm1) were
downloaded from the UCSC Genome Bioinformatics site
at http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/downloads.html (25). The
scanned upstream sequences span a gene region of variable
length starting from 10 000 bp upstream of the transcript start
up to 50 bp downstream of the ATG, thus possibly including
the initial introns and non-coding exons. In order to compare
the TFBS profile in upstream sequences of ortholog genes,
homology information describing clusters of orthologs across
the three genomes was obtained from the HomoloGene data-
base (build 30) available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/HomoloGene/ (26). The GoldenPath annotation and
chromosome files were used to extract upstream sequences
for all annotated genes in the human, mouse and Drosophila
genomes. The HMMER hmmpfam function, called with a cut-
off value of 16 for the E-value, was used to search for matches
for all models in all upstream sequences collected. The
hmmpfam output is normally presented in a readable format
that is not well suited for automated processing. Since the source
code for the program is freely available, we modified it to output
its results in an alternative format based on structured lists,
which made subsequent parsing and processing much easier.
All HMMER hits returned by the large-scale runs were
filtered to flag as redundant the ones that occur in the same
sequence, have the same positions (more than 50% overlap)
and were retrieved by both matrix-derived and factor-derived
models that were linked to each other in the TRANSFAC
entries, thus eliminating them from the displayed results.
Database construction
Based on the modifications to the hmmpfam output, the data-
base construction process was completely automated: for each
organism the modified hmmpfam program was used to scan a
file containing the upstream sequences of all its genes against
all models; the resulting output file was read by a Common
Lisp script and fed directly into a relational database based on
the MySQL database server. This pipeline was designed so
that it will allow us to easily update or recreate the database
when additional TF models or genome annotations become
available. To facilitate access to the database, we implemented
a publicly available web-based interface using the Allegro
Common Lisp programming language.
RESULTS
Profile HMMs
The parsing procedure described retrieved 359 matrix-derived
and 718 factor-derived alignments from TRANSFAC, while
57 alignments corresponding to JASPAR matrices were down-
loaded. All alignments were used to generate HMMs, resulting
in a total of 1134 models.
The distribution of the number of sequences used to build
the models showed that the average number of sites used was
22 for matrix-derived models, 16 for factor-derived models
and 20 for JASPAR-derived models. The minimum number of
sites used for the three types of models was 4, 4 and 6 respect-
ively. Although the number of sequences in the training set
influences strongly the quality of the model, we did not want to
impose an arbitrary cut-off value on this parameter. Instead,
we are providing this information for each model (together
with other details such as the model length, HMM consensus
and HMM logo), allowing the user to decide on the quality and
suitability for the desired analysis of those models for which
the training set is small.
The 1134 models correspond to 863 TF entries with distinct
names in the TRANSFAC and JASPAR databases. However,
this number is only an estimate of the true number of factors
covered by MAPPER since in the two databases used as data
source, entries with different names pertain sometimes to iso-
forms of the same TF (e.g. HNF-1, HNF-1alpha) or even to the
same TF (e.g. p65, RelA). These discrepancies originated at
D92 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
the curation step in the two databases and pose a serious chal-
lenge for automation. However, in the absence of a consistent
and standard TF nomenclature, we decided to retain the
TRANSFAC and JASPAR names and accession numbers as
the most effective choice both for the purpose of this work as
well as for the user already familiar with the other two databases.
Nevertheless,our system isable toaccommodate future changes
and evolutions in the TF nomenclature.
The full list of transcription factors and associated models in
our database is available at http://bio.chip.org/mapperdb/
factors.html. The table contains links to model pages that
provide details such as the model length, the number of
sequences used to train it, the HMM consensus sequence(s)
(the most probable nucleotide at that position according to the
model; models that allow insertions or deletions may have
more than one consensus sequences displayed) and the
HMM logo generated using the Logomat-M software (27).
In addition, hit statistics for each model, such as the number
of hits in each organism and the minimum and maximum score
and E-value are provided.
Database content
All 1134 models were used to scan a total of 57906 sequences
from the human, mouse and Drosophila genomes. The rela-
tional database was used to store information on the genomic
sequences (gene name and symbol, Locuslink, RefSeq,
GenBank and Swiss-Prot identifiers, etc.) and their orthologs
(HomoloGene cluster numbers and homology percent), infor-
mation on the factors and matrices retrieved from TRANSFAC
and JASPAR, and the results of the HMMER searches. Each
hit in the database is described by its position, a score (a
probabilistic measure of the match between the hit and the
model—the higher the score the better the match), an E-value
(a measure of the likelihood of the hit being retrieved by
chance—the lower the E-value the more likely it is that the
hit is ‘real’), and the alignment between the model and the
sequence at the putative site. The cumulative results charac-
terizing our database are presented in Table 1. As explained in
the HMMER documentation (24), and as we have observed by
running hmmpfam on a number of control sequences, experi-
mentally validated sites can sometimes be retrieved with a
negative score. Therefore, we used ‘relaxed’ scores and
E-values for the search in order to obtain a comprehensive
representation of the TFBS map in the sequences scanned.
Since the total number of hits depends on the stringency of
the score and E-value parameters, we present both the figures
obtained using relaxed threshold values and those obtained
with more realistic thresholds, namely score > 0 or score > 0
and E-value < 1.
Interface capabilities
We designed and implemented a web-based system
called MAPPER (Multi-genome Analysis of Positions and
Patterns of Elements of Regulation), publicly available at
http://bio.chip.org/mapper, to facilitate access to the catalog
of putative TFBSs.
The entry page allows the user to query a sequence based on
a gene identifier (e.g. NCBI Gene ID, RNA accession number
or CG symbol for Drosophila) and to retrieve all putative
binding sites that satisfy the input parameters specified: thresh-
olds on the score (default value is 0) and E-value (default value
is 10) and position relative to the ATG or the start of the
transcript. For each putative site the interface displays its
position according to three different coordinate systems (abso-
lute position on chromosome, distance from the ATG, distance
from the transcript start), its score and E-value, and the gene
region it belongs to (upstream region, intron or exon). The list
of hits can be sorted by position, score, E-value, factor name or
factor accession number. For each hit a pop-up window dis-
plays the alignment between the putative site on the query
sequence and the model. The results page highlights hits
retrieved in close proximity (i.e. within a window of 50 bp)
for factors known to physically interact with each other (based
on the TRANSFAC annotation), the TRANSFAC classes to
which the factors for which hits were found belong and the
common hits retrieved for the orthologs of the selected gene
across the three genomes (if present in the Homologene data-
base). The set of putative hits can be saved as a text file with or
without alignments, displayed graphically with respect to the
translation start, or exported as a custom track to the Gold-
enPath browser, thus allowing the user to visualize the putative
TFBSs in the context of the genomic region in which they are
found and to take advantage of the wealth of information
provided by the GoldenPath Genome browser (25).
Figure 1 presents the results displayed by MAPPER for
the promoter of the B99/gtse1 (G2 and S phase-expressed-1)
gene containing an experimentally characterized p53-
responsive element located between positions 126 and 96
from the ATG. This element consists of three half-site dec-
amers and is responsible for the p53-mediated upregulation of
the gene following DNA damage (28). As shown in Figure 1A,
three models for p53 (T00671, T04997 and M00761) retrieve
these sites. The predicted TFBSs in this region are displayed as
a list (Figure 1A) and can be exported as text (with or without
alignments), in graphical form along the promoter of the gene
(Figure 2A) or as a custom track in the GoldenPath Browser
(Figure 2B). Figure 1B shows details on the p53 model
M00761 whose match to the plus strand of the sequence is
shown in the pop-up window in Figure 1A. It was experimen-
tally demonstrated that the p53 binding site contains two
copies of the sequence 50-RRRC(A/T)(T/A)GYYY-30
(where R = A/G and Y = C/T) separated by a spacer region
(29). The HMM consensus sequences for model M00761 dis-
played in Figure 1B are in agreement with the p53 consensus
and show that the model can accommodate up to two inser-
tions or deletions (represented by a dot character) between the
two half-sites but not elsewhere. Based on our observations, if
the number of insertions in the spacer region was higher the
model would identify instead a half-site by matching only one
fragment to the model.
Table 1. Cumulative results characterizing the MAPPER database
H.sapiens M.musculus D.melanogaster Total
Sequences scanned 21 735 17 218 18 953 57 906
Base pairs
scanned (Mb)
371 263 218 852
Putative TFBS found
All 17 357 280 11 093 651 10 032 839 38 483 770
With score > 0 13 503 672 8 335 765 7 112 552 28 951 989
With score > 0 and
E-value < 1
846 509 311 802 82 716 1 241 027
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D93
Figure 1. MAPPER output for the promoter of the mouse gtse1 gene. (A) The MAPPER query for putative TFBSs found within 500 bp upstream of the ATG in the
mouse gtse1gene identifies an experimentally characterized p53-responsive element composed of three half sites situated between positions126 and96 (28). The
models retrieving these sites are boxed. For each hit, a pop-up window displays the alignment between the sequence and the model at the putative site (the match
between the model M00761 and the plus strand of the sequence is shown). (B) The consensus sequence displayed in the page for model M00761 shows that the model
can accommodate insertion or deletions (represented by a dot character) between the half-sites but not elsewhere. Additional information on the model and its hit
statistics over the entire database are also provided.
D94 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
An alternative way of using MAPPER consists in specifying
the accession number of a single TFBS model, and retrieving
the hits for that model only. This analysis can be performed on
a single gene or on all genes. In the latter case the results
returned are limited to a fixed number of best-scoring hits for
efficiency, and the graphical display options are not available
since the genes containing these hits will usually be scattered
on different chromosomes.
The web interface design is based on ease of use and flex-
ibility. The page layout was intentionally kept simple, mini-
mizing graphics and striving to present complete and clear
information in each page. Context-sensitive menus allow
the user to quickly switch between alternative views of the
data (e.g. different ordering of the hits, different reference
point for coordinates), and to filter the data by changing the
score and E-value thresholds. For each page, an on-line help
provides step-by-step instructions regarding the format of the
input required by each field as well as explanations regarding
the meaning of the output fields and the options available for
sorting and exporting them.
DISCUSSION
MAPPER represents both a catalog of models for TFBSs and a
catalog of putative sites retrieved for them in all human, mouse
and Drosophila genes that offers several advantages over other
available similar resources.
Figure 2. Graphical export options for the hit set found in the promoter of the mouse gtse1 gene. The hit set presented as a list in Figure 1A is displayed graphically
along the promoter of the gene (A) or exported in the GoldenPath browser (B).
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D95
First, the set of TFBS models in MAPPER is very compre-
hensive. The models are based on curated information on
experimentally determined binding sites contained in the
TRANSFAC and JASPAR databases, but use HMMs instead
of NWMs to model the characteristics of the sites. While some
of these models have an equivalent NWM in the TRANSFAC
and JASPAR databases, many others (the factor-derived
models) are specific to MAPPER. In addition to capturing the
probability distribution of nucleotides at each position in the
binding site, HMMs allow modeling insertions, deletions and
fragment matches to the model thus attaining a higher level of
generality than the corresponding NWM built on the same
alignment. Many TFs bind the DNA as dimers or tetramers
and thus the characterized binding sites are composed of func-
tional half-sites separated by spacers of variable lengths. While
in the functional moieties of the TFBSs insertions and
deletions are uncommon, they can occur in the more divergent
spacer regions (30). Moreover, in the search procedure
HMMER allows fragment matches to the model that in this
context will lead to the retrieval of half-sites. In our database,
481 models (42% of the total) allowed at least one insertion or
deletion during the large-scale searches.
We recognize that profile HMMs also have limitations. In
order to convert the observed counts into probabilities
HMMER combines the actual counts with priors, in this
case single-component Dirichlet priors (24). These priors
introduce pseudocounts that weight heavier if the training
set is low thus biasing the model. A small training set
would represent a problem for any statistical approach (includ-
ing NWMs) and, due to the fact that in some cases the number
of known or available sequences for a binding site is small, the
quality of the model has to be evaluated by different means.
For these reasons, the MAPPER model pages provide details
such as the length of the model, the number of sequences in the
training set, the HMM consensus, the HMM logos and hit
statistics over the entire database (minimum and maximum
scores and E-values) so that the user can make an informed
evaluation of the quality of any given model. Moreover, even
if some models are trained on a small number of sequences this
does not usually represent a problem in MAPPER since most
TFs are described by more than one model.
Second, in contrast to TRANSFAC and JASPAR that
require the user to supply the nucleotide sequence of the
gene of interest or the profiles to be included in the search,
MAPPER needs as little information as a gene identifier and
outputs all putative binding sites found for all its models that
satisfy the cut-off parameters. The sequences scanned to build
the database are likely to contain the regulatory regions of a
large number of genes, according to the most up-to-date anno-
tations. Having a pre-computed list of putative TFBSs in three
genomes instead of simply offering the ability to scan a user-
supplied sequence, represents in our opinion a good trade-off
between generality and efficiency: the results can be retrieved
very quickly (both for a single organism or when analyzing
multiple genomes), and, as our analysis covered a wide range
of scores and E-values, it allows the user to experiment effi-
ciently with very different settings of these parameters
when querying the database. Moreover, the static database
allows the retrieval of the best scoring hits for a given tran-
scription factor of interest by supplying only a model identifier
as input.
Finally, the MAPPER interface was designed to provide
comprehensive and detailed information to the users, and
offers powerful options for the visualization and the export
of the data.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Dr Sven Rahmann and Benjamin Schuster-Bo¨ckler
for making available the source code for generating the HMM
logos locally, and the anonymous reviewers for their useful
comments.
REFERENCES
1. Davidson,E.H., Rast,J.P., Oliveri,P., Ransick,A., Calestani,C.,
Yuh,C.H., Minokawa,T., Amore,G., Hinman,V., Arenas-Mena,C. et al.
(2002) A genomic regulatory network for development. Science,
295, 1669–1678.
2. Levine,M. and Tjian,R. (2003) Transcription regulation and animal
diversity. Nature, 424, 147–151.
3. Bailey,T.L. and Noble,W.S. (2003) Searching for statistically significant
regulatory modules. Bioinformatics, 19 (Suppl. 2), II16–II25.
4. Sinha,S., Van Nimwegen,E. and Siggia,E.D. (2003) A probabilistic
method to detect regulatory modules. Bioinformatics, 19 (Suppl. 1),
I292–I301.
5. Rajewsky,N., Vergassola,M., Gaul,U. and Siggia,E.D. (2002)
Computational detection of genomic cis-regulatory modules applied
to body patterning in the early Drosophila embryo.
BMC Bioinformatics, 3, 30.
6. Sharan,R., Ben-Hur,A., Loots,G.G. and Ovcharenko,I. (2004) CREME:
Cis-Regulatory Module Explorer for the human genome. Nucleic Acids
Res., 32, W253–W256.
7. Alkema,W.B., Johansson,O., Lagergren,J. and Wasserman,W.W. (2004)
MSCAN: identification of functional clusters of transcription factor
binding sites. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, W195–W198.
8. Wingender,E., Chen,X., Fricke,E., Geffers,R., Hehl,R., Liebich,I.,
Krull,M., Matys,V., Michael,H., Ohnhauser,R. et al. (2001) The
TRANSFAC system on gene expression regulation. Nucleic Acids Res.,
29, 281–283.
9. Sandelin,A., Alkema,W., Engstrom,P., Wasserman,W.W. and
Lenhard,B. (2004) JASPAR: an open-access database for eukaryotic
transcription factor binding profiles. Nucleic Acids Res., 32,
D91–D94.
10. Kel-Margoulis,O.V., Romashchenko,A.G., Kolchanov,N.A.,
Wingender,E. and Kel,A.E. (2000) COMPEL: a database on composite
regulatory elements providing combinatorial transcriptional regulation.
Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 311–315.
11. Sandelin,A., Wasserman,W.W. and Lenhard,B. (2004) ConSite:
web-based prediction of regulatory elements using cross-species
comparison. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, W249–W252.
12. Bigelow,H.R., Wenick,A.S., Wong,A. and Hobert,O. (2004) CisOrtho:
a program pipeline for genome-wide identification of transcription
factor target genes using phylogenetic footprinting. BMC
Bioinformatics, 5, 27.
13. Loots,G.G. and Ovcharenko,I. (2004) rVISTA 2.0: evolutionary
analysis of transcription factor binding sites. Nucleic Acids Res., 32,
W217–W221.
14. Dieterich,C., Wang,H., Rateitschak,K., Luz,H. and Vingron,M. (2003)
CORG: a database for COmparative Regulatory Genomics.
Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 55–57.
15. Stormo,G.D. (2000) DNA binding sites: representation and discovery.
Bioinformatics, 16, 16–23.
16. Benos,P.V., Bulyk,M.L. and Stormo,G.D. (2002) Additivity in
protein–DNA interactions: how good an approximation is it?
Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 4442–4451.
17. Man,T.K. and Stormo,G.D. (2001) Non-independence of Mnt
repressor-operator interaction determined by a new quantitative
multiple fluorescence relative affinity (QuMFRA) assay.
Nucleic Acids Res., 29, 2471–2478.
D96 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
18. Bulyk,M.L., Johnson,P.L. and Church,G.M. (2002) Nucleotides of
transcription factor binding sites exert interdependent effects on the
binding affinities of transcription factors. Nucleic Acids Res., 30,
1255–1261.
19. Eddy,S.R. (1998) Profile hidden Markov models. Bioinformatics,
14, 755–763.
20. Bateman,A., Coin,L., Durbin,R., Finn,R.D., Hollich,V.,
Griffiths-Jones,S., Khanna,A., Marshall,M., Moxon,S.,
Sonnhammer,E.L. et al. (2004) The Pfam protein families database.
Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D138–D141.
21. Conkright,M.D., Guzman,E., Flechner,L., Su,A.I., Hogenesch,J.B. and
Montminy,M. (2003) Genome-wide analysis of CREB target genes
reveals a core promoter requirement for cAMP responsiveness.
Mol. Cell, 11, 1101–1108.
22. Ellrott,K., Yang,C., Sladek,F.M. and Jiang,T. (2002) Identifying
transcription factor binding sites through Markov chain optimization.
Bioinformatics, 18 (Suppl. 2), S100–S109.
23. Price,C.W., Fawcett,P., Ceremonie,H., Su,N., Murphy,C.K.
and Youngman,P. (2001) Genome-wide analysis of the general
stress response in Bacillus subtilis. Mol. Microbiol., 41,
757–774.
24. Eddy,S.R. (2003) HMMER User’s Guide: Biological sequence analysis
using profile hidden Markov models.
25. Kent,W.J., Sugnet,C.W., Furey,T.S., Roskin,K.M., Pringle,T.H.,
Zahler,A.M. and Haussler,D. (2002) The human genome browser at
UCSC. Genome Res., 12, 996–1006.
26. Wheeler,D.L., Church,D.M., Federhen,S., Lash,A.E., Madden,T.L.,
Pontius,J.U., Schuler,G.D., Schriml,L.M., Sequeira,E., Tatusova,T.A.
et al. (2003)Database resourcesof the NationalCenter forBiotechnology.
Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 28–33.
27. Schuster-Bockler,B., Schultz,J. and Rahmann,S. (2004) HMM Logos for
visualization of protein families. BMC Bioinformatics, 5, 7.
28. Utrera,R., Collavin,L., Lazarevic,D., Delia,D. and
Schneider,C. (1998) A novel p53-inducible gene coding for a
microtubule-localized protein with G2-phase-specific expression.
EMBO J., 17, 5015–5025.
29. el-Deiry,W.S., Kern,S.E., Pietenpol,J.A., Kinzler,K.W. and
Vogelstein,B. (1992) Definition of a consensus binding site for p53.
Nature Genet., 1, 45–49.
30. Sinha,S. and Tompa,M. (2002) Discovery of novel transcription factor
binding sites by statistical overrepresentation. Nucleic Acids Res., 30,
5549–5560.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D97
