Production of viral vectors using
recombinase-mediated cassette exchange
Masakazu Nakano, Kazuhiko Odaka, Yuzuka Takahashi, Masakazu Ishimura,
Izumu Saito and Yumi Kanegae*
Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo,
4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan
Received January 25, 2005; Revised March 23, 2005; Accepted April 7, 2005
ABSTRACT
DNA viruses are often used as vectors for foreign
gene expression, but large DNA region from cloned
or authentic viral genomes must usually be handled
to generate viral vectors. Here, we present a unique
system for generating adenoviral vectors by directly
substituting a gene of interest in a small transfec-
ted plasmid with a replaced gene in a replicating
viral genome in Cre-expressing 293 cells using the
recombinase-mediated cassette exchange (RMCE)
reaction. In combination with a positive selection of
the viral cis-acting packaging signal connected with
the gene of interest, the purpose vector was enriched
to 97.5 and 99.8% after three and four cycles of
infection, respectively. Our results also showed that
the mutant loxP V (previously called loxP 2272), a
variant target of Cre used in the RMCE reaction,
was useful as a non-compatible mutant to wild-type
loxP. This method could be useful for generating not
only a large number of adenovirus vectors simultan-
eously, but also other DNA virus vectors including
helper-dependent adenovirus vector.
INTRODUCTION
DNA viral vectors derived from adenoviruses, herpes viruses,
vaccinia viruses, baculoviruses and so on have contributed to
advances in both basic research and gene therapy. These vec-
tors are particularly useful owing to their high expression level
and the excellent stability of their viral genomes. However, the
construction of these vectors, i.e. the introduction of a gene of
interest to a specific site in the viral genome, has been hampered
by the large sizes of viral genomes (36–200 kb). Con-
sequently, viral vectors have been generated utilizing either
authentic viral genome DNAs from adenoviruses (1), vaccinia
viruses (2) or baculoviruses (3), or cloned full-length viral
DNAs of adenoviruses (4,5), Epstein–Barr viruses (6) or bacu-
loviruses (7). However, these large sections of DNA are difficult
to handle, and the efficiency of obtaining viral vectors is low.
For first-generation adenovirus vector construction, the
most efficient method available to date is the COS–TPC
method (1), which utilizes viral genome DNA–terminal
protein complex (DNA–TPC) instead of a cloned intact
viral genome. This method is highly efficient because DNA–
TPC yields 103-fold more infectious viruses than deprotein-
ated viral genomes (8) or cloned intact viral DNA. DNA–TPC
is usually prepared from purified virus particles but is, of
course, present abundantly in infected host cells as part of
the replicating viral genome. If a gene of interest could be
transferred directly into the replicating viral DNA–TPC in
these cells, vectors could be efficiently constructed without
manipulating large sections of viral genome DNA. Therefore,
we designed a novel approach where a gene of interest initially
located in a small plasmid is transferred directly to a specific
site in the replicating ‘recipient’ viral genome via a pathway
mediated by recombinase-mediated cassette exchange
(RMCE) and Cre recombinase.
The site-specific recombinase Cre, derived from bacterio-
phage P1, catalyzes the precise excision of DNA flanked by a
pair of target sequences, loxP, in the same orientation. Cre also
exhibits another recombination activity: double-reciprocal
recombination or RMCE [(9) and for a review see (10)], in
which two DNA regions on different molecules are both
flanked by a wild type (wt) and a mutant loxP sequence.
Cre exchanges the two regions flanked by the wt and mutant
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +81 3 5449 5556; Fax: +81 3 5449 5432; Email: kanegae@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Present addresses:
Masakazu Nakano, Department of Genomic Medical Sciences, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kawaramachi-Hirokoji, Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto 602-8566,
Japan.
Masakazu Ishimura, Pharmacology Department, Central Research Laboratories, Kaken Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, 14, Shinomiya, Minamigawara-cho, Yamashina-
ku, Kyoto 607-8042, Japan
ª The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 8 e76
doi:10.1093/nar/gni074
loxP sequences while maintaining the orientation of the
regions. The mutant loxP 511 (11), which has a single-base
substitution within the central eight-base region of loxP, has
been used in the RMCE reactions (9,12–16). Ideally, such
‘exclusive’ mutants would not be able to recombine with
wt loxP, but would exclusively and efficiently recombine
only with identical mutant loxPs. We found a mutant loxP V
(previously called loxP 2272) with two-base substitutions
whose recombination efficiency was as high as that of loxP
511, but recombination with wt loxP was strictly undetectable
in an in vitro assay (17), an Escherichia coli system using the
M13 phagemid (18), or in mammalian chromosomes (19). And
loxP V, together with wt loxP, has been successfully applied in
the RMCE reactions, yielding a higher fidelity and efficiency
than those obtained by loxP 511 together with wt loxP using
embryonic stem (ES) cells with the selection of drug resistance
(20,21). In the present study, we established a highly efficient
method to produce adenoviral vectors by using the RMCE
reaction mediated by the Cre and the mutant loxP V without
the isolation of the viral clones. The method probably provides
an efficient and a reliable tool not only for generating a large
number of adenovirus vectors at once, but also for other viral
vector construction and offers various applications in genetic
manipulation of mammalian cell chromosomes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines
The human embryonic kidney cell line, 293 (22), and the
monkey kidney cell line, CV1, were cultured in DMEM sup-
plemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS). The 293 cells
constitutively express adenoviral E1 genes and support the
replication of E1-substituted recombinant adenoviruses.
After infection with the recombinant adenoviruses, the cells
were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 5% FCS. The
293 cell line that constitutively expressed nuclear localization
signal (NLS)-tagged Cre recombinase under the control of the
CAG promoter (23) (termed 293FNCre) was isolated and
maintained with 10% FCS in DMEM containing 1.5 mg/ml
of geneticin. The characterization of this cell line will be
presented elsewhere.
Construction of recipient viruses
The mutant loxP V (V) used in this study was identical to
loxP 2272 (17,19), with two transversion mutations within
the eight-base central region (ATGTATGC) of wt loxP (L):
T to A at the second base and G to C at the seventh base. To
construct an expression unit flanked by L and V, we first
cloned the ‘L sequence-SwaI site-V sequence’ at the SacI
site of pUC19 (termed pUVwL). To construct the recipient
viruses using the COS–TPC method (1), the left-end fragment
of the adenovirus genome, including an L sequence at the end
of the viral-packaging signal, was introduced into the cassette
cosmid pAxcw (1) and termed pAx19Lcw (since the position
where the L sequence was introduced was at the SgrAI site,
191 bp from the left end of the adenovirus genome, we
included 19L in the name of the constructs). The ‘V-SwaI-
L’ unit from pUVwL was then cloned at the SwaI site of
pAx19Lcw; the resulting cassette cosmid for the recipient
virus was named pAxVwL19L. The expression unit of the
recipient viruses, which expresses LacZ or FLP recombinase
under the control of a human polypeptide elongation factor 1a
(EF-1a) promoter (24), was cloned at the SwaI site of
pAxVwL19L. Each cosmid was mixed with adenovirus
DNA–terminal protein complex and transfected to the
293 cells, resulting in the generation of recipient viruses
(Figure 2A) expressing LacZ (AxVEFZL19L) or FLP
(AxVEFFLPL19L) through homologous recombination.
Construction of the donor plasmid
The XhoI–SwaI fragment of pAxVwL19L containing the L
sequence and the viral-packaging signal was inserted into
pUVwL; the resulting cassette donor plasmid for the gene of
interest was named pUVw19L. The expression unit of the GFP
gene in the donor plasmid was derived from pxCAEGFP (25)
[originally derived from pEGFP-C1 (EGFP vector; Clontech)],
and cloned at the SwaI site of pUVw19L (termed pUV-
CAGFP19L or D; Figure 2A, left). Another plasmid lacking V
(termed pUCAGFP19LDV or DV; Figure 2A, right) was also
constructed to serve as a negative control.
Production of first-generation adenovirus
vector by RMCE
Under standard conditions, 293FNCre cells were infected with
the recipient virus at an MOI of 1 and cultured in a 6-well plate
for 1 h, followed immediately by the transfection of the donor
plasmid at 3.0 mg/well using TransFast (Promega). When a
viral cytopathic effect was clearly observed (normally 5 days
after infection, under the above conditions), the cells were
harvested together with the medium (1.5 ml/well). The cell
suspension was then sonicated for 3 min (6 cycles, 30 s each)
using a Bioruptor II sonicator (CosmoBio, Tokyo, Japan) at
maximum power (200 W) and centrifuged at 1900 g (5000 r.p.m.;
Tomy TMP 11 rotor) for 5 min at 4C using a microcentrifuge.
The supernatant was stored at80C as a virus stock (‘passage
1 stock’). To enrich the purpose vector by eliminating the
residual recipient virus, 293FNCre cells were infected with
50 ml of the virus stock and cultured in a 6-well plate. A total
of five passages were performed (including the initial infec-
tion step), and each virus stock was prepared as described
above. The production of the purpose vector was monitored
by green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression observed using
a fluorescence microscope (IX70; Olympus) throughout the
culture period.
Titration of the produced purpose vector
The total virus titer (PFU/ml) and the purpose vector titer
[GFP-expressing units (GEU)/ml] of the passage 1 stock
were measured using an end-point assay, as described previ-
ously (26). Briefly, 50 ml of DMEM with 5% FCS was dis-
pensed into each well of a 96-well plate and 8 rows of 3-fold
serial dilutions of the initial virus stock, starting at a dilution of
1:10 were prepared, followed by the addition of 293 cells
(3 · 105 cells) in 50 ml of the medium to each well. Twelve
days later, the end point of the cytopathic effect of the total
viruses or GFP-expressing viruses was determined by using
microscopy, and the 50% tissue culture infectious dose
(TCID50) was calculated. In our laboratory, 1 TCID50/ml
corresponded to 1 PFU/ml (26).
e76 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 8 PAGE 2 OF 8
Southern blot analyses
To detect the ‘infectious virus’ DNA of purpose vector and the
residual recipient viruses, CV1 cells were infected with the
virus stocks at 100 ml per 6 cm dish. After 24 h, the total DNA
was prepared from the dish according to the method described
by Saito et al. (27). After AflII digestion, 20 mg of the DNA
was electrophoresed on a 0.8% agarose gel at 35 V for 17 h.
Before alkaline treatment, the gel was exposed to 0.1 N HCl
for partial depurination (28), and the DNA was then trans-
ferred onto a Hybond-N nylon membrane (Amersham Bio-
sciences) using the capillary-transfer method (29). Specific
DNA was detected with a DIG DNA Labeling and Detection
kit (Roche Diagnostics). A 0.3 kb XhoI–BspEI fragment of the
C gene, a 3.4 kb KpnI–XmnI fragment of theC-GFP gene and
a 0.3 kb AflII–BstEII fragment of the adenovirus genome
(corresponding to the coding region of the viral protease gene)
were labeled with digoxigenin-UTP as probes (Figure 2A),
and specific DNAs were detected by autoradiography using
chemiluminescence of CDP-Star (Roche Diagnostics).
Ratio of purpose vector to recipient viruses
To determine the ratio of produced purpose vector to residual
recipient viruses, the total DNA was extracted from CV1 cells
infected with each virus stock and was subjected to Southern
blotting or quantitative real-time PCR. Since the ‘carryover’
donor plasmid DNA was transferred to the CV1 cells when the
passage 1 stock was used (Figure 2C), the results of the real-
time PCR were disturbed by this DNA. Hence, for passages
1 and 2 stocks, we quantified the density of the specific bands
using Southern blot analysis, while for passage 3–5 stocks we
measured the amount of each viral DNA using real-time PCR.
TaqMan primers and probes specific for the GFP gene in the
purpose vector (forward primer, 50-CTG CTG CCC GAC
AAC CA-30; reverse primer, 50-TGT GAT CGC GCT TCT
CGT T-30; and TaqMan probe, 50-FAM-CTG AGC ACC CAG
TCC GCC CTG-TAMRA-30) and specific for the LacZ gene in
the recipient virus (forward primer, 50-GGC TTT CGC TAC
CTG GAG AGA-30; reverse primer, 50-GTA TTT AGC GAA
ACC GCC AAG AC-30; and TaqMan probe, 50-FAM-TGA
TCC TTT GCG AAT ACG CCC ACG-TAMRA-30) were
designed using Primer Express software. The difference in
the detection efficiency between the GFP and LacZ genes
was corrected using the control plasmid pEFVGV-CALNLZ
(19), containing both GFP and LacZ gene on the same plasmid.
RESULTS
Production of adenovirus vectors using RMCE
Using our novel method, a ‘gene of interest’ in a donor plasmid
was substituted for a ‘replaced gene’ initially located in a
replicating recipient virus genome using RMCE, together
with a positive selection to eliminate residual recipient viruses,
via viral cis-element excision (Figure 1). The ‘recipient virus’
genome contained a viral cis-element (denoted by *) flanked
by a pair of wt loxP sequences (denoted by L) and a replaced
gene flanked by wt loxP and the mutant loxP V (denoted by V),
while a ‘donor plasmid’ contained a linked set of viral cis
element and a gene of interest flanked by L and V. When the
recipient virus and the donor plasmid were co-introduced into
a Cre-expressing cell line, the purpose vector was produced as
a result of the Cre-mediated excision of the viral cis-element in
the recipient virus and the subsequent RMCE of the replaced
gene in the Dcis-element recipient virus with the gene of
Figure 1. Strategy for the generation of viral vectors using the RMCE reaction. L, wt loxP and V, mutant loxP V.
PAGE 3 OF 8 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 8 e76
interest from the donor plasmid. In the present study, we
attempted to use this method to produce a first-generation
adenovirus vector as a model.
To produce a first-generation adenovirus vector using
RMCE, we first established a 293 cell line, 293FNCre, that
constitutively expressed an NLS-tagged Cre (NCre). When
the 293FNCre cells were infected with viruses bearing a
pair of wt loxP sequences, AxCALNLZ (25), AxVEFZL19L
and AxVEFFLPL19L described below, 80% of the
replicating viral genome underwent Cre-mediated excision
(data not shown). A similar level of Cre expression was repor-
ted by Parks et al. (30) We then prepared two different recipi-
ent viruses expressing LacZ and FLP (denoted as the LacZ
recipient and the FLP recipient or AxVEFZL19L and
AxVEFFLPL19L, respectively, in Figure 2A) and compared
the efficiency of the production of a purpose vector containing
the donor plasmid-derived GFP gene. Note that the function of
the FLP gene per se was not significant. In these recipient
A
∆ ∆
∆
∆
Figure 2. Production of a first-generation adenovirus vector by Cre-mediated RMCE. (A) Structure of the donor plasmids, recipient viruses and purpose vector.
pUVCAGFP19L (top left), donor plasmid carrying a GFP-expression unit flanked by L and V. pUCAGFP19LDV (top right), control plasmid lacking V.
AxVEFZL19L and AxVEFFLPL19L, LacZ and FLP recipient viruses, respectively. AxVCAGFP19L, purpose vector. The position of the probes (closed bars,
bottom) and the size (kb) of the specific bands corresponding to fragments from the recipient viruses (Z4.7 or F3.0), the purpose vector (P3.5) and the adenovirus
constant region (2.3) detected by Southern blotting are shown. V, a mutant loxP V; CAG, CAG promoter; GFP, green fluorescent protein; GpA, rabbit b-globin
poly(A) signal;C, viral-packaging signal; L, wild-type loxP; Apr, ampicillin-resistance gene; ori, plasmid replication origin; EF-1a, EF-1a promoter; SpA, SV40
early poly(A) signal; and A, AflII site. (B) Virus titer of the produced purpose vector and residual recipient viruses in passage 1 stock. The indicated MOIs are those for
the initial infection of the 293FNCre cells with the recipient viruses. PFU, plaque-forming units; GEU, GFP-expressing units. (C) Detection of the infectious viral
genomes in passage 1 stock. 293FNCre cells were infected with LacZ (lanes 1–3) or FLP (lanes 4–6) recipient viruses at an MOI of 2 or 1 and cultured in a 6-well plate,
followed by transfection with the donor plasmid (D) or the control plasmid (DV) at 3.0mg/well. The passage 1 stock was prepared on day 5 and then used to infect CV1
cells to detect the infectious viral genomes. Specific bands corresponding to fragments from the purpose vector (P3.5) and each recipient virus (LacZ, Z4.7; FLP, F3.0)
were detected using Southern blotting withC (upper panel) orC-GFP probes (lower panel) using the same nylon membrane. The bands representing D6.6 andDVcir,
corresponding to AflII-cleaved 6.6 kb pUVCAGFP19L donor and circular pUCAGFP19LDV, respectively, appear to be ‘carryover’ DNA initially transfected to the
293FNCre cells and then co-transferred to the CV1 cells, together with the adenoviral infection (36). These bands were not detected at and after the second cycle of
infection (data not shown). Note that the DNA was detected as an AflII-digested linear form of the donor plasmid and a circular form of the control plasmid. The bands
indicated by the asterisk (*) appear to have been caused by recipient viruses carrying two packaging signals generated by the re-integration of the excised circularC
into either loxP site on the recipient viral genomes.
e76 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 8 PAGE 4 OF 8
viruses, the viral-packaging signal (C) corresponded to the
viral cis element (*) shown in Figure 1, while the LacZ-
and FLP-expression units corresponded to the replaced
gene. The 293FNCre cells were infected with one of the recipi-
ent viruses at a multiplicity of infection (MOI: PFU/cell) of 1
or 2, followed by the transfection of the donor plasmid (Figure
2A) at 3.0 mg/well on a 6-well plate. Under these conditions, a
viral cytopathic effect was observed on day 5. The cells were
harvested, and the virus stock (referred to as ‘passage 1 stock’)
was prepared. The initial viral titer of the purpose vector
produced by the RMCE was determined by infecting authentic
293 cells on 96-well plates with serially diluted passage 1
stock. The total virus titer, i.e. the residual recipient virus
plus the purpose vector (PFU/ml), and the titer of the purpose
vector only (GEU/ml) were then determined by observing the
end point of the viral cytopathic effect and GFP-expressing
fluorescent cells, respectively (Figure 2B). A significant titer
(1 · 105 to 2 · 106 GEU/ml) of GFP-expressing purpose vector
was detected in the passage 1 stock, showing that the purpose
vector was efficiently generated by the RMCE. Moreover,
the titer of purpose vector expressing GFP (closed bar) was
higher when each recipient virus was infected at an MOI of 1,
rather than at an MOI of 2. The titer was also higher when
the LacZ recipient, rather than the FLP recipient was used;
when both recipients were infected at an MOI of 1, the
percentages of purpose vector in the initial viral stock were
30 and 4%, respectively, based on the GEU/PFU ratio
(Figure 2B).
To confirm the efficient production of the purpose vector,
the viral genomes of the infectious particles in the passage 1
stock were analyzed as follows. CV1 cells were infected with
the passage 1 stock and then, 24 h later, completely washed
with PBS () to remove any viral particles remaining on the
surfaces of the cells. The total DNA, including the infectious
viral genomes of the produced purpose vector and the residual
recipient virus, was then extracted, digested using AflII, and
subjected to Southern blotting using a C or C-GFP probe
(Figure 2C, upper and lower panels, respectively; the positions
of the probes are shown in Figure 2A, bottom). The C probe
detected the left-end fragments (denoted Z4.7, F3.0 and P3.5)
of the two residual recipient viruses, the purpose vector and
‘carryover’ donor plasmid DNA (see Figure 2C legend) with
uniform sensitivity, while the C-GFP probe was designed to
detect the purpose vector-derived P3.5 fragment 10-fold
more strongly than the other fragments. When the cells were
infected with one of the recipient viruses at an MOI of 1
(Figure 2C: LacZ, lane 2; FLP, lane 5), the P3.5 bands within
the total DNA from the CV1 cells were faintly detected by
the C probe (upper panel), but were clearly detected by the
C-GFP probe (lower panel). When an MOI of 2 was used
(LacZ, lane 1; FLP, lane 4), the P3.5 bands were only detected
by theC-GFP probe (lower panel). In contrast, the P3.5 bands
were not detected when a control plasmid lacking V (denoted
DV) was transfected instead of the donor plasmid (D) (lanes 3
and 6, both panels). These results showed that a purpose vector
with the expected structure was indeed produced by the
RMCE. The percentage of purpose vector to the residual
recipient viruses expressing LacZ (P3.5 to Z4.7) or FLP
(P3.5 to F3.0) was higher when the lower MOI was used
(lane 1 versus lane 2 for LacZ and lane 4 versus lane 5
for FLP) and when the LacZ recipient, rather than the FLP
recipient was used (lane 2 versus lane 5), confirming the result
of the viral titration described above.
Optimization of vector production
To optimize the conditions for efficient production of the
purpose vector, 293FNCre cells were infected with the LacZ
recipient at an MOI of 2 or 1, transfected with various amounts
of the donor plasmid, and the passage 1 stock was prepared.
The viral genomes of the produced purpose vector and the
residual recipient virus in infectious particles within the stock
were then analyzed using the C-GFP probe (Figure 3A) as
described above. The ratio of the purpose vector to the residual
recipient virus (Figure 3A, P3.5 to Z4.7) was clearly higher
when the donor plasmid was transfected at 3.0 mg/well (lanes 3
and 4) than when it was transfected at 1.5 mg/well (lanes 1 and
2), irrespective of the MOI. No notable improvement was
obtained when the amount of the donor plasmid was increased
to 6.0 mg/well (lanes 5 and 6). Thus, we fixed the amount of the
donor plasmid at 3.0 mg/well in subsequent experiments. We
then optimized the MOI by infecting 293FNCre cells with the
LacZ recipient at various MOIs (Figure 3B), followed by
donor plasmid transfection. The purpose vector was produced
more efficiently when an MOI of 1 or 0.5 (lanes 3 or 4) was
used, compared with when an MOI of 4 or 2 (lanes 1 or 2) was
used; thus, an MOI of 1 or 0.5 was selected as optimal,
although the percentage of the purpose vector increased fur-
ther when a lower MOI was used (see below). The percentage
of purpose vector in the passage 1 stock was quantified as
25% when the LacZ recipient, an MOI of 0.5, and a donor
plasmid amount of 3.0 mg/well of the donor plasmid were
used. (Figure 3B, lane 4 and Table 1, first row, right. Note
that the C-GFP probe was used in Figure 3B.)
A
B
Figure 3. Optimal conditions for producing adenovirus vector by Cre-mediated
RMCE. The virus stock was prepared on day 5 and then used to infect CV1 cells
for a Southern blot analysis. Note that the C-GFP probe was used to detect
the specific bands. The results were reproduced in three experiments, and a
representative result is shown. (A) Optimal amount of the donor plasmid
DNA. 293FNCre cells were infected with the LacZ-expressing recipient virus
at an MOI of 2 or 1 and cultured in a 6-well plate, followed by transfection with
the indicated amounts of donor plasmid (mg/well). (B) Optimal MOI of the
recipient virus. 293FNCre cells were infected with the LacZ-recipient virus
at the indicated MOIs, followed by transfection with the donor plasmid at
3.0 mg/well.
PAGE 5 OF 8 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 8 e76
Vector purification by serial passage
Since the produced purpose vector can replicate by itself and
the residual recipient viruses are eventually eliminated because
of the excision of a viral-packaging signal (C), the vector stock
can be purified by serial passages in Cre-expressing 293 cells
or isolated by limiting dilutions in authentic 293 cells. To
purify the purpose vector, 293FNCre cells were infected
with 50 ml of the passage 1 stock and cultured in a 6-well
plate; passage 2 stock was then prepared on day 5. A total of
five passages were performed (including the initial infection
step), and each prepared viral stock was used to infect CV1
cells for a Southern blot analysis of the infected viral genomes
from infectious particles (Figure 4). The ratio of purpose
vector to residual recipient virus (P3.5 to Z4.7) dramatically
increased with each passage in the 293FNCre cells, especially
when an MOI of 0.5 was initially used (right panel), and the
Z4.7 band specific for the recipient virus was no longer detect-
able after the fourth passage at an MOI of 2 (lane 4) or after the
third passage at an MOI of 0.5 (lane 8). When initiated at an
MOI of 0.5, the percentage of purpose vector in the stock
reached 80–90% after no more than two passages (Table 1),
indicating that only 10 days are required to produce an aden-
ovirus vector sufficient for practical screening applications.
Moreover, a stock purity of 99.8% was obtained after four
passages.
DISCUSSION
In the present study, a novel system for producing viral vectors
was established based on an RMCE reaction mediated by Cre
recombinase and the mutant loxP V. Here, we demonstrated
the efficient production of a first-generation adenovirus vector
by the replacement of a specific gene (replaced gene) in the
replicating adenovirus genome with a gene of interest from
plasmid DNA in Cre-expressing 293 cells (293FNCre cells).
Although the first successful example of the RMCE was repor-
ted using FLP/FRT system (31), we chose Cre/loxP system
because Cre is much more active, 90-fold more, than FLP in
the recombination efficiency in mammalian cells (32).
Several factors were found to be important for the efficient
construction of adenovirus vectors using the RMCE reaction.
First, two different recipient viruses, a LacZ recipient and an
FLP recipient, were used and the former recipient was found to
produce the purpose vector much more efficiently than the
latter, based on the viral titers (Figure 2B) and a Southern
blot analysis of the infectious viral genomes (Figure 2C).
The structures of both recipient viruses were identical, except
for the inserted genes (LacZ and FLP). A possible reason for
the difference in vector production efficiencies may be due to
the differences in the genome sizes of the recipient viruses.
Relative to the size of the wt adenovirus-5 genome (35 935 nt =
100%), the genome of the LacZ recipient was much larger
(103.5%) than those of the FLP recipient (97.8%) and the
GFP-expressing purpose vector (95.4%). In general, when
two viral clones with different genome sizes are simultan-
eously replicated in the permissive cells, the virus with the
shorter genome tends to become dominant, probably because
shorter genomes replicate faster than longer ones (Y. Kanegae
and I. Saito, unpublished data). A recipient virus with a gen-
ome larger than that of the LacZ recipient described here may
be difficult to construct, since such a genome size would be
near the upper limit of the adenovirus packaging (105%) (33).
Therefore, the purpose vector has two different selective
advantages against the LacZ recipient virus; the majority of
the recipients were not packaged by excision of their pack-
aging signal, and the purpose vector outgrew the recipients of
much larger size.
On the other hand, if undesired recombination between wt
loxP (L) and loxP V (V) should occur, viruses lacking either a
replaced gene or a gene of interest would be generated (refer to
Figure 2A), and such viruses would replicate much faster and
might become majority of the viral population. Langer et al.
(34) faced this problem in construction of adenoviral vector
when using loxP 511 by RMCE and hence their trial was
unsuccessful. Although the loxP 511 was the first mutant
applied to the RMCE reaction as an ‘exclusive’ or ‘non-com-
patible’ mutant loxP, our in vitro analyses revealed that most
of the mutant loxPs with single-base substitutions, including
loxP 511, slightly but reproducibly recombined with wt loxP
(17). In contrast, most of the mutant loxPs with two-base
substitutions exhibited a high fidelity against wt loxP but a
low recombination efficiency with identical mutant loxP,
while the mutant loxP V showed both a high fidelity and high
recombination efficiency not only in vitro analysis, but also in
mammalian cells. In the present study, the viruses without an
insert were not evident and did not disturb the process of the
vector construction, even though thousands of copies of viral
Table 1. Ratio of produced purpose vector to residual recipient viruses during
passages through 293FNCre cells
Passage Ratio (purpose vector:recipient virus)
MOI 2a MOI 0.5a
1b 5:95 25:75
2b 40:60 85:15
3c 93.0:7.0 97.5:2.5
4c 98.5:1.5 99.8:0.2
5c 99.9:0.1 99.97:0.03
aThe initial MOIs used to infect the 293FNCre cells with the LacZ-recipient
virus are shown.
bThe estimated percentages by quantifying the density of the Z4.7- and
P3.5-bands specific to the purpose vector and the recipient virus, respectively.
cThe estimated percentages by measuring the amounts of the infectious viral
genome of the purpose vector and the recipient virus using quantitative real-time
PCR by detecting GFP and LacZ genes, respectively.
Figure 4. Purification of the purpose vector by serial passage. CV1 cells
infected with passages 1–5 stocks were used in a Southern blot analysis.
The initial MOIs (MOI 2, left panel; 0.5, right panel) used to infect the
293FNCre cells with the LacZ-recipient virus are shown. The C probe and
Ad probe were simultaneously used to detect specific bands. The results were
reproduced in three experiments, and a representative result is shown.
e76 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 8 PAGE 6 OF 8
genomes per cell replicates in 293FNCre cells. Even after the
fifth serial passage using the LacZ recipient, no putative virus
genome lacking an insert was detected, showing such virus, if
any, was present at most 20-fold less than the purpose vector
(M. Ishimura and Y. Kanegae, unpublished data). In addition,
the designs of the virus structures in the present study were
chosen such that the recipient virus and the purpose vector
would lose their viral packaging signal if L–V recombination
occurred (Figure 2A).
Second, our data showed that a low initial MOI (1.0 or 0.5)
of the recipient virus produced a much higher ratio of the
purpose vector (Figure 3B), suggesting that only a small
amount of recipient virus is required by using this method.
This result may indicate that large amounts of recipient virus
are difficult to eliminate and that a small amount of recipient
virus is sufficient to generate purpose vectors. However, we do
not recommend using an MOI of <0.5 because we observed
undesired generation of rearranged viruses containing only
part of the gene of interest, probably because uncontrolled
multiple cycles of infection occurred within a single passage
(data not shown).
Third, using the LacZ recipient, we observed that the pur-
pose vector was purified and the recipient virus was eliminated
during serial passages. The proportion of recipient virus in the
stock constantly decreased by 5–10-fold per passage, reach-
ing a percentage of no more than 0.03% after five cycles of
infection (Table 1). This result shows that the residual recipi-
ent virus can be efficiently eliminated from the stock, irre-
spective of the amount of residual recipient virus, by excising
the packaging signal. Suprisingly, the percentage of purpose
vector in the stock after the initial infection cycle reached as
high as 25% without any kind of external selection. One obvi-
ous reason for such high efficiency was that, in our construc-
tion design, the genome of the purpose virus grew faster than
that of the recipient viruses depending on the genome size,
even within the initial cycle. However, the efficiency of RMCE
itself might be more important. Previous reports (20,21) using
RMCE method and loxP V were concerned about drug-
selected isolation of purpose cell clones in murine ES cell
lines and hence the efficiency of RMCE was not examined.
Our preliminary results, using CV1 cells, which is replication-
non-permissive for adenovirus vector, indicated that without
any selection, approximately no <1% of the infected cells did
receive the GEU through the RMCE reaction (data not shown).
The method described here is the first successful example of
RMCE applied to the construction of viral vectors in mam-
malian cells. For adenovirus vector construction, this method
provides several unique features, compared with the conven-
tional methods. First, this method only requires that a small
donor plasmid containing cDNA be introduced into the vector,
while other methods require very large plasmids or cosmids
containing nearly the full-length of adenovirus genome (1,4,5).
These large plasmids are often difficult to handle, especially
for new users of adenovirus vectors. RMCE-related system
using att of lambda phage have been commercially available
recently (35). Because, however, lambda-phage recombina-
tion system can work only within E.coli, large viral genome
should be handled before the generation of viral vector.
Second, a purpose vector can be quickly obtained by trans-
fection plus infection followed by more than three times
serial passages. Although this virus stock contained a trace
of remaining recipient virus, the pure purpose virus can be
readily isolated using limiting-dilution, if desired.
Therefore, this simple and efficient method will probably
be useful in genomic/proteomic approaches for expression
screening using adenovirus vectors not only in culture cell
but also in vivo directly when hundreds of cDNA candidates
are to be examined. Using this method, a set of 24- or even
96-different recombinant adenoviruses could be obtained by
transfecting 293FNCre cells with a large set of donor plasmids
in a multiple-well plate and subsequently infecting the cells
with the recipient virus for serial passages (using the same
multi-well plate layout). The purpose vector would become
dominant after about three cycles, without requiring the tedi-
ous isolation of each recombinant virus. After expression
screening, the desired adenoviral clones could be readily
isolated for further large-scale expression experiments or
for use in animal experiments.
The present work shows that a given DNA plasmid
sequence can be efficiently transferred into a DNA viral gen-
ome using a viral cis element, such as the packaging signal
utilized in the present study. Therefore, this method could be
used for the construction of large DNA vectors other than
first-generation adenovirus vectors. The study of DNA viruses
with large genomes, such as various herpes viruses, including
Epstein–Barr virus, could probably have benefits from this
technique. This method may also be applicable to the devel-
opment of helper-dependent adenovirus vectors (30) generated
by the substitution of 30 kb of foreign DNA. This possibility
is now being studied in our laboratory.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank Dr J. Miyazaki for the CAG promoter,
Ms K. Nishijima and Ms E. Kondo for their excellent secretarial
support, and Ms Y. Nishiwaki for real-time PCR analysis.
We also thank Ms S. Kondo for her continuous support
and encouragement. This work was supported in part by
grants-in-aid from the Ministry of Education, Culture,
Sports, Science and Technology to M.N., Y.K. and I.S.
Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this
article was provided by the grant above.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Miyake,S., Makimura,M., Kanegae,Y., Harada,S., Sato,Y., Takamori,K.,
Tokuda,C. and Saito,I. (1996) Efficient generation of recombinant
adenoviruses using adenovirus DNA–terminal protein complex and a
cosmid bearing the full-length virus genome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA,
93, 1320–1324.
2. Merchlinsky,M. and Moss,B. (1992) Introductionof foreign DNAinto the
vaccinia virus genome by in vitro ligation: recombination-independent
selectable cloning vectors. Virology, 190, 522–526.
3. Kitts,P.A. and Possee,R.D. (1993) A method for producing recombinant
baculovirus expression vectors at high frequency. Biotechniques, 14,
810–817.
4. Bett,A.J., Haddara,W., Prevec,L. and Graham,F.L. (1994) An efficient
and flexible system for construction of adenovirus vectors with insertions
or deletions in early regions 1 and 3. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 91,
8802–8806.
5. Mizuguchi,H. and Kay,M.A. (1998) Efficient construction of a
recombinant adenovirus vector by an improved in vitro ligation method.
Hum. Gene Ther., 9, 2577–2583.
PAGE 7 OF 8 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 8 e76
6. Kanda,T., Yajima,M., Ahsan,N., Tanaka,M. and Takada,K. (2004)
Production of high-titer Epstein–Barr virus recombinants derived from
Akata cells by using a bacterial artificial chromosome system.
J. Virol., 78, 7004–7015.
7. Ernst,W.J., Grabherr,R.M. and Katinger,H.W. (1994) Direct cloning
into the Autographa californica nuclear polyhedrosis virus for
generation of recombinant baculoviruses. Nucleic Acids Res., 22,
2855–2856.
8. Sharp,P.A., Moore,C. and Haverty,J.L. (1976) The infectivity of
adenovirus 5 DNA–protein complex. Virology, 75, 442–456.
9. Feng,Y.Q., Seibler,J., Alami,R., Eisen,A., Westerman,K.A.,
Leboulch,P., Fiering,S. and Bouhassira,E.E. (1999) Site-specific
chromosomal integration in mammalian cells: highly efficient CRE
recombinase-mediated cassette exchange. J. Mol. Biol., 292,
779–785.
10. Baer,A. and Bode,J. (2001) Coping with kinetic and thermodynamic
barriers: RMCE, an efficient strategy for the targeted integration of
transgenes. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 12, 473–480.
11. Hoess,R.H., Wierzbicki,A. and Abremski,K. (1986) The role of the loxP
spacer region in P1 site-specific recombination. Nucleic Acids Res.,
14, 2287–2300.
12. Bouhassira,E.E., Westerman,K. and Leboulch,P. (1997) Transcriptional
behavior of LCR enhancer elements integrated at the same chromosomal
locus by recombinase-mediated cassette exchange. Blood, 90,
3332–3344.
13. Bethke,B. and Sauer,B. (1997) Segmental genomic replacement by
Cre-mediated recombination: genotoxic stress activation of the p53
promoter in single-copy transformants. Nucleic Acids Res., 25,
2828–2834.
14. Trinh,K.R. and Morrison,S.L. (2000) Site-specific and directional gene
replacement mediated by Cre recombinase. J. Immunol. Methods,
244, 185–193.
15. Lauth,M., Moerl,K., Barski,J.J. and Meyer,M. (2000) Characterization
of Cre-mediated cassette exchange after plasmid microinjection in
fertilized mouse oocytes. Genesis, 27, 153–158.
16. Hong,S.H., Lee,M.S., Park,S., Kim,H.I., Shin,H.J., Kwon,M.H. and
Kim,K.H. (2004) A phagemid system enabling easy estimation of the
combinatorial antibody library size. Immunol. Lett., 91, 247–253.
17. Lee,G. and Saito,I. (1998) Role of nucleotide sequences of loxP spacer
region in Cre-mediated recombination. Gene, 216, 55–65.
18. Siegel,R.W., Jain,R. and Bradbury,A. (2001) Using an in vivo phagemid
system to identify non-compatible loxP sequences. FEBS Lett., 505,
467–473.
19. Kondo,S., Okuda,A., Sato,H., Tachikawa,N., Terashima,M., Kanegae,Y.
and Saito,I. (2003) Simultaneous on/off regulation of transgenes located
on a mammalian chromosome with Cre-expressing adenovirus and a
mutant loxP. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, e76.
20. Kolb,A.F. (2001) Selection-marker-free modification of the murine
beta-casein gene using a lox2272 [correction of lox2722] site.
Anal. Biochem., 290, 260–271.
21. Araki,K., Araki,M. and Yamamura,K. (2002) Site-directed integration of
the cre gene mediated by Cre recombinase using a combination of
mutant lox sites. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, e103.
22. Graham,F.L., Smiley,J., Russell,W.C. and Nairn,R. (1977)
Characteristics of a human cell line transformed by DNA from human
adenovirus type 5. J. Gen. Virol., 36, 59–74.
23. Niwa,H., Yamamura,K. and Miyazaki,J. (1991) Efficient selection for
high-expression transfectants with a novel eukaryotic vector.
Gene, 108, 193–199.
24. Kim,D.W., Uetsuki,T., Kaziro,Y., Yamaguchi,N. and Sugano,S. (1990)
Use of the human elongation factor 1 alpha promoter as a versatile
and efficient expression system. Gene, 91, 217–223.
25. Kanegae,Y., Lee,G., Sato,Y., Tanaka,M., Nakai,M., Sakaki,T.,
Sugano,S. and Saito,I. (1995) Efficient gene activation in mammalian
cells by using recombinant adenovirus expressing site-specific Cre
recombinase. Nucleic Acids Res., 23, 3816–3821.
26. Kanegae,Y., Makimura,M. and Saito,I. (1994) A simple and efficient
method for purification of infectious recombinant adenovirus.
Jpn. J. Med. Sci. Biol., 47, 157–166.
27. Saito,I., Oya,Y., Yamamoto,K., Yuasa,T. and Shimojo,H. (1985)
Construction of nondefective adenovirus type 5 bearing a 2.8-kilobase
hepatitis B virus DNA near the right end of its genome. J. Virol.,
54, 711–719.
28. Saito,I., Groves,R., Giulotto,E., Rolfe,M. and Stark,G.R. (1989)
Evolution and stability of chromosomal DNA coamplified with the CAD
gene. Mol. Cell. Biol., 9, 2445–2452.
29. Sambrook,J., Fritsch,E.F. and Maniatis,T. (1992) Molecular Cloning:
A Laboratory Manual, 3rd edn. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press,
Cold Spring Harbor, NY.
30. Parks,R.J., Chen,L., Anton,M., Sankar,U., Rudnicki,M.A. and
Graham,F.L. (1996) A helper-dependent adenovirus vector system:
removal of helper virus by Cre-mediated excision of the viral packaging
signal. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 93, 13565–13570.
31. Seibler,J. and Bode,J. (1997) Double-reciprocal crossover mediated by
FLP-recombinase: a concept and an assay. Biochemistry, 36, 1740–1747.
32. Nakano,M., Odaka,K., Ishimura,M., Kondo,S., Tachikawa,N., Chiba,J.,
Kanegae,Y. and Saito,I. (2001) Efficient gene activation in cultured
mammalian cells mediated by FLP recombinase-expressing recombinant
adenovirus. Nucleic Acids Res., 29, e40.
33. Parks,R.J. and Graham,F.L. (1997) A helper-dependent system for
adenovirus vector production helps define a lower limit for efficient
DNA packaging. J. Virol., 71, 3293–3298.
34. Langer,S.J., Ghafoori,A.P., Byrd,M. and Leinwand,L. (2002) A genetic
screen identifies novel non-compatible loxP sites. Nucleic Acids Res.,
30, 3067–3077.
35. Hartley,J.L., Temple,G.F. and Brasch,M.A. (2000) DNA cloning using
in vitro site-specific recombination. Genome Res., 10, 1788–1795.
36. Yoshimura,K., Rosenfeld,M.A., Seth,P. and Crystal,R.G. (1993)
Adenovirus-mediated augmentation of cell transfection with unmodified
plasmid vectors. J. Biol. Chem., 268, 2300–2303.
e76 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 8 PAGE 8 OF 8
