Snow-fed streamflow timing at different basin scales:
Case study of the Tuolumne River above Hetch Hetchy,
Yosemite, California
Jessica D. Lundquist1
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla, California, USA
Michael D. Dettinger2
U.S. Geological Survey, La Jolla, California, USA
Daniel R. Cayan3
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla, California, USA
Received 29 December 2004; revised 22 March 2005; accepted 29 March 2005; published 7 July 2005.
[1] Diurnal cycles in snow-fed streams provide a useful technique for measuring the time
it takes water to travel from the top of the snowpack, where snowmelt typically peaks
in the afternoon, to the river gauge, where the daily maximum flows may arrive many
hours later. Hourly stage measurements in nested subbasins (6–775 km2) of the Tuolumne
River in Yosemite National Park illustrate travel time delays at different basin scales
during the spring 2002 and 2003 melt seasons. Travel times increase with longer
percolation times through deeper snowpacks, increase with longer travel times over land
and along longer stream channels, and increase with slower in-stream flow velocities. In
basins smaller than 30 km2, travel times through the snowpack dominate streamflow
timing. In particular, daily peak flows shift to earlier in the day as snowpacks thin and
mean discharges increase. In basins larger than 200 km2, snowpack heterogeneity
causes the hour of peak flow to be highly consistent, with little or no variation as the
snowpack thins. Basins with areas in between 30 and 200 km2 exhibit different sequences
of diurnal streamflow timing in different years, sometimes acting like small basins and
other times like large basins. From the start of the melt season until the day of peak
snowmelt discharge, increasing travel distances in channels as the snow line retreats to
higher elevations do not cause long enough travel delays to offset the observed decrease in
mean travel times through the snowpack. A model that couples porous medium flow
through thinning snowpacks with free surface flow in stream channels can reproduce the
observed patterns, provided that the model incorporates snowpack heterogeneity.
Citation: Lundquist, J. D., M. D. Dettinger, and D. R. Cayan (2005), Snow-fed streamflow timing at different basin scales: Case
study of the Tuolumne River above Hetch Hetchy, Yosemite, California, Water Resour. Res., 41, W07005, doi:10.1029/
2004WR003933.
1. Introduction
[2] Diurnal fluctuations, generally observed in hourly
streamflow measurements from snow-fed watersheds, pro-
vide a new way of understanding basin hydrology. The
daily cycle of solar forcing yields major changes in snow-
melt and streamflow over the course of each day, and the
difference between the time of highest melt rate and the time
of peak runoff provides a measure of average runoff travel
times through the river basin (Figure 1). These travel times
provide information about snowpack properties, in-channel
flow velocities, and distances to the primary snowmelt
source areas. The ability to predict travel times may prove
useful for flood forecasting, reservoir and hydropower
operations, and characterizing and predicting chemical
transports in mountain rivers.
1.1. Prior Studies
[3] Most previous studies of short-term streamflow tim-
ing variations have focused on small basins and local
processes [Bengtsson, 1981; Caine, 1992; Colbeck, 1972;
Dunne et al., 1976; Jordan, 1983; Woo and Slaymaker,
1975]. Braun and Slaymaker [1981] examined changes in
diurnal runoff at different spatial scales, but their largest
basin, Miller Creek, encompassed only 23 km2. Kobayashi
and Motoyama [1985] examined streamflow timing in four
adjacent watersheds from 0.4 to 108 km2, all completely
snow covered throughout the period of study. All of these
studies report that travel times decrease as the snowpack
1Now at Climate Diagnostics Center, Cooperative Institute for Research
in Environmental Sciences, Boulder, Colorado, USA.
2Also at Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla, California, USA.
3Also at U.S. Geological Survey, La Jolla, California, USA.
Copyright 2005 by the American Geophysical Union.
0043-1397/05/2004WR003933$09.00
W07005
WATER RESOURCES RESEARCH, VOL. 41, W07005, doi:10.1029/2004WR003933, 2005
1 of 14
thins and matures, reflecting shorter travel times for melt-
water to pass from the snow surface to the base of the
snowpack.
[4] Basin-scale runoff travel times cease to be dominated
by snowpack properties when larger basins are considered.
Grover and Harrington [1966] state that below the snow-
field, peaks and troughs of the diurnal cycle occur later
than at the edge of a snowfield, with a delay that depends
on the in-stream distance from the snowfield and on the
stream’s velocity. Lundquist and Cayan [2002] show that,
during the peak melt season, most USGS gauged rivers in
the western United States have clear diurnal cycles, and
that the hour of peak flow changes very little during the
peak melt season. The mechanisms by which the evolution
of diurnal cycles in many small (<30 km2) catchments or
subcatchments sum to form the contrasting evolution of
diurnal cycles in larger (>200 km2) basins, however, has
not been described previously.
1.2. Current Study: Tuolumne River, Yosemite
National Park
[5] This paper presents an analysis of new observations
of hourly streamflow timing within nested basins of the
Tuolumne River above the Hetch Hetchy Reservoir, Yosem-
ite National Park, California (Figure 2). California has a
Mediterranean climate, and most precipitation falls between
November and March. Thus snow provides a natural
reservoir, releasing winter precipitation in the summer when
the population needs it most. Indeed, over half of Califor-
nia’s water supply comes from the high-elevation snow-
packs of the Sierra Nevada. Climate variability in the region
is high, and precipitation and runoff fluctuate from year to
year, from under 50% to over 200% of climatological
averages. Climate fluctuations, climate trends, and the
growing needs of water consumers require informed man-
agement of these resources. In order to improve understand-
ing of hydrologic processes at high altitudes, a network of
meteorological and hydrological sensors has been deployed
in Yosemite National Park since Summer 2001 [Lundquist
et al., 2003].
[6] The nested subbasins in the study area illustrate the
kinematics of streamflow timing at different spatial scales.
During the 2002 and 2003 melt seasons, in-stream pressure
sensors (Solinst Leveloggers, http://www.solinst.com) mea-
sured river stages at half-hour intervals in 17 subbasins
(Figure 2) of the Tuolumne and Merced rivers. Subbasin
areas, delineated on a 30-m resolution digital elevation
model (DEM), range from 6 to 775 km2. Basin elevations
range from 1200 to 3700 m. Table 1 details the character-
istics of three subbasins examined in this paper.
[7] During the first half of the 2002 and 2003 melt
seasons, from the day flows started rising until the day of
peak flow, different sized basins exhibited different trends in
diurnal streamflow timing (Figure 3). During this early
season melt period, sensors monitoring flows from basins
larger than 200 km2 reported remarkably constant diurnal
streamflow timings, e.g., at Glen Aulin (251 km2) and
Hetch Hetchy (775 km2, Figure 3). This consistency is
similar to that observed in most USGS gauged basins
throughout the western United States [Lundquist and
Cayan, 2002; Lundquist, 2004; Lundquist and Dettinger,
2005].
[8] In the subbasins smaller than 30 km2, e.g., in Rafferty
Creek (25 km2, Figure 3), the observed times of peak daily
flows evolved so that they were 5 to 6 hours earlier on the
day of peak flow than they were when flows began to rise in
both years. This evolution is similar to the sequence of
events reported by previous small basin studies [Bengtsson,
1981; Caine, 1992; Colbeck, 1972; Dunne et al., 1976;
Jordan, 1983]. At gauges monitoring subbasins larger than
30 but smaller than 200 km2, the evolution of daily flow
timing differed from one spring to the next. In 2002, at the
Lyell Fork of the Tuolumne River (109 km2, Figure 3), daily
peak flows arrived between 2000 and 2200 local standard
time (LST) during the early melt season, with no clear trend
toward earlier or later diurnal cycles, a seasonal evolution
similar to those in the larger basins. In 2003, however,
streamflow timing at Lyell Fork came earlier as the melt
season progressed, until by the day of peak flows, the
diurnal peak was 3 hours earlier than when the snowmelt
began. Thus flows in 2002 evolved like a large basin, and
flows in 2003 evolved more like a small basin.
[9] Following the day of peak spring discharge, during
the second half of the two melt seasons, the peak daily flows
arrived later and later in all basins, even as flows declined.
During this period of declining streamflow, more and more
of the snowmelt originated from the highest snowfields, and
streamflow velocities decreased as water levels in the
channels fell [Rickenmann, 1994]. The resulting delays in
diurnal cycle timing were greatest in the larger basins,
where long travel distances added significantly to time
delays caused by declining velocities. This period of de-
clining streamflow is the subject of continuing research and
is not the focus of this paper.
1.3. Objectives
[10] This study focuses on the basin-to-basin and, in
some basins, year-to-year differences in diurnal streamflow
timing during the period in early spring from the start of
snowmelt to the date of peak discharge. Somehow, dis-
charge from numerous small (<30 km2) catchments, each
with diurnal peak streamflows that arrive earlier each day as
the snowpack shrinks, combine to produce a diurnal signal
    
0  
75
150
225
300
375
450
W
 m
−
2
travel time
11 Apr 2002 noon midnight  noon
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
m
3  
s−
1
Figure 1. Travel time, which can be measured as the
difference between the time of peak solar radiation (solid
line) and the time of peak discharge (dashed line).
2 of 14
W07005 LUNDQUIST ET AL.: TUOLUMNE RIVER DIURNAL FLOW W07005
in larger (>200 km2) catchments that peaks near the same
time each day during this period, apparently regardless of
snowpack properties. This change could come about be-
cause the time that water spends moving through the
snowpack becomes a smaller fraction of the total travel
time as channel distances and channel travel times increase
with basin scale. The change could occur because small
headwater basins are snow covered throughout the first half
of the melt season, whereas larger basins generally span
larger ranges of elevations and have snow lines that retreat
to higher altitudes during the melt season. In these larger
basins, the increase in travel distance along the channels
might offset the decrease in travel distance through the
snowpack. However, this possibility would require some
unrealistic ‘‘tuning’’ of the rates of snow line retreat to just
match the hastening of diurnal cycles expected from snow-
pack thinning.
[11] Alternatively, variations in snow depths and melt
rates are observed to increase with basin scale [Anderton et
al., 2002; Erxleben et al., 2002]. These spatial variations of
snowpack properties within the larger basins would yield
differing contributions to the diurnal cycles of streamflow,
contributions that peak at very different times of day. The
timing of the sum of all these contributions ends up being
independent of the snowpack properties at any one point
[Lundquist and Dettinger, 2005; Lundquist, 2004]. The
resulting diurnal timing is stable throughout the early melt
season because of the (essentially random) heterogeneity of
the snowpack rather than because of a specific spatial
distribution of snowpack properties.
[12] The present analysis uses the Tuolumne River net-
work of streamflow observations along with a numerical
simulation to test the above hypotheses. The average time
that meltwater spends in the snowpack on various days
Table 1. Tuolumne River Subbasin Characteristics
Basin Area, km2
Main Channel
Length, km
Gauge
Elevation, m
Mean
Elevation, m
Highest
Elevation, m
Rafferty Creek 25 9 2670 3060 3400
Lyell Fork 109 20 2670 3160 3700
Hetch Hetchy 775 59 1170 2850 3700
Figure 2. Map of stream gauges in intensive study area in Yosemite National Park. Gauges marked as
‘‘snow-dominated’’ monitor basins with areas less than 30 km2. Gauges marked as ‘‘transitional’’ monitor
basins larger than 30 km2 but smaller than 200 km2. Gauges marked as ‘‘no snow signature’’ monitor
basins larger than 200 km2.
W07005 LUNDQUIST ET AL.: TUOLUMNE RIVER DIURNAL FLOW
3 of 14
W07005
during the early melt season is estimated from measure-
ments of snow depth and melt rates (section 2.1). The
average time spent traveling along the stream channel is
estimated using observed distances along channels from the
snow line to a gauge together with estimates of in-channel
velocities for a measured discharge (section 2.3). These
estimates, although approximate, indicate that the travel
times in stream channels are short compared to travel times
within the snowpack, even in the large Hetch Hetchy basin
(775 km2). Increases in channel lengths from retreating
snow lines to the gauges are not sufficient to offset the
decreasing travel times through the thinning snowpack
(section 2.4). Thus some other property that changes with
basin scale must be responsible for the observations of
streamflow timing. Variability in snowpack properties
increases in larger basins, and a simulation of the Tuolumne
River above Hetch Hetchy is used to test how snowpack
variability affects streamflow timing at different scales
(section 3). As with the travel time estimates of section 2,
the model shows that the seasonal evolution of in-channel
travel velocities and distances is not sufficient to explain the
observed timing changes. Rather, the model must include
heterogeneity of snowpack properties if it is to reproduce
the observed patterns in streamflow timing. Thus accurate
representations of snowpack heterogeneity appear to be
essential for accurate forecasts of short-term streamflow
timing (Section 4). Thus the heterogeneity of snow-fed
river basins is an essential characteristic that affects their
hydrologic behavior and not a source of ‘‘noise.’’
2. Estimated Travel Times: Snowpack
Versus Stream
[13] Average travel times in a basin are the average
distances traveled divided by the path-averaged travel
velocities, along flow paths from melt to measurement.
The path-averaged distances depend on (1) distances that
meltwater has to percolate through the snowpack, (2) paths
and distances traveled from the base of the snowpack to
channels, and (3) distances that the water flows along the
channel network to reach the gauge. Travel velocities depend
on discharge magnitude, geometry, and friction along these
paths. As the snowmelt season begins, snowpacks mature,
flow fingers develop, and stream channels fill so that flow
velocities increase. Thus overall travel velocities increase in
both snowpacks and river channels along with the increases
in discharge. To interpret the observed sequences of daily
flow times discussed in section 1, we partitioned travel times
between travel in the snowpack and travel along the hillslope
and stream channel. Adding a snowpack component to
D’Odorico and Rigon’s [2003] estimated mean travel time
across hillslopes and channels, E[t], yields
E t½  ¼ hxsi
us
þ hxhi
uh
þ hxci
uc
ð1Þ
where hxs/h/ci is the average travel distance and us/h/c is the
average velocity of water through or over the snowpack(s) /
hillslope(h) /channel(c).
2.1. Travel Time Through the Snowpack
[14] To estimate travel times through the snowpack, one
must know the distances water moves through the snow-
pack (snow depths) and the speed at which meltwater
travels, which depends on surface melt rates and on snow-
pack properties. To estimate these time-varying properties,
measurements of daily snow water equivalent (SWE) during
springs 2002 and 2003 were analyzed at 47 snow pillows at
elevations from 1500 to 3400 m throughout the central
Sierra Nevada (described further by Lundquist et al.
[2004]). Daily melt rates were estimated from the day-to-
day differences in SWE at each station. This interpretation
assumes that all of the meltwater migrated out of the
snowpack above the pillow each day. While it accurately
measures outflow from the snowpack and inflow to the
stream, actual surface melt rates may be underestimated,
particularly early in the season when melt at the upper
surface is retained within the snowpack.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Apr1 May1 Jun1 Jul1
di
sc
ha
rg
e 
(m
3  
s−
1 )
(a) 2002
16
19
22
1
4
7
10
13
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Apr1 May1 Jun1 Jul1
(b) 2003
16
19
22
1
4
7
10
13
hr
 o
f m
ax
 fl
ow
 (L
ST
)
Figure 3. Observations of hour of peak streamflow (curves with symbols, right axis) in local standard
time (LST) for Rafferty Creek (pluses), Lyell Fork (circles), Glen Aulin (triangles), and Hetch Hetchy
(squares) along the Tuolumne River in (a) 2002 and (b) 2003. Discharge at the nearby Merced River at
Happy Isles gauge (solid line, left axis), which is highly correlated with stages at all gauges, illustrates
relative discharge magnitudes through time. Vertical dashed lines indicate the beginning and end of the
period of interest for this study. The falling limb of the hydrograph is not considered here.
4 of 14
W07005 LUNDQUIST ET AL.: TUOLUMNE RIVER DIURNAL FLOW W07005
[15] Snow depth, density, and SWE were measured at 92
snow courses in the central Sierra Nevada on 1 April 2002
and 1 May 2003, near the start of the melt season for each
year. The average density at these snow courses, calculated
by combining both sets measurements, was 400 kg m	3.
Because density varies much less in space and time than
either SWE or snow depth [Adams, 1976; Anderton et al.,
2002; Elder et al., 1991; Logan, 1973; Shook and Gray,
1997], this average density was used to convert SWEs at the
snow pillows to snow depths (Figure 4a). Density was
assumed constant throughout the melt season, since sensi-
tivity tests by Lundquist and Dettinger [2005] indicated that
seasonal changes in density did not noticeably affect diurnal
melt timing.
[16] Flow through snowpacks can be modeled as a vertical
percolation of water through an unsaturated porous medium
[Colbeck, 1972]. Although downslope flow along ice layers
is likely throughout the Sierra Nevada [Kattelmann and
Dozier, 1999], flow from the top to the bottom of the
snowpack probably dominates the melt regime, especially
on slopes of lower angle and when the snowpack is
isothermal at 0C [Smith, 1974; Dettinger and Gerkhe,
2002]. From a snowmelt propagation model [Dunne et al.,
1976], we estimate
us ¼ Km2=3 ð2Þ
where us is the vertical velocity through the snowpack, m is
the melt rate at the surface, and K corresponds to an
unsaturated permeability, assumed herein to be about
99 cm1/3 h	1/3 (1.4 m1/3 s	1/3), based on estimates by
Lundquist and Dettinger [2005] and Lundquist [2004].
[17] On the basis of snow pillow measurements from
2002 and 2003 (Figure 4b), typical daily totals of snowmelt
in the central Sierra range from 1.5 cm d	1, early in the
season, to 4.5 cm d	1, during peak melt. On the basis of
energy balance measurements and calculations from the
Mammoth Mountain Energy Balance Monitoring Site
(http://neige.bren.ucsb.edu/mmsa/), located southeast of
the Yosemite Study area in the Sierra Nevada, melt rates
follow the diurnal cycle of solar radiation. Thus melt rates
can be represented by half sinusoids with peaks at noon
each day. In this idealized representation, average daytime
melt rates are assumed to vary from 0.125 to 0.375 cm h	1,
and maximum melt rates vary from 0.196 to 0.589 cm h	1.
Substituting these melt rates into equation 2, typical veloc-
ities range from 25 to 70 cm h	1, consistent with values
measured in previous field experiments: 25 cm h	1 [Dunne
et al., 1976], 36 cm h	1 [Colbeck and Anderson, 1982], and
50 cm h	1 [Kobayashi and Motoyama, 1985].
[18] Thus, given observations (or estimates) of snowpack
thicknesses, travel time through snowpacks can be estimated
throughout the melt seasons. At the start of the melt
season in both 2002 and 2003, the snow depths at the snow
pillows, hxsi, averaged 190 cm. Assuming mﬃ 0.125 cm h	1
and us = 25 cm h
	1, the travel time through the snowpacks
might have totaled as much as 7.7 hours. The snowmelt
season was much shorter in 2003 than in 2002, due to
above-normal April snowfall and therefore a late start of
melt, but in both years peak flows occurred around 30 May,
when average melt totals reached 4.5 cm d	1 (Figure 4b)
and us = 50 cm h
	1. By that time, hxsi = 30 cm in 2002 and
90 cm in 2003. Consequently, by the end of May, snowpack
travel times were about 0.6 hour and 1.7 hours in 2002 and
2003, respectively. Thus, from the beginning to midpoint of
the 2002 and 2003 snowmelt seasons, the travel times
through the snowpacks would be expected to have declined
by 6 to 7 hours. This estimated reduction in travel time is
consistent with observations in subbasins with areas less
than 30 km2, e.g., Rafferty Creek (Figure 3), in both years.
Because the channel lengths are short in the smaller basins,
the close agreement between this travel time estimate and
observations suggests that meltwater percolates through the
unsaturated snowpack at a speed that is consistent with
equation 2.
2.2. Travel Time From the Snowpack to the
Stream Channel
[19] Hillslope lengths, hxhi, have been parameterized by
1
2D
[Bras, 1990], where D is the watershed’s drainage
density, i.e., the total length of channels within a basin
divided by the basin area. For the Tuolumne River drainage,
D was estimated from a DEM (Figure 2), and hxhi ﬃ 250 m.
Estimates of uh range from 14 m h
	1 for travel along
the saturated base of a snowpack [Dunne et al., 1976] to
540 m h	1 for fast overland flow [Dunne, 1978]. Thus, in
the Tuolumne River drainage, the time spent in hillslope
transport could vary from less than one hour to just under a
day. Neither drainage densities nor overland flow velocities
depend much on basin size [D’Odorico and Rigon, 2003].
Figure 4. (a) Average snow depth versus day of the year
for 2002 and 2003. Arrows indicate average depth at the
start of the main melt season (time of peak snow
accumulation) and on the day of peak discharge (30
May). (b) Average daily melt versus time for the 2 years.
Arrows indicate melt rates at the start and peak of each melt
season.
W07005 LUNDQUIST ET AL.: TUOLUMNE RIVER DIURNAL FLOW
5 of 14
W07005
Seasonal changes in soil moisture, frozen ground, and
relative proportions of surface to subsurface flow are likely
to affect diurnal timing at a site [Lundquist and Dettinger,
2005]. However, soil characteristics in the Tuolumne
Watershed do not change systematically with basin scale.
For example, most of the fine-grained soils are located in
the Tuolumne Meadows region upstream of the Lyell Fork
gauge, while most of the riverbed and adjacent slopes
between the Glen Aulin and Hetch Hetchy gauges are bare
granite. Thus, while time spent in hillslope transport might
vary by up to 22 hours at different basin locations, these
variations do not appear to depend on basin scale and
thus probably are not responsible for the observed scale-
dependent variations in timing. However, variability in
hillslope transport is probably partly responsible for
smoothing out the peak in the streamflow hydrograph. In
this study, we assume hillslope transport is fast and neglect
its influence on streamflow timing.
2.3. Travel Time Along the Stream Channel
[20] Estimating travel times in stream channels requires
knowledge of channel lengths and path-integrated veloci-
ties. To determine how the distances from the snow line to
each gauge increase as the snow line retreats to higher
elevations, MODIS-derived snow covered area maps were
obtained for the 2002 and 2003 melt seasons (MOD10A2
data product (Hall et al. [2000], data from March to June
2002 and May to June 2003)). These images had 500-m
spatial and 8-day temporal resolution and were projected
over the DEM (Figure 5). The changing snow line
primarily follows contours of elevation. If most discharge
had originated from the edge of the snow line along the
main channel of the Tuolumne River above Hetch Hetchy,
hxci = 16 km on 09 May 2003, when melt began, and hxci =
46 km on 02 June 2003, when peak flow occurred. If all
snow covered areas contributed equally to Tuolumne River
discharge, then, by averaging over all the snow covered
lengths of the channel network, hxci = 33 km on 09 May
2003, and hxci = 40 km on 02 June 2003. On 02 June, the
area-averaged channel length is shorter than the main
channel length because Piute Creek, in the northern portion
of the basin, contributed snowmelt from a shorter distance
than the main channel, which had a snow line near Mount
Lyell (Figure 5).
[21] In-channel flow velocities depend strongly on chan-
nel geometry and roughness, which are difficult to param-
eterize [Bathurst, 2002]. Velocity increases with discharge
[Rickenmann, 1994] and slope [Bras, 1990], but the coef-
ficients and forms of the equations vary between river
reaches. In-channel velocities can be estimated by the
Manning and Chezy equations:
uc ¼ C Qð Þ
ﬃﬃ
s
p ð3Þ
where uc is velocity, s is channel slope, and C(Q) represents
the very site-dependent relationship between velocity and
channel shape and roughness that varies with discharge
level, Q.
[22] C(Q) was estimated here by considering travel times
late in the season, when almost all the meltwater originated
from snowpacks at the head of the channel. By mid-June of
2002 and 2003, only the highest elevations were snow
covered in the satellite images, and most of the streamflow
originated from glaciers and snowfields surrounding Mount
Figure 5. Map of snow cover for the Tuolumne River basin above Hetch Hetchy. Darkest to lightest
shading represents area that was snow free from 9 May 2003 on, from 17 May, from 25 May, and by
2 June, respectively. White areas were snow covered on 2 June. The elevation ranges from 1200 m at
the Hetch Hetchy gauge on the west side of the map to 3700 m at Mount Lyell on the southeast
corner of the map.
6 of 14
W07005 LUNDQUIST ET AL.: TUOLUMNE RIVER DIURNAL FLOW W07005
Lyell, the highest peak in Yosemite National Park. During
the second half of the melt season, peak timings at all small-
basin gauges agreed to within less than one hour, so we
assume that the hour of peak flow observed at Rafferty
Creek is about the same as that at the head of Lyell Canyon.
With this assumption, we measured the difference between
the hours of peak flow at various gauges (Figure 3) and
combined that with in-channel distances from the DEM
(Figure 5) to estimate mean velocities for different channel
sections at different discharge rates (Figure 6).
[23] Four sites along the Tuolumne River were used to
estimate travel times and velocities: the headwater streams
(represented by Rafferty Creek and the head of Lyell
Canyon), the Lyell Fork gauge, the Glen Aulin gauge, and
the Hetch Hetchy gauge (Figure 6a). For each of the three
upstream sites, the difference in hour of peak flow between
that site and Hetch Hetchy was used to estimate the in-
channel travel time to Hetch Hetchy at different levels of
discharge (Figure 6b). The dates shown coincide with
periods when discharge levels and streamflow timing were
stable for several days and when satellite images were
available to verify that the snow line had retreated to near
the headwaters of Lyell Canyon. Travel times were about
twice as long on 29 June 2002, when 10 m3 s	1 of discharge
were recorded at the nearby Happy Isles gauge (Figure 3),
as on 14 June 2003, when 40 m3 s	1 of discharge were
recorded (Figure 6). Thus the higher discharge rate coin-
cided with the faster velocities.
[24] Average velocities were estimated for the three
reaches between the four gauges (Figure 6c). By normaliz-
ing these velocities by the square root of the average slope
for each reach, we estimated C(Q) at selected times and
locations (Figure 6d). Along each reach, C(Q) increased
with discharge. C(Q) also increased downstream as contrib-
uting areas and discharge rates increased. The highest
calculated value was 138 km h	1, for the reach between
Glen Aulin and Hetch Hetchy on 14 June 2002. This value
is much higher than the others, perhaps because of some
errors in the snow cover analyses; e.g., perhaps, on that day,
snowfields too small to appear on the satellite image were
providing runoff from the northern drainage area, which is
closer to the Hetch Hetchy gauge than Glen Aulin. Such an
unaccounted for source would result in an earlier diurnal
peak and erroneously high velocity estimates. On 14 June
2003, snow was visible in satellite images of the northern
drainage area, so no velocity estimate was made for the
reach below Glen Aulin. The lowest calculated value is
16 km h	1 for the reach between the headwater streams and
the Lyell Fork gauge on 29 June 2002, which was the
location and date of the lowest discharge levels. The mean
value of C(Q) for all three reaches was 64 km h	1 on
14 June 2002 and 28 km h	1 on 29 June 2002. Combining
these two mean values with slope measurements along the
channel provides rough estimates of how travel times and
velocities vary along the channel (Figures 6b and 6c, lines)
at higher and lower discharge levels. The very high veloci-
ties downstream of Glen Aulin correspond to a canyon-like
section of the Tuolumne River characterized by steep granite
slopes, repeated waterfalls, and supercritical flow. Because
the main roughness elements in this river section are large
boulders, the velocity has the potential to increase dramati-
cally between low flows and high flows, when the boulders
become completely submerged [Bathurst, 2002]. From these
velocity estimates and satellite maps of the snow line along
the channel, travel times in the stream channel from the start
to peak of the melt season can be approximated.
[25] Table 2 summarizes in-channel travel time estimates.
For the Hetch Hetchy basin, the mainstream in-channel
travel distance increased from 16 to 46 km, assuming that
most melt originated from the edge of the snow line along
the main channel. Estimated in-channel velocities increased
from 7 to 15 km h	1, assuming that the average values of
Figure 6. (a) Elevation versus distance along the main
channel of the Tuolumne River, from Hetch Hetchy to the
top of Mount Lyell. Vertical dashed lines indicate the
location of the MODIS snow lines on 3 May and 3 June,
near the start and peak of the 2003 melt season. (b) Travel
time from a point along the channel to the Hetch Hetchy
gauge as a function of distance. Travel times measured from
hourly records of streamflow peaks are represented by
circles (29 June 2002), triangles (14 June 2002), and squares
(14 June 2003). The solid curve estimates travel time
assuming v = 28
ﬃﬃ
s
p
, and the dashed curve estimates travel
time assuming v = 64
ﬃﬃ
s
p
. (c) Estimated velocity versus
distance along the same channel. Horizontal lines with
symbols estimate average velocities for each reach between
gauge measurements, for the same dates as in Figure 6b.
Curves illustrate velocities from the same equations as in
Figure 6b. (d) C(Q) for the same dates as in Figures 6b and
6c, calculated as C(Q) = vﬃ
s
p for each reach, where the bars
denote average values.
W07005 LUNDQUIST ET AL.: TUOLUMNE RIVER DIURNAL FLOW
7 of 14
W07005
C(Q) of 28 and 64 km h	1 are representative for low- and
high-flow volumes, respectively. Channel length increased
as the season progressed, as did flow velocity. The increased
length (alone) would increase travel time; increased velocity
would decrease travel time. The net effect of these two
changes, however, was an increase in travel time by about
+0.8 hours. If snow covered areas above the snow line
contributed significantly to diurnal timing, the seasonal
change in average travel distance in the channel would be
smaller, and the increase in travel time would be smaller. If
the velocity change was larger, which is possible since the
range of discharge magnitudes between the starting and
peak discharge values was greater than the range repre-
sented in the velocity estimates, the change in timing would
be smaller and could become negative. Given these uncer-
tainties (which would tend to reduce in-channel travel
times), we will use the initial, longer travel time estimate
in the following discussion.
[26] In contrast with the reach above Hetch Hetchy, travel
times along the reach above the Lyell Fork gauge varied
considerably with the retreating snow line (Table 2). Tuo-
lumne Meadows is the flattest segment with the slowest
flow velocities in the Tuolumne River basin (Figures 6a and
6c). Estimated in-channel velocities above the Lyell Fork
gauge are about 10 times smaller than velocities above the
Hetch Hetchy gauge (Figure 6c). These slow velocities
result in large seasonal changes in channel travel time for
meltwater originating upstream of Tuolumne Meadows
(Figure 6b). At the start of the 2003 melt season, the entire
Lyell Fork basin was covered with snow, so, assuming that
most melt originated right next to the gauge, the channel
section produced no delays. By the peak of the melt season,
the snow line had moved 9 km upstream, so meltwater had
to travel through 9 km of relatively flat meadows at perhaps
3 km h	1 (Figure 6c). This increased the in-channel travel
time by about 3 hours, a greater increase than that estimated
for the larger Hetch Hetchy basin.
[27] Finally, above Tuolumne Meadows, in the steeper
slopes of the headwater streams, in-channel velocities
increased again (Figure 6), and travel distances in these
small basins are short. Rafferty Creek was completely snow
covered at the start of the 2003 melt season, and the snow
line retreated 2 km by the season’s peak. Estimated veloc-
ities for this reach varied from 6 to 8 km h	1, and the
estimated seasonal increase in channel travel time is only
about 15 min. Thus the time delay provided by increased
travel distance was not enough to offset the 6-hour decrease
in travel time observed in the snowpack in any of the
Tuolumne River subbasins.
2.4. Combined Travel Times
[28] Table 3 compares the estimated (from sections 2.1
and 2.3) and observed (from section 1) 2003 changes in
hour of peak flow in the three subbasins. In Rafferty Creek a
headwater basin draining 25 km2, the stream channel is
short, and the in-channel travel time has very little effect
on the estimate of total travel time; thus we estimate that the
6-hour decrease in travel time through the snowpack should
have been recorded at the stream gauge, as it was. In the
intermediate-sized Lyell Fork basin (109 km2) the slow-
velocity Lyell Canyon segment of the greater Tuolumne
Meadows channel section, immediately upstream of the
Lyell Fork gauge, introduced a delay of about 3 hours when
the snow line retreated 9 km upstream of the gauge.
Consequently, the estimated 6-hour decrease in travel time
through the snowpack was partially offset by the estimated
3-hour increase in travel time in the channel, for a net
decrease in travel time of about 3 hours, in agreement with
observations that year. In the large Hetch Hetchy basin
(775 km2), increasing channel velocities offset the delays
due to increased travel distances in the estimated in-channel
travel times (Table 2), so the maximum reasonable estimate
of increased travel time was less than 1 hour. Combining
this with the decreased time water spent in the snowpack
yielded an estimated shift of daily peak flows to about
5 hours earlier at the peak of melt season than at the
beginning. However, observations at Hetch Hetchy and
other basins larger than 200 km2 show that diurnal stream-
flow timing did not change during this period. Changing
channel lengths alone are not enough to erase the influence
of decreasing snow depth on diurnal cycle timing at the
Hetch Hetchy basin scale.
3. Variable Velocity Model
[29] The order-of-magnitude arguments presented in Sec-
tion 2 suggest that the channel geometry and changing snow
line in the Hetch Hetchy basin do not explain the observed
patterns in diurnal streamflow timing. This section applies
the variable velocity model (VVM) developed by Lundquist
[2004] and Lundquist and Dettinger [2005] to the
Tuolumne River basin above Hetch Hetchy to determine
whether, instead, heterogeneity of snowpack properties
provides a better explanation for the scale dependence of
the seasonal evolution of diurnal streamflow cycles. In one
simulation, snow depths were only varied with elevation, so
that snow uniformly ran out at lower elevations first, and the
Table 2. Effects of Changing Snow Line and Water Velocity on Channel Travel Times in 2003
hxiinitial
9 May, km
hxifinal
2 June, km
uinitial,
km h	1
ufinal,
km h	1
tinitial,
hours
tfinal,
hours
Dt
hours
Rafferty Creek 0 2 6 8 0 0.25 +0.25
Lyell Fork 0 9 1.7 3.3 0 2.7 +2.7
Hetch Hetchy 16 46 7 15 2.3 3.1 +0.8
Table 3. Estimated Versus Observed Changes in Time of Peak
Flow for the First Month of Melt in 2003 for Three Tuolumne
River Subbasins
2003
Change in Time of Peak Flow, hours
Estimated Observed
Rafferty Creek 	6 + 0.25 = 	5.75 	6
Lyell Fork 	6 + 2.7 = 	3.3 	3
Hetch Hetchy 	6 + 0.8 = 	5.2 0 (±1)
8 of 14
W07005 LUNDQUIST ET AL.: TUOLUMNE RIVER DIURNAL FLOW W07005
snow line retreated as observed in satellite images. In this
simulation, snowpacks within each elevation band had
identical properties. In a second simulation, snow depths
were increased on average with elevation as in simulation 1.
However, in this second simulation, snow depths and melt
rates were also varied randomly within each elevation band.
By comparing the diurnal cycles in the two simulations, the
role of snowpack heterogeneity can be illustrated.
[30] The VVM represents the Tuolumne River as a series
of channel segments (Figure 7), each with specified length,
slope, contributing area, and mean elevation determined
from the DEM. Segment lengths varied from 1 to 19 km,
and slopes varied from 0.01 to 0.19. In both 2002 and 2003,
SWE increased with elevation at the snow pillows. How-
ever, the relationship between melt rate and elevation was
not significant at a 95% confidence level in either year,
suggesting that elevation is not a dominant parameter
controlling melt rates in this area. Spatially, melt rates vary
much less than snow depth in alpine basins [Anderton et al.,
2002; Dunn and Colohan, 1999; Luce et al., 1998; Hartman
et al., 1999]. Thus, for simplicity, we assumed that melt
rates were not functions of elevation or location in the
model. Initial snow depths were specified according to
elevation (as outlined by Liston [1999]), so that, when the
measured mean daily melt rates were integrated over the
season, snow cover on average disappeared at each eleva-
tion on the first snow-free day observed by the MODIS
satellite (Figure 8). A line fit to these SCA-based estimates,
excluding the outlier at 0 cm initial SWE, indicates that
average SWE increased 0.14 cm per m increase in elevation
in 2003, with an initial average snow line at 2,400 m. This
Figure 7. Map of Tuolumne River channels as represented in the VVM. Thick lines indicate channel
segments. A new segment is defined each time a tributary stream intersects the main channel. The thin
line delineates the boundaries of the Tuolumne River watershed above Hetch Hetchy. Numbers and
arrows in the northwest corner of the diagram identify five channel segments. Each has unique properties
measured from the DEM, as shown for segment 24, Piute Creek. The model considers 33 segments in
total.
0 50 100 150
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
initial SWE (cm)
e
le
va
tio
n 
(m
)
snow pillows
SCA estimates
estimated trend
Figure 8. SWE as a function of elevation at the start of the
2003 melt season, measured from snow pillows (circles) and
satellite images of changing snow-covered area (SCA,
triangles). The dashed line represents the best linear fit to
the SCA estimates, excluding the outlier with 0 cm initial
SWE.
W07005 LUNDQUIST ET AL.: TUOLUMNE RIVER DIURNAL FLOW
9 of 14
W07005
slope falls along the line of snow pillows with relatively low
snow accumulation compared to other snow pillows at
similar elevations (Figure 8). Because snow pillows are
generally installed where large amounts of snow accumu-
late, they can overrepresent the snow depth for a given
elevation. Also, because the MODIS snow-mapping algo-
rithm [Hall et al., 2000] only recognizes large patches of
snow, the SCA may be set to zero before all the snow in a
pixel is gone.
[31] The VVM models melted water’s journey from the
snowpack to the stream gauge in terms of two dominant
stages. The first stage is the vertical propagation of melt-
water through a snowpack, which introduces the asymmetry
of the diurnal cycle [Lundquist and Cayan, 2002] and the
shift in hour of peak flow to earlier in the day as the snow
depth decreases. VVM disaggregates daily melt rates mea-
sured at snow pillows into half sinusoids with peaks at solar
noon, and these hourly melts are input at the top of
homogeneous or heterogeneous snowpacks. Water propa-
gates independently through patches of snow with different
initial depths and melt rates at a speed according to (2),
following Dunne et al. [1976]. Faster melt pulses overtake
slower ones, and shock fronts develop. Meltwater that
reaches the bottom of all the snow patches along a given
river segment at a given time is summed and input to the
upper end of that adjoining channel segment.
[32] The second model stage is the flow of water down
the channel to the gauge, with snowmelt at each channel
segment adding to the flow from segments farther upstream
as the water moves downstream (Figure 9). In the present
simulations, the flux from the snowpack is first divided into
10% surface flow and 90% subsurface/groundwater flow,
with fractions based on the observed relative amplitude of
the diurnal cycle [Lundquist and Cayan, 2002]. The surface
flow is routed down the nearest channel using the Manning
equation (following Henderson [1966] and Kouwen et al.
[1993]), assuming V-shaped cross sections with constant
side slopes, q, and spatially and temporally varying flow
depths, h. From the Manning equation, the streamflow
velocity, V, for this geometry is
V ¼ 1
n
R
2

3
ﬃﬃ
s
p ¼ 1
n
h cos q
2
 2
3 ﬃﬃ
s
p ð4Þ
where n is Manning’s roughness coefficient, R is the
hydraulic radius, and s is the longitudinal slope of the
channel. The roughness coefficient, n, is assumed here to be
0.07, a value typical for mountain streams [Fread, 1993].
The side slope, q, is assumed to be 18, based on channel
cross sections measured from the DEM. C(Q) in equation (3)
is represented more explicitly in equation (4) as a function of
changing stream depths. The subsurface flow is modeled as
outflow from a linear reservoir, which drains into the
channel. Groundwater inflow,
Ig ¼ K	1g Sg; ð5Þ
where Kg = 2.5 days based on recession slopes from the
Merced and Tuolumne Rivers, and Sg is the groundwater
storage. Further model details and error analyses are
presented by Lundquist [2004] and Lundquist and Dettinger
[2005].
[33] In simulation 1, snowpack properties were kept
uniform along each channel segment, with melt rates
specified to equal the mean value measured by all the snow
pillows each day and with the initial snow depths as shown in
Figure 8 for that segment’s mean elevation. In simulation 2,
100 independent snowpack patches were modeled alongside
each channel segment. Each patch was prescribed a melt rate
and depth chosen from a normal distribution with standard
deviations as measured at the snow pillows and segment
means as specified in simulation 1. For 2003, these standard
deviations were 1 m for snow depths and 1.5 cm d	1 for
melt rates. The areas of the 100 contributing patches were
scaled by the segment’s local contributing area, as measured
in the DEM.
4. Simulation Results
[34] Comparisons of observed discharge and hours of
peak diurnal flows with simulated values for Rafferty
Creek, Budd Creek, and Hetch Hetchy, are presented for
spring 2003 (Figure 10) and spring 2002 (Figure 11).
Rafferty and Budd creeks drain neighboring small basins
of similar size and orientation (Figure 2), and streamflow
peaks at nearly the same time each day in the two basins.
Both records are shown in Figure 10 because the Rafferty
Creek pressure sensor moved during seasonal peak flows in
2003, and there is some uncertainty about the measurements
during the period from 28 May to 7 June 2003. At both
Budd and Rafferty Creeks, continuous records of stream
depth were converted to discharge magnitudes using rating
curves established from at least 10 wading discharge mea-
surements [Rantz, 1982] at each site. Since no discharge
measurements were available at Hetch Hetchy, discharge
was estimated as a linear multiple of depth. This yielded a
Figure 9. Diagram of river-routing component of the
VVM. Iu is the upstream input, Is is the local snowmelt
input, fs is the fraction of surface flow, Ig is the groundwater
input, L is the length of the channel segment in this grid cell,
h is the height of the water column, s is the slope of the
channel bottom, q is the angle of the channel walls, and Q is
the discharge from the channel segment (which will be Iu to
the channel segment immediately downstream).
10 of 14
W07005 LUNDQUIST ET AL.: TUOLUMNE RIVER DIURNAL FLOW W07005
Figure 10. (a) Measured and simulated discharge versus time for two small basins, Rafferty and Budd
creeks, for spring 2003. Observations are compared with simulations of Rafferty Creek, as marked in the
legend in Figure 10c. (b) Estimated and simulated discharge versus time for the large basin, Hetch Hetchy,
for 2003, with curves corresponding to the legend in Figure 10d. (c) Measured and simulated hour of peak
streamflow versus day of year for the Rafferty and Budd Creek basins, for times corresponding to
discharge levels in Figure 10a. (d) As in Figure 10c, but for the Hetch Hetchy basin. Observed flow timing
at Hetch Hetchy is also plotted with an offset to 3 hours earlier, marked with arrow, for ease in comparison.
Figure 11. Same as Figure 10, except for 2002 and with no Budd Creek observations. Days where the
time of peak of the diurnal cycle could be determined are marked with symbols in Figures 11c and 11d.
W07005 LUNDQUIST ET AL.: TUOLUMNE RIVER DIURNAL FLOW
11 of 14
W07005
reasonable measure of the seasonal shape of the hydrograph
but could not be used to check how accurately the model
simulates discharge magnitudes.
[35] In the small basins (Figures 10a and 11a), both
simulations 1 and 2 overestimated discharge magnitudes
early in the season. This overestimate occurred because the
entire basin was modeled as contributing melt during this
period, whereas high-altitude stage measurements from the
inflow to Fletcher Lake near Vogelsang (Figure 2) indicated
that snow in some north facing basins above 3000 m began
melting about 10 days later than at lower elevations. VVM
specified melt rates independently of elevation because a
better functional relationship could not be determined from
the snow pillow measurements.
[36] Simulation 1 overestimated the small-basin seasonal
peak discharges and dried out unrealistically during the late
season (after 4 June 2003 and 25 May 2002). In this
simulation, given the specified uniform character of each
channel segment’s snowpack, the entire segment area con-
tributed melt until the mean snowpack was depleted. At that
point, no refuge of snow remained to sustain late season
flows. In contrast, the real world and simulation 2 both
include snow covered areas long after the mean snowpack
was gone.
[37] Simulation 2 incorporated heterogeneous snow prop-
erties, and, as a result, variable snow covered area along
each segment. In this simulation, the basin’s snowmelt
contributions decreased more gradually. The longer-lasting
snowpacks of simulation 2 generated late season discharges
that agreed much better with observations. The improved
agreement occurred because the thinnest snowpacks disap-
peared before peak melt. Peak discharge was lower because
the thicker snowpacks covered only a fraction of the total
basin area, producing less total meltwater. These thicker
snowpacks also lasted longer into the season, producing
larger late season discharges. Simulation 2 also appears to
match the observed seasonal flows at Hetch Hetchy slightly
better than did simulation 1 (Figures 10b and 11b). As in
the smaller basins, simulation 1 overestimated early and
peak seasonal discharge and underestimated late season
discharge.
[38] In 2002, both simulations deviated more from ob-
served flows than in 2003. This may be due to sustained
stormy periods during spring 2002, which interfered with
the normal progress of snowmelt. In VVM, storms were
represented (crudely) by periods of ‘‘negative melt’’ which
added SWE and depth to the snowpack but did not supply
water to the streams. In the small high-elevation basins, e.g.,
Rafferty Creek, observations suggest these storms decreased
the percentage of the basin with snow ripe for melting,
which may have contributed to the simulations’ large
overestimation of discharge. At Hetch Hetchy, observations
suggest that some water is added to the streams during these
periods, perhaps from precipitation falling as rain at lower
elevations. This may have contributed to the simulations’
underestimation of discharge at Hetch Hetchy.
[39] In simulation 1, channel lengths increased as the
snow line retreated, but there was no heterogeneity in
snowpack properties along an individual channel segment.
In this simulation, the times of peak daily flows shifted to
earlier in the day during the early melt season in both small
and large basins. In 2003, daily peak flows at Rafferty
Creek in simulation 1 arrived about 8 hours earlier by 30
May (day 150, the seasonal peak) than they did at the start
of the melt season (Figure 10c). This shift is larger than the
observed shift of 6 hours. In 2002, peak flow times in
simulation 1 shifted to about 12 hours earlier between 1
April and 20 May, compared to an observed shift of about
4 hours (Figure 11c). In simulation 2, times of daily peak
flows at Rafferty Creek in 2003 shifted about 6 hours
earlier, in accord with observations. In 2002, simulated
times of peak flows shifted 7.5 hours earlier, which is closer
to observations than the results of simulation 1.
[40] At Hetch Hetchy, in both simulation 2 and in obser-
vations, daily peak flow times remained nearly constant in
both years. However, in both 2002 and 2003, observed times
of daily peak flow at Hetch Hetchy remained relatively
constant near 2200 local time (Figures 10d and 11d),
whereas the simulated times of peak flows at Hetch Hetchy
were consistently about 1900 local time, 3 hours earlier. This
offset may be due to an underestimate of channel roughness,
resulting in overestimates of channel velocities. No wading
discharge measurements were available to check velocities
downstream of Glen Aulin. The too early simulations also
may be due to delays introduced by hillslope travel times,
which were not included in the model.
[41] In 2003, the time of peak flows in simulation 1
shifted to about 3 hours earlier in the early melt season,
compared to the earlier estimate of 5 hours (section 2) and
an observation of 0 hours (section 1). The shift of daily peak
flows to earlier in the day in simulation 1 was interrupted at
Hetch Hetchy after the season’s peak discharge (30 May).
By this time, the snow covered area had decreased to the
point where most of the discharge originated upstream from
Tuolumne Meadows, where slopes and velocities are rela-
tively small. As more and more of the discharge at Hetch
Hetchy originated above this break in channel slopes and in-
channel velocities, the discharge-averaged travel times in-
creased markedly. Simulation 2 matched observed changes
in travel times well (Figure 10d). In 2002, Hetch Hetchy
streamflow in simulation 1 peaked near 2200 at the begin-
ning of the melt season and then shifted about 6 hours
earlier near 10 May (Figure 11d). Flows in simulation 2
peaked near 1900 local time throughout most of the
simulation (Figure 11d), with added delays of about 5 hours
during the weeks with snowstorms in mid-April.
5. Summary, Discussion, and Applications
[42] Prior studies of nested basins [Braun and Slaymaker,
1981; Kobayashi and Motoyama, 1985] have suggested that
the diurnal cycle in streamflow might yield information
about snow characteristics in basins of all scales. This study
examines nested basins across a wider range of areas and
elevations, and demonstrates that diurnal streamflow timing
is dominated by different characteristics at different basin
scales. In small basins with limited elevation ranges and
thus limited spatial variations in snow depths and melt rates,
travel times through the snowpack dominate diurnal stream-
flow timing. Thus diurnal cycles reflect snow depths in
these basins. In basins with areas less than 30 km2, the hour
of daily peak flow generally occurs near midnight at the
beginning of the season and then shifts to progressively
earlier in the day.
12 of 14
W07005 LUNDQUIST ET AL.: TUOLUMNE RIVER DIURNAL FLOW W07005
[43] In larger basins that span large ranges of elevations
and aspects, with greater spatial variations of snow depths,
melt rates, and in-channel travel distances, snow heteroge-
neity and in-channel travel distances and velocities are more
influential than the mean snow depth on the timing of
diurnal cycles. Throughout the first half of the melt season,
streamflow from these basins tends to peak consistently
near midnight. As the melt season progresses, snow lines
retreat to higher elevations, and higher elevations correlate
with longer in-channel travel distances. However, during the
first half of the melt season, increases in travel time due to
increased distance are often offset by decreases in travel
time due to increased velocity, as shown for the Hetch
Hetchy basin in section 2. Thus both order-of-magnitude
considerations and model simulations indicate that the
retreat of the snow line is not sufficient to explain the
near-constant time of peak flow observed at Hetch Hetchy
from the start of the melt season until the day of peak
discharge. Heterogeneity in snow depths and melt rates
must be taken into account in order to properly simulate
the near constancy of diurnal flow timings during this
period. The same heterogeneity is necessary to reproduce
the persistence of snowmelt-fed flows after the seasonal
peak has passed. Thus snowpack heterogeneity is a funda-
mental part of the working of larger river basins.
[44] Pressure sensors for recording stream stage, such as
those used in the Yosemite study, are small, inexpensive,
easy to deploy, and have little environmental impact in
remote mountain areas. Developing rating curves for sites in
remote areas is labor intensive and time consuming, but
precise information about diurnal cycle timing can be
gleaned from stage information alone, without rating
curves. Thus the ideas presented here provide practical
ways to learn about snow and basin properties in remote,
previously unmonitored basins. When all snowmelt input
originates upstream, diurnal timing measured at different
locations along a single channel gives direct measurements
of travel time along channel segments. This information can
be combined with distance and standard flow equations to
estimate changing velocities and roughness coefficients for
these segments at various levels of discharge (Figure 6).
[45] Diurnal timing in small basins, with areas less than
30 km2, provides information about snow water reserves
throughout the melt season and might be used to forecast
water supplies. Timing in larger river basins reflects the
extent of heterogeneity within the basins. This may even-
tually provide an indicator of how many small basins should
be monitored to adequately represent average snow depths
contributing to the larger river’s discharge. Timing in larger
rivers is also remarkably consistent during the first half of
the melt season each year, and this information can be used
by hydroelectric power plants to predict the best hours of
operation.
[46] Mountain channel morphology is characterized by
pronounced and abrupt variations in slope [Wohl, 2000], and
almost all mountain basins in the western United States
have sections of very flat topography (generally lakes and
meadows). The largest transitions in (in-channel) travel
times are associated with periods when snowmelt patterns
change from having most snowmelt derived from below a
major flat segment (e.g., Tuolumne Meadows) to a pattern
with most snowmelt deriving from above the break in slope.
Where low-gradient sections are long enough, they can
introduce the abrupt onset of pronounced delays in diurnal
cycle timing. When these sections are located at elevations
upstream of a gauge, abrupt changes in diurnal cycle timing,
which are likely to be repeated each year, may be used to
determine the proportions of melt from upstream and
downstream of the low-gradient section. A full examination
of this effect is the subject of further research by the authors.
[47] Hourly discharge/stage information is already
available in real time from 83% of USGS gauges (http://
waterdata.usgs.gov/nwis/rt). In light of the results presented
here, this data can be used to evaluate snowpack properties,
basin heterogeneity, the location of snowmelt, or stream
channel velocities in many settings. However, development
of these methods will require the development of historical
archives of hourly flows, which are not available for many
gauges at present.
[48] Acknowledgments. The authors thank Jeff Dozier, Brad Werner,
Rob Pinkel, and two anonymous reviewers for comments and suggestions
on the manuscript. Brian Huggett and Jim Roche provided field support for
the 2002 and 2003 Yosemite observations. Dave Peterson and Rich Smith
provided the instruments and data for the Tuolumne River gauges at Hetch
Hetchy and Highway 120, and Frank Gehrke and the California Snow
Surveys provided snow sensor and snow survey data. Mammoth Mountain
energy balance data were provided by Michael Colee and the NASA
investigation ‘‘Hydrology, Hydrochemical Modeling, and Remote Sensing
in Seasonally Snow covered Alpine Drainage Basins,’’ the Donald Bren
School of Environmental Science and Management at the University of
California, Santa Barbara, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Cold Regions
Research and Engineering Laboratory (CRREL), and the Mammoth Moun-
tain Ski Area. Funding was provided by the Canon National Parks
Foundation, the California Institute for Telecommunications and Informa-
tion Technology, the U.S. Geological Survey, the NOAA Office of Global
Programs through the California Application Program, the NSF ROADNet,
and the California Energy Commission.
References
Adams, W. P. (1976), Areal differentiation of snow cover in east central
Ontario, Water Resour. Res., 12, 1226–1234.
Anderton, S. P., S. M. White, and B. Alvera (2002), Micro-scale spatial
variability and the timing of snow melt runoff in a high mountain catch-
ment, J. Hydrol., 268, 158–176.
Bathurst, J. C. (2002), At-a-site variation and minimum flow resistance for
mountain rivers, J. Hydrol., 269, 11–26.
Bengtsson, L. (1981), Snowmelt generated run-off from small areas as a
daily transient process, Geophysica, 17, 109–121.
Bras, R. L. (1990), Hydrology: An Introduction to Hydrologic Science,
643 pp., Addison-Wesley, Boston, Mass.
Braun, L. N., and H. O. Slaymaker (1981), Effect of scale on complexity of
snowmelt systems, Nord. Hydrol., 12, 235–246.
Caine, N. (1992), Modulation of the diurnal streamflow response by the
seasonal snowcover of an alpine basin, J. Hydrol., 137, 245–260.
Colbeck, S. C. (1972), A theory of water percolation in snow, J. Glaciol.,
11(63), 369–385.
Colbeck, S. C., and E. A. Anderson (1982), The permeability of a melting
snow cover, Water Resour. Res., 18(4), 904–908.
Dettinger, M. D., and F. Gerkhe (2002), Thermodynamic evolution of
snowpack at Gin Flat, Yosemite National Park, winter-spring 2002, paper
presented at Sierra Nevada Science Symposium, U.S. Geol. Surv., Lake
Tahoe, Calif.
D’Odorico, P., and R. Rigon (2003), Hillslope and channel contributions to
the hydrologic response, Water Resour. Res., 39(5), 1113, doi:10.1029/
2002WR001708.
Dunn, S. M., and R. J. E. Colohan (1999), Developing the snow component
of a distributed hydrological model, a step-wise approach based on multi-
objective analysis, J. Hydrol., 223, 1–16.
Dunne, T. (1978), Field studies of hillslope flow processes, in Hillslope
Hydrology, edited by M. J. Kirkby, pp. 227–293, John Wiley, Hoboken,
N. J.
Dunne, T., A. G. Price, and S. C. Colbeck (1976), The generation of runoff
from subarctic snowpacks, Water Resour. Res., 12, 677–685.
W07005 LUNDQUIST ET AL.: TUOLUMNE RIVER DIURNAL FLOW
13 of 14
W07005
Elder, K., J. Dozier, and J. Michaelsen (1991), Snow accumulation and
distribution in an alpine watershed, Water Resour. Res., 27, 1541–
1552.
Erxleben, J., K. Elder, and R. Davis (2002), Comparison of spatial inter-
polation methods for estimating snow distribution in the Colorado Rocky
Mountains, Hydrol. Processes, 16, 3627–3649.
Fread, D. L. (1993), Flow routing, in Handbook of Hydrology, edited by
D. R. Maidment, pp. 10.1–10.36, McGraw-Hill, New York.
Grover, N. C., and A. W. Harrington (1966), Stream Flow: Measurements,
Records and Their Uses, 363 pp., Dover, Mineola, N. Y.
Hall, D. K., G. A. Riggs, and V. V. Salomonson (2000), MODIS/Terra
Snow Cover 8-Day L3 Global 500m Grid V004, http://arcss.colorado.
edu/data/mod10a2.html, Natl. Snow and Ice Data Cent., Boulder, Colo.
(Updated weekly.)
Hartman, M. D., J. S. Baron, R. B. Lammers, D. W. Cline, L. E. Band,
G. E. Liston, and C. Tague (1999), Simulations of snow distribution
and hydrology in a mountain basin, Water Resour. Res., 35, 1587–
1603.
Henderson, F. M. (1966), Open Channel Flow, 522 pp., Macmillan, New
York.
Jordan, P. (1983), Meltwater movement in a deep snowpack: 1. Field ob-
servations, Water Resour. Res., 19, 971–978.
Kattelmann, R., and J. Dozier (1999), Observations of snowpack ripening
in the Sierra Nevada, California, U.S.A., J. Glaciol., 45(151), 409–
416.
Kobayashi, D., and H. Motoyama (1985), Effect of snow cover on time lag
of runoff from a watershed, Ann. Glaciol., 6, 123–125.
Kouwen, N., E. D. Soulis, A. Petroniro, J. Donald, and R. A. Harrington
(1993), Grouping response units for distributed hydrologic modeling,
J. Water Resour. Plann. Manage., 119(3), 289–305.
Liston, G. E. (1999), Interrelationships among snow distribution, snowmelt,
and snow cover depletion, implications for atmospheric, hydrologic and
ecologic modeling, J. Appl. Meteorol., 38, 1474–1487.
Logan, L. (1973), Basin-wide water equivalent estimation from snowpack
depth measurements, in Role of Snow and Ice in Hydrology, IAHS AIHS
Publ., 107, 864–884.
Luce, C. H., D. G. Tarboton, and K. R. Cooley (1998), The influence of the
spatial distribution of snow on basin-averaged snowmelt, Hydrol. Pro-
cesses, 12, 1671–1683.
Lundquist, J. D. (2004), The pulse of the mountains: Diurnal cycles in
western streamflow, Ph.D. thesis, Univ. of Calif., San Diego, La Jolla.
Lundquist, J. D., and D. Cayan (2002), Seasonal and spatial patterns in
diurnal cycles in streamflow in the western United States, J. Hydrome-
teorol., 3, 591–603.
Lundquist, J. D., and M. D. Dettinger (2005), How snowpack heterogeneity
affects diurnal streamflow timing, Water Resour. Res., 41, W05007,
doi:10.1029/2004WR003649.
Lundquist, J. D., D. R. Cayan, and M. D. Dettinger (2003), Meteorology
and hydrology in Yosemite National Park: A sensor network application,
in Information Processing in Sensor Networks: Second International
Workshop, IPSN 2003, edited by F. Zhao and L. Guibas, pp. 518–528,
Springer, New York.
Lundquist, J. D., D. R. Cayan, and M. D. Dettinger (2004), Spring onset
in the Sierra Nevada: When is snowmelt independent of elevation?,
J. Hydrometeorol., 5, 325–340.
Rantz, S. E. (1982), Measurement and Computation of Streamflow, vol. 1,
Measurement of Stage and Discharge, U.S. Geol. Surv. Water Supply
Pap., 2175, 284 pp.
Rickenmann, D. (1994), An alternative equation for the mean velocity in
gravel-bed rivers and mountain torrents, in Hydraulic Engineering ’94:
Proceedings of the 1994 Conference, pp. 672–676, Am. Soc. of Civ.
Eng., Reston, Va.
Shook, K., and D. M. Gray (1997), Synthesizing shallow seasonal snow
covers, Water Resour. Res., 33, 419–426.
Smith, J. L. (1974), Hydrology of warm snowpacks and their effects upon
water delivery. . .some new concepts, in Proceedings, Symposium on
Advanced Concepts and Techniques in the Study of Snow and Ice Re-
sources, Monterey, CA., Dec. 2–6, 1973, pp. 76–89, Natl. Acad. of Sci.,
Washington, D. C.
Wohl, E. (2000),Mountain Rivers,Water Resour. Monogr., vol. 14, 320 pp.,
AGU, Washington, D. C.
Woo, M., and H. O. Slaymaker (1975), Alpine streamflow response to
variable snowpack thickness and extent, Geogr. Ann., 57, 201–212.
																											
D. R. Cayan, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, 9500 Gilman Drive,
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
M. D. Dettinger, U.S. Geological Survey, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
J. D. Lundquist, CIRES, Climate Diagnostics Center, University of
Colorado, 216 UCB, Boulder, CO 80309-0216, USA. (jessica.lundquist@
noaa.gov)
14 of 14
W07005 LUNDQUIST ET AL.: TUOLUMNE RIVER DIURNAL FLOW W07005
