Nucleic Acids Research
doi:10.1093/nar/gki032 
 33:523-526, 2005. Nucleic Acids Res.
James Robinson, Matthew J. Waller, Peter Stoehr and Steven G. E. Marsh 
IPD—the Immuno Polymorphism Database
 http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/full/33/suppl_1/D523
The full text of this article, along with updated information and services is available online at 
 References
 http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/full/33/suppl_1/D523#BIBL
This article cites 20 references, 6 of which can be accessed free at 
 Cited by
 http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/full/33/suppl_1/D523#otherarticles
This article has been cited by 3 articles at 1 September 2008 . View these citations at 
 Reprints
 http://www.oxfordjournals.org/corporate_services/reprints.html
Reprints of this article can be ordered at 
 Email and RSS alerting Sign up for email alerts, and subscribe to this journal’s RSS feeds at http://nar.oxfordjournals.org 
 image downloads
PowerPoint® Images from this journal can be downloaded with one click as a PowerPoint slide. 
 Journal information
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org 
Additional information about Nucleic Acids Research, including how to subscribe can be found at
 Published on behalf of
http://www.oxfordjournals.org 
Oxford University Press 
  
 at UCL (University College London) on 1 September 2008 http://nar.oxfordjournals.orgDownloaded from 
IPD—the Immuno Polymorphism Database
James Robinson1, Matthew J. Waller1, Peter Stoehr3 and Steven G. E. Marsh1,2,*
1Anthony Nolan Research Institute and 2Department of Haematology, Royal Free Hospital, Pond Street,
Hampstead, London NW3 2QG, UK and 3EMBL Outstation, The European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI),
Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK
Received August 5, 2004; Revised and Accepted September 22, 2004
ABSTRACT
The Immuno Polymorphism Database (IPD) (http://
www.ebi.ac.uk/ipd/) is a set of specialist databases
related to the study of polymorphic genes in the
immune system. IPD currently consists of four data-
bases: IPD-KIR, contains the allelic sequences of
Killer-cell Immunoglobulin-like Receptors; IPD-
MHC, a database of sequences of the Major
Histocompatibility Complex of different species;
IPD-HPA, alloantigens expressed only on platelets;
and IPD-ESTAB, which provides access to the
European Searchable Tumour Cell-Line Database, a
cell bank of immunologically characterized mela-
noma cell lines. The IPD project works with specialist
groupsornomenclature committeeswhoprovide and
curate individual sections before they are submitted
to IPD for onlinepublication. The IPDproject stores all
the data in a set of related databases. Those sections
with similar data, such as IPD-KIR and IPD-MHCshare
the same database structure. The sharing of a com-
mon database structure makes it easier to implement
common tools for data submission and retrieval. The
data are currently available online from the website
and ftp directory; files will also be made available in
different formats todownload fromthewebsiteand ftp
server. The data will also be included in SRS, BLAST
and FASTA search engines at the European
Bioinformatics Institute.
INTRODUCTION
The Immuno Polymorphism Database (IPD) is a set of
specialist databases related to the study of polymorphic
genes in the immune system. The IPD project works with
specialist groups or nomenclature committees, which each
curate a different section of the project. IPD currently consists
of four databases: IPD-KIR, contains the allelic sequences
of Killer-cell Immunoglobulin-like Receptors (KIRs); IPD-
MHC, a database of sequences of the Major Histocompati-
bility Complex (MHC) of different species; IPD-HPA,
alloantigens expressed only on platelets; and IPD-ESTAB,
which provides access to the European Searchable Tumour
Cell-Line Database (ESTDAB), a cell bank of immunologi-
cally characterized melanoma cell lines.
The study of the immune system constitutes many different
complex areas of research. By providing a centralized resource
for the work of different groups, it is hoped that we can bring
together similar data to aid in the study and analysis of this
area. This will be done by contacting various expert groups,
such as the nomenclature committees for certain genes, and
inviting them to contribute their data to a central resource. The
individual nomenclature committees are all established within
their own field, their continuing role being the identification
and naming of new alleles based on the submission of new
sequences to generalist databases like the European Molecular
Biology Laboratory’s nucleotide sequence database (EMBL),
the National Center for Biotechnology Information’s Gen-
Bank and the DNA DataBank of Japan (DDBJ). The main
difference between the data held within a specialist system
like IPD and the generalist databases is the further curation of
the files by experts in the relevant field. This additional step
allows improvements in data quality and the addition of more
specialized information. This may result in there being differ-
ences in the entries kept in the different databases; in such
a case the entry in IPD should be considered as the most
accurate. The inclusion of some nomenclature committees
has meant the online publication of sequence alignments for
the first time. This is particularly important when it comes to
the sequences of polymorphic genes. Also because the IPD
project is able to provide the work of different committees in
a common format, it is easier to compare the sequences of
different species.
The IPD project stores all the data in a set of related
databases. Those sections with similar data, IPD-KIR and
IPD-MHC share the same database structure. The sharing
of a common database structure makes it easier to implement
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +44 20 7284 8321; Fax: +44 20 7284 8331; Email: marsh@ebi.ac.uk
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use permissions, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org.
ª 2005, the authors
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 33, Database issue ª Oxford University Press 2005; all rights reserved
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D523–D526
doi:10.1093/nar/gki032
common tools for data submission and retrieval. Other
unrelated sections like IPD-ESTDAB currently have their
own unique structure.
IPD-KIR
The KIRs are members of the immunoglobulin super family
(IgSF) formerly called Killer-cell Inhibitory Receptors. KIRs
have been shown to be highly polymorphic both at the allelic
and haplotypic levels (1). They are composed of two or three
Ig-domains, a transmembrane region and cytoplasmic tail,
which can in turn be short (activatory) or long (inhibitory).
The Leukocyte Receptor Complex (LRC), which encodes KIR
genes, has been shown to be polymorphic, polygenic and
complex in a manner similar to the MHC. This complexity
in sequences has led to the formation of the KIR nomenclature
committee. The nomenclature committee is responsible for the
naming of new allele sequences, and produced its first report in
2002 (2); this was complemented by the inclusion of the KIR
data into IPD. The IPD-KIR Sequence Database contains the
most up-to-date nomenclature and sequence alignments. Also
available is an online submission tool that allows the sub-
mission of new and confirmatory KIR sequences directly to
the KIR nomenclature committee. Sequences submitted to IPD
as part of the work of the individual nomenclature committees
are based on sequences currently found in the EMBL Nucleo-
tide Sequence Database (EMBL) (3), GenBank (4) and the
DDBJ (5). Indeed a requirement of all submissions to IPD is
that they have been submitted to these more general databases.
Future developments of the IPD-KIR section will involve
working with the KIR nomenclature committee to provide
nomenclature and tools for study of the complex haplotypes
and genotypes currently seen in KIR research.
IPD-MHC
The MHC sequences of many different species have been
reported previously (6–9), along with different nomenclature
systems used in the naming and identification of new genes
and alleles in each species. The sequences of the MHC from a
number of different species are highly conserved between
species (10). By bringing the work of different nomenclature
committees and the sequences of different species together it is
hoped to provide a central resource that will facilitate further
research on the MHC of each species and on their comparison.
The first release of the IPD-MHC database involved the
work of groups specializing in non-human primates, canines
(DLA) and felines (FLA) and incorporated all data previously
available in the IMGT/MHC database (11). This release
included data from 5 species of ape, 16 species of new world
monkey, 17 species of old world monkey, as well as data on
different canines and felines. Since the first release, we have
been able to add sequences from cattle (BoLA), and are now
working to include the MHC sequences from swine (SLA),
chickens, horses (ELA) and rats (RT1).
For each species, there are some differences in the spectrum
of data covered but all sections provide the core nomenclature
pages and sequence alignments. The nomenclature and align-
ments follow a similar structure to that of the IPD-KIR section,
and the same basic tools are used in both sections. Currently,
the IPD-MHC sequence alignments are limited to species-
specific alignments; however, we are working to allow cross-
species alignments and the inclusion of human sequences from
the IMGT/HLA database (12) for comparative purposes. The
IPD-MHC Sequence Databases will also contain a submission
tool for online submission of new and confirmatory sequences
to the appropriate nomenclature committee.
COMMON TOOLS FOR IPD-KIR AND IPD-MHC
Some sections of the project are clearly more closely related,
namely the IPD-KIR and IPD-MHC sections, both deal with
sequences from polymorphic genes and as such they share
a number of features. As each section is based on the work
of a nomenclature committee, the website includes or links to a
portable document format (PDF) file of recent nomenclature
reports. The website also provides a recognized location for
updates to the nomenclature between published reports. These
pages contain the official allele name, any previous designa-
tions, the EMBL, GenBank or DDBJ accession number(s) and
a reference linked wherever possible to the PubMed abstract.
If possible additional details on the source of sequence are
also provided. Some nomenclature committees may provide
additional information but the core components of any nomen-
clature reported are the allele names, accession numbers and
publications.
The second common feature is the sequence alignment tool,
which is provided using a common interface for both sections.
Figure 1 shows the alignment tool used for the IPD-KIR sec-
tion. The main difference seen in the IPD-MHC interface is the
locus listing, which is also preceded by a species listing. The
selection of a locus, automatically updates the list of features,
which can be aligned, as well as the default reference sequence
used for the alignment. The remaining options cover display
and formatting options. The alignment tool uses standard for-
matting conventions for the display of sequence alignments;
these are based on those currently used by the IMGT/HLA
Sequence Database (11–14) and published recommendations
for Human Gene Mutations (15,16). The alignment tool
options allow the user to display a subset of alleles of a parti-
cular locus, omit alleles unsequenced for a particular region
and align against a particular reference or consensus sequence.
In addition, the sequences can be displayed as complete
nucleotide sequence, partial sequences of single exons or
the amino acid sequence of the encoded protein (Figure 2).
The alignment tool does not perform a sequence alignment
each time it is used, but it extracts pre-aligned sequences,
allowing for faster access. For some of the sections included,
this is the first time users have been able to view sequence
alignments online.
IPD-HPA
Human platelet antigens (HPAs) are alloantigens expressed
only on platelets, specifically on platelet membrane glycopro-
teins. These platelet-specific antigens are immunogenic and
can result in pathological reactions to transfusion therapy. The
HPA nomenclature system was adopted in 1990 (17,18) to
overcome problems with the previous nomenclature. Since
then more antigens have been described and the molecular
D524 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
basis of many has been resolved. As a result the nomenclature
was revised in 2003 (19) and included in the IPD project. The
IPD-HPA section contains nomenclature information and
additional background material. The different genes in the
HPA system have not been sequenced to the same level as
some of the other projects and so currently only single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are used to determine
alleles. This information is presented in a grid of SNP for
each gene. The IPD and HPA nomenclature committee
hope to expand this to provide full sequence alignments
when possible.
IPD-ESTDAB
IPD-ESTDAB is a database of immunologically characterized
melanoma cell lines. The database works in conjunction
with the European Searchable Tumour Cell Line Database
(ESTDAB) cell bank, which is housed in T€ubingen, Germany
and provides immunologically characterized tumour cells.
The IPD-ESTDAB section of the website provides an online
search facility for cells stored in this cell bank. This enables
investigators to identify cells possessing specific parameters
important for studies of immunity, immunogenetics, gene
expression, metastasis, response to chemotherapy and other
tumour biological experimentation. The search tool allows for
searches based on a single parameter, or clusters of parameters
on over 250 different markers for each cell. The detailed
reports produced can then be used to identify cells of interest,
which in turn can then be obtained from the cell bank.
DISCUSSION
The IPD project provides a new resource for those interested
in the study of polymorphic sequences in the immune system.
Figure 2. Alignment formats available from IPD. The examples shown are all alignments of DRB alleles from different species. In these alignments a dash (-)
indicates identity to the reference sequence and an asterisk (*) denotes an unsequenced base. The first alignment shows the nucleotide sequence of Chimpanzee
(Pan troglodytes) DRB1 alleles with the human HLA-DRB1*010101 allele. The nucleotide sequence is also displayed in amino acid codons; the first base of the
initial codon is encoded in exon 1 and so not displayed in this alignment. The second set of sequences showsDRB alleles from cattle. The final alignment uses canine
DRB alleles, and demonstrates how the full sequence can be displayed.
Figure 1. The alignment interface provides a user-friendly method of viewing sequence alignments with output options easily selected.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D525
By accommodating related systems in a single database, data
can be made available in common formats aiding use and
interpretation. As the projects grow and more sections are
added, the benefit of having expertly curated sequences
from related areas stored in a single location will become
more apparent. This is particularly true of the IPD-MHC
project, where cross-species studies will be able to utilize
the high-quality sequences provided by the different nomen-
clature committees in a common format, ready for use. The
initial release of the IPD Database contained only four sections
and a small number of tools; however, as the database grows
and more sections and species are added, more tools will be
added to the website. We plan to use the existing database
structures to house data for new sections of the IPD project as
they become available. The files will also be made available
in different formats for downloading from the website, and ftp
server, and the data will be included in SRS, BLAST
and FASTA search engines at the European Bioinformatics
Institute (20).
ACCESS AND CONTACT
IPD Homepage: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ipd/
IPD-KIR Homepage: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ipd/kir/
IPD-MHC Homepage: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ipd/mhc/
IPD-HPA Homepage: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ipd/hpa/
IPD-ESTDAB Homepage: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ipd/estdab/
Contact: ipd@ebi.ac.uk
If you are interested in contributing to the project, there are
specific guidelines for the inclusion of new sections, and inter-
ested parties should contact Dr S. G. E. Marsh, marsh@ebi.ac.uk
for further information.
REFERENCES
1. Garcia,C.A., Robinson,J., Guethlein,L.A., Parham,P., Madrigal,J.A. and
Marsh,S.G.E. (2003) Human KIR sequences 2003. Immunogenetics,
55, 227–239.
2. Marsh,S.G.E., Parham,P., Dupont,B., Geraghty,D.E., Trowsdale,J.,
Middleton,D., Vilches,C., Carrington,M., Witt,C., Guethlein,L.A. et al.
(2003) Killer-cell immunoglobulin-like receptor (KIR) nomenclature
report, 2002. Immunogenetics, 55, 220–226.
3. Kanz,C., Aldebert,P., Althorpe,N., Baker,W., Baldwin,A., Bates,K.,
Browne,P., van den Broek,A., Castro,M., Cochrane,G. et al. (2005) The
EMBLNucleotideSequenceDatabase.NucleicAcidsRes.,33,D29–D33.
4. Benson,D.A., Karsch-Mizrachi,I., Lipman,D.J., Ostell,J. and
Wheeler,D.L. (2005) GenBank. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D34–D38.
5. Miyazaki,S., Sugawara,H., Ikeo,K., Gojobori,T. and Tateno,Y. (2004)
DDBJ in the stream of various biological data. Nucleic Acids Res.,
32, D31–D34.
6. Kennedy,L.J., Angles,J.M., Barnes,A., Carter,S.D., Francino,O.,
Gerlach,J.A., Happ,G.M., Ollier,W.E., Thomson,W. and Wagner,J.L.
(2001) Nomenclature for factors of the dog major histocompatibility
system (DLA), 2000: second report of the ISAG DLA Nomenclature
Committee. Tissue Antigens, 58, 55–70.
7. Kennedy,L.J., Altet,L., Angles,J.M., Barnes,A., Carter,S.D.,
Francino,O.,Gerlach,J.A.,Happ,G.M.,Ollier,W.E.,Polvi,A.et al. (1999)
Nomenclature for factors of the dog major histocompatibility system
(DLA), 1998. First report of the ISAG DLA Nomenclature Committee.
International Society for Animals Genetics. Tissue Antigens,
54, 312–321.
8. Davies,C.J., Joosten,I., Bernoco,D., Arriens,M.A., Bester,J., Ceriotti,G.,
Ellis,S., Hensen,E.J., Hines,H.C., Horin,P. et al. (1994) Polymorphismof
bovine MHC class I genes. Joint report of the Fifth International Bovine
Lymphocyte Antigen (BoLA) Workshop, Interlaken, Switzerland,
1 August 1992. Eur. J. Immunogenet., 21, 239–258.
9. Klein,J., Bontrop,R.E., Dawkins,R.L., Erlich,H.A., Gyllensten,U.B.,
Heise,E.R., Jones,P.P., Parham,P., Wakeland,E.K. and Watkins,D.I.
(1990) Nomenclature for the major histocompatibility complexes of
different species: a proposal. Immunogenetics, 31, 217–219.
10. Parham,P. (1999) Virtual reality in the MHC. Immunol. Rev.,
167, 5–15.
11. Robinson,J., Waller,M.J., Parham,P., de Groot,N., Bontrop,R.,
Kennedy,L.J., Stoehr,P. and Marsh,S.G.E. (2003) IMGT/HLA and
IMGT/MHC: sequence databases for the study of the major
histocompatibility complex. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 311–314.
12. Robinson,J.,Malik,A., Parham,P.,Bodmer,J.G. andMarsh,S.G.E. (2000)
IMGT/HLA database—a sequence database for the human major
histocompatibility complex. Tissue Antigens, 55, 280–287.
13. Robinson,J., Waller,M.J., Parham,P., Bodmer,J.G. and Marsh,S.G.E.
(2001) IMGT/HLADatabase—a sequence database for the humanmajor
histocompatibility complex. Nucleic Acids Res., 29, 210–213.
14. Robinson,J. and Marsh,S.G.E. (2000) The IMGT/HLA sequence
database. Rev. Immunogenet., 2, 518–531.
15. den Dunnen,J.T. and Antonarakis,S.E. (2001) Nomenclature for the
description of human sequence variations. Hum. Genet., 109, 121–124.
16. Antonarakis,S.E. (1998) Recommendations for a nomenclature system
for human gene mutations. NomenclatureWorking Group.Hum.Mutat.,
11, 1–3.
17. von demBorne,A.E. andDecary,F. (1990) ICSH/ISBTWorking Party on
platelet serology.Nomenclature of platelet-specific antigens.Vox. Sang.,
58, 176.
18. von dem Borne,A.E. and Decary,F. (1990) Nomenclature of platelet-
specific antigens. Hum. Immunol., 29, 1–2.
19. Metcalfe,P., Watkins,N.A., Ouwehand,W.H., Kaplan,C., Newman,P.,
Kekomaki,R., De Haas,M., Aster,R., Shibata,Y., Smith,J. et al. (2003)
Nomenclature of human platelet antigens. Vox. Sang., 85, 240–245.
20. Harte,N., Silventoinen,V., Quevillon,E., Robinson,S., Kallio,K.,
Fustero,X., Patel,P., Jokinen,P. and Lopez,R. (2004) Public web-based
services from the European Bioinformatics Institute. Nucleic Acids Res.,
32, W3–W9.
D526 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
