VMD: a community annotation database for
oomycetes and microbial genomes
Sucheta Tripathy, Varun N. Pandey2, Bing Fang1, Fidel Salas3 and Brett M. Tyler*
Virginia Bioinformatics Institute, 1Department of Computer Science, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and
State University, Blacksburg, VA-24061, USA, 2Microsoft Corporation Ltd, Redmond,
WA-98052, USA and 3Omicia Corporation, CA, USA
Received August 13, 2005; Revised and Accepted October 3, 2005
ABSTRACT
The VBI Microbial Database (VMD) is a database sys-
tem designed to host a range of microbial genome
sequences. At present, the database contains
genome sequence and annotation data of two plant
pathogens Phytophthora sojae and Phytophthora
ramorum. With the completion of the draft genome
sequences of these pathogens in collaboration with
theDOEJointGenome Institute (JGI),wehavecreated
this resource to make the sequences publicly avail-
able. The genome sequences (95 MB for P.sojae and
65 MB for P.ramorum) were annotated with 19 000
and 16 000 gene models, respectively. We used two
different statistical methods to validate these gene
models, Fickett’s and a log-likelihood method.
Functional annotation of the gene models is based
on results from BlastX and InterProScan screens.
From the InterProScan results,wecould assignputat-
ive functions to 17 694 genes in P.sojae and 14 700
genes in P.ramorum. We created an easy-to-use gen-
ome browser to view the genome sequence data,
which opens to detailed annotation pages for each
gene model. A community annotation interface is
available for registered community members to add
or edit annotations. There are 1600 genemodels for
P.sojae and 700 models for P.ramorum that have
already been manually curated. A toolkit is provided
as an additional resource for users to perform a vari-
ety of sequence analysis jobs. The database is pub-
licly available at http://phytophthora.vbi.vt.edu/.
INTRODUCTION
Phytophthora species are oomycete pathogens infecting many
host plant species. Phytophthora sojae is a soybean pathogen
that has been extensively used as a model for this genus.
Phytophthora ramorum is a newly emerged pathogen of
woody shrubs and trees that is threatening California’s coastal
oak forests. The genome sequencing of P.sojae and
P.ramorum was carried out in conjunction with the DOE
Joint Genome Institute (JGI). The draft sequences, covering
9x for P.sojae and 7x for P.ramorum were completed in early
2004. An Annotation Jamboree was held at the JGI during
August 2004, where community members manually annotated
data that were hosted at the JGI (http://www.jgi.doe.gov/).
To complement the JGI databases we have created a database,
called the VBI Microbial Database (VMD), that has a
community annotation web interface to enable ongoing editing
and detailed annotation of the sequences by community mem-
bers. The Genome Unified Schema (GUS; www.gusdb.org)
(1), developed at the Computational Biology & Informatics
Laboratory (CBIL), at the University of Pennsylvania, was
chosen as the database system for storing the information.
We have created a large number of software tools around
the schema to perform various functions, such as data
upload, data retrieval and user interfaces. We also extensively
updated the GUS installation notes (http://www.gusdb.org/
documentation/older/vbidoc.pdf and http://phytophthora.vbi.
vt.edu/documents/gus.pdf).
VMD is an integrated resource with community annotation
features, toolkits and a large number of other facilities to
perform complex queries. We used Perl/CGI for most of
the front end applications and Java servlets for storing
query histories. For the community annotation interface we
created a separate schema based on MySQL to temporarily
store contributed annotations for review, before transfer to the
GUS database. The database was released to the public in
April 2005.
DATA RESOURCES
VMD currently contains the assembled genome sequences of
two species, P.sojae and P.ramorum, that were generated by a
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 540 231 7318; Fax: +1 540 231 2606; Email: bmtyler@vt.edu
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D379–D381
doi:10.1093/nar/gkj042
random shotgun strategy. The assembly of paired end shotgun
sequence reads was carried out with the JGI assembler, Jazz, at
a coverage of 9x for P.sojae and 7x for P.ramorum. After
trimming for vector and quality, over one million reads
were assembled into 1810 scaffolds totaling over 86 Mb for
P.sojae and 2576 scaffolds totaling 66.6 Mb for P.ramorum.
Approximately half of the genome is contained in 54 scaffolds
all at least 463 kb in length for P.sojae and 63 scaffolds all at
least 308 kb in length for P.ramorum. The estimated genome
size is 95 Mb for P.sojae and 65 Mb for P.ramorum. The initial
gene calling was carried out at the JGI using the following four
algorithms: FgeneSHAbinitio (2), FgeneSHhomology, Gene-
Wise (3) and Synteny-based methods. We validated the four
models using Fickett’s (4) statistics and codon preference (5)
methods and stored only the best model in VMD.
DATA PROCESSING AND ANALYSIS
For each gene model, we have stored the Fickett (4) and log-
likelihood (5) validation data. The BLASTX (6) outputs of the
sequence scaffolds against 22 different databases belonging to
various taxonomic groups are also stored in the database. The
predicted coding and non-coding regions in the P.sojae and
P.ramorum sequences were compared to each other and the
results displayed in the browser. Similarity of a coding region
in one species to a non-coding region in the other is a useful
guide to possible mis-called gene models. Expressed sequence
tag (EST)-derived unigenes from P.sojae and Phytophthora
infestans were aligned to the P.sojae scaffolds using BLAT (7)
and stored in the database. Alignments similar to the
P.ramorum sequence will soon be added. InterProScan (8)
implements Pfam (9), Prosite (10), Prodom (11), Fingerprint
(12), Interpro (13), Smart (14) and TigrPfam (15) searches.
The outputs from InterProScan were parsed and stored in
supplementary tables outside GUS.
Other data that have been uploaded to the database include,
but are not limited to, external resources such as the Gene
Ontology dump files from GenBank, nr data from GenBank,
external databases and their release versions.
Analysis data were uploaded to the database using the Perl
object layer of the GUS system. Additional scripts were writ-
ten for data that did not fit into the GUS relational model.
USER INTERFACE DESIGN AND
IMPLEMENTATION
We have created an easy-to-use interface for the database,
mostly based on CGI written in Perl running on an Apache
web server. Our user interface has several components, the
most important ones are as follows:
(i) browser page,
(ii) query page,
(iii) edit annotation page and
(iv) toolkit page.
Apart from these there are several other utilities such as
Boolean searches, History, News and a Statistics page.
Browser page
We have created an easy-to-use Perl GD-based browser which
is distinct from Gbrowse (16). The browser currently shows
the gene models, the non-coding regions of scaffolds, gaps and
the EST-to-genome sequence alignments (Figure 1A). The
view can be zoomed in and out to increase clarity and visibility
Figure 1. (A) The genome browser at 10· zoom. (B) When clicking a gene model, the main annotation page opens with a detailed description of the gene model.
(C) When clicking the EST to genome alignment, the link opens to EST database with more detailed information. (D) The community annotation interface.
D380 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
of data. Each gene model or EST unigene is made clickable to
view detailed annotation information (Figure 1B). The main
annotation page is the central part of the user interface. It
summarizes details of the current annotation and also provides
functions for community members to add or modify existing
annotations. This page notes if the gene has already been
manually annotated.
The EST unigene alignment to the genome uses four colors
to indicate the quality of the alignments, similar to the NCBI
Blast output viewer. Clicking on a unigene icon opens a more
detailed view (Figure 1C) of the unigene from the EST data-
base (S. Tripathy and B. M. Tyler, unpublished).
Query page
The query page has several different combinations of queries,
including advanced queries, which open to the main annota-
tion page. The query can take either gene_ids (if known), EST
ids, or key words from the primary annotation or protein
domain annotations. All records retrieved by the query are
linked through the gene_ids to the main annotation page.
Edit annotation page
This page opens from the main page or from any other location
through the annotation button (Figure 1D). Registered users
can directly edit information by providing their user name and
passwords. New users can register and then edit the informa-
tion. The data from this page goes to a temporary MySQL
database, where the curator reviews the information before it is
finally transferred to the main schema. Once in the main
schema the color of a manually annotated gene model appears
yellow on the main browser.
Toolkit page
The toolkit page provides a combination of several web-based
programs including the EMBOSS (17) suite, Blast services
and pairwise sequence alignment using bl2seq. Additionally,
there are other utility programs written by us (S. Tripathy and
B. M. Tyler, unpublished) based on Fickett statistics and
codon usage to validate potential gene models on the fly.
The EMBOSS suite has more than 160 sequence analysis
tools that can perform a range of jobs. The blast interface
is provided with graphical outputs with links to the internal
databases. On clicking a sequence id, the user can view a
detailed annotation of that particular gene or EST sequence.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
We will soon be uploading information on orthology and
paralogy relationships among P.sojae and P.ramorum
genes, as well as gaps in the genome sequences closed
using BAC end sequencing. Our next release will contain
a viewer to link BAC physical map data to the sequence
scaffolds via BAC end sequences. In the next year we
expect to add genome sequences for the fungal pathogen of
Arabidopsis, Alternaria brassicicola and the oomycete patho-
gen of Arabidopsis, Hyaloperonospora parasitica to the
database. In addition we plan to implement support for pro-
teomic and microarray data. The microarray data have already
been stored in the database, and we will create links between
the functional genomic data and the genome sequences.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Tejal Karkhanis for programming assistance, the
CBIL group at the University of Pennsylvania for valuable
advice and Margaret Gabler for assistance in manuscript pre-
paration. This work was supported by grants from the National
Research Initiative of the USDA Cooperative State Research,
Education and Extension Service (2002-35600-12747 and
2004-35600-15055) and from the National Science Founda-
tion (MCB-0242131, EF-0412213 and DBI-0211863).
Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this
article was provided by the Virginia Bioinformatics Institute.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Davidson,S.B., Crabtree,J., Brunk,B., Schug,J., Tannen,V.,
Overton,G.C. and Stoeckert,J.C.J. (2001) K2/Kleisli and GUS:
experiments in integrated access to genomic data sources. IBM Syst. J.,
40, 512–531.
2. Salamov,A.A. and Solovyev,V.V. (2000) Ab initio gene finding in
Drosophila. Genomic DNA, 10, 516–522.
3. Birney,E., Clamp,M. and Durbin,R. (2004) GeneWise and GenomeWise.
Genome Res., 14, 988–995.
4. Fickett,J.W. (1982) Recognition of protein coding regions in DNA
sequences. Nucleic Acids Res., 10, 5303–5318.
5. McLachlan,A.D. (1984) A method for measuring the non-randombias of a
codon usage table. Nucleic Acids Res., 12, 9567–9575.
6. Altschul,S.F., Madden,T.L., Schaffer,A.A., Zhang,J., Zhang,Z.,
Miller,W. and Lipman,D.J. (1997) Gapped Blast and Psi-Blast: a new
generation of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res.,
25, 3389–3402.
7. Kent,W.J. (2002) BLAT—the BLAST-like alignment tool.GenomeRes.,
12, 656–664.
8. Zdobnov,E.M. and Apweiler,R. (2001) InterProScan—an integration
platform for the signature-recognition methods in InterPro.
Bioinformatics, 17, 847–848.
9. Bateman,A., Coin,L., Durbin,R., Finn,R.D., Hollich,V., Griffiths-
Jones,S., Khanna,A., Marshall,M., Moxon,S. and Sonnhammer,E.L.
(2004) The Pfam protein families database. Nucleic Acids Res., 32,
D138–D141.
10. Hulo,N., Sigrist,C.J., Le Saux,V., Langendijk-Genevaux,P.S., Bordoli,L.,
Gattiker,A., De Castro,E., Bucher,P. and Bairoch,A. (2004) Recent
improvements to the PROSITE database. Nucleic Acids Res., 32,
D134–D137.
11. Bru,C., Courcelle,E., Carre`re,S., Beausse,Y., Dalmar,S. and Kahn,D.
(2005) The ProDom database of protein domain families: more emphasis
on 3D. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D212–D215.
12. Attwood,T.K., Bradley,P., Flower,D.R., Gaulton,A., Maudling,N.,
Mitchell,A.L., Moulton,G., Nordle,A., Paine,K. and Taylor,P. (2003)
PRINTS and its automatic supplement, prePRINTS. Nucleic Acids Res.,
31, 400–402.
13. Mulder,N.J., Apweiler,R., Attwood,T.K., Bairoch,A., Bateman,A.,
Binns,D., Bradley,P., Bork,P., Bucher,P. and Cerutti,L. (2005)
InterPro, progress and status in 2005. Nucleic Acids Res., 33,
D201–D205.
14. Letunic,I., Goodstadt,L., Dickens,N.J., Doerks,T., Schultz,J., Mott,R.,
Ciccarelli,F., Copeley,R.R., Ponting,C.P. and Bork,P. (2002) Recent
improvements to the SMART domain-based sequence annotation
resource. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 242–244.
15. Haft,D.H., Selengut,J.D. and White,O. (2003) The TIGRFAMs database
of protein families. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 371–373.
16. Stein,L.D., Mungall,C., Shu,S., Caudy,M., Mangone,M., Day,A.,
Nickerson,E., Stajich,J.E., Harris,T.W., Arva,A. and Lewis,S. (2002) The
generic genome browser: a building block for a model organism system
database. Genome Res., 12, 1599–1610.
17. Rice,P., Longden,I. and Bleasby,A. (2000) EMBOSS: the European
Molecular Biology Open Software Suite. Trends Genet., 16,
276–277.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D381
