Cloning and characterization of the
Schizosaccharomyces pombe homologs of the
human protein Translin and the Translin-associated
protein TRAX
Orly Laufman, Ron Ben Yosef, Noam Adir1 and Haim Manor*
Department of Biology and 1Department of Chemistry, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32,000, Israel
Received March 31, 2005; Revised June 14, 2005; Accepted July 5, 2005
ABSTRACT
Translin isahumanoctameric protein that specifically
binds the single-stranded microsatellite repeats
d(GT)n and the corresponding transcripts (GU)n.
It also binds, with lesser affinities, other single-
stranded G-rich DNA and RNA sequences. TRAX is
a human protein that bears a homology to Translin
and interacts with it. Translin and TRAX have been
proposed to be involved in DNA recombination,
chromosomal translocation and mRNA transport
and translation. Both proteins are highly conser-
ved in eukaryotes, including the fission yeast
Schizosaccharomyces pombe, which is amenable
to genetic analysis. Here, we report the first study
of the S.pombe Translin and TRAX homologs. We
have deleted the genes encoding Translin and TRAX
in S.pombe and found that the proliferation of the
mutant cells was slightly stimulated, suggesting that
these genes are not essential for the fission yeast.
We have also shown that the S.pombe Translin
and TRAX interact. Biochemical analysis of the
S.pombe Translin, which was cloned and expressed
in Escherichia coli, revealed that it is octameric and
that it selectively binds d(GT)n and d(GTT)n micro-
satellite repeats. However, unlike the human protein,
it has much higher affinities for the homologous
RNA sequences (GU)n and (GUU)n. These data sug-
gest that the S.pombe Translin is primarily involved
in functions related to RNA metabolism.
INTRODUCTION
The human protein Translin has been identified in cell
extracts by virtue of its ability to bind single-stranded
oligodeoxynucleotides consisting of consensus sequences
adjacent to chromosomal translocations in leukemia and
lymphoma cells (1). The Translin gene (designated tsn) has
been cloned and found to encode a polypeptide consisting
of 228 amino acids. The gene was expressed in Escherichia
coli and eight molecules of the recombinant polypeptide
were found to assemble into an octamer, which forms a
ring structure. It was this structure that was shown to bind
single-stranded DNA (2,3).
We have previously discovered in nuclear extracts of human
fibroblasts a protein that specifically binds the single-stranded
microsatellite repeats, d(GT)n, and with lower affinities, other
G-rich DNA sequences (4). This protein was later shown to be
identical, or closely related, to Translin (5). Recent studies
carried out in our laboratory revealed that recombinant Trans-
lin binds single-stranded d(GT)n microsatellites and G-strand
telomeric repeats, d(TTAGGG)n, with higher affinities (Kdis ﬃ
2 nM and Kdis ﬃ 12.5 nM, respectively) than the affinity with
which it binds a prototypical sequence flanking translocation
sites (Kdis ﬃ 23 nM). However, it does not bind the corres-
ponding double-stranded DNAs [(5,6); E. Jacob, N. Baran and
H. Manor, unpublished data).
Translin has been highly conserved throughout eukaryotic
evolution. Of the 228 amino acids in the mouse Translin
(also designated TB-RBP), 225 amino acids are identical to
corresponding amino acids in the human protein (7). Translin-
like proteins in chicken, Xenopus, Drosophila and the fission
yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe share 86, 81, 53 and 36%
identities, respectively, with the human Translin and also have
similar lengths (8–10). However, the budding yeast Saccharo-
myces cerevisiae does not contain a Translin ortholog.
The 3D structures of the mouse and the human Translins
have been determined by X-ray crystallography and found to
be virtually identical (11,12). The monomer has a highly hel-
ical secondary structure with seven a helices, which constitute
>70% of the amino acid residues. Both crystal structures
reported had tetramers as asymmetric units, which by using
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +972 4 8293456; Fax: +972 4 8225153; Email: manor@tx.technion.ac.il
 The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
4128–4139 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 13
doi:10.1093/nar/gki727
 Published online July 25, 2005
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
crystal symmetry operations show that the actual crystallized
complex is that of an octamer. However, the octamers visu-
alized in the crystal structures are neither consistent with the
assembly of the subunits into octameric rings as seen in elec-
tron microscopic studies (3), nor do they have a pore large
enough to encompass single-stranded DNA or RNA.
A yeast two-hybrid screen of a human cDNA library led to
the discovery of a 33 kDa protein that forms a specific complex
with Translin. This protein, whose sequence has 28% identity
with that of Translin, was designated Translin-associated
factor X (TRAX) (13). There are homologous TRAX-like
proteins in the various species that also contain Translin ortho-
logs. The human and the mouse TRAX proteins, which share
90% amino acids identities, contain identical bipartite nuclear
targeting sequence near their N-terminus, and the mouse pro-
tein targeting sequence was shown to be functional (14).
TRAX does not bind DNA or RNA (15).
The data about the strong affinity of the human Translin to
the d(GT)n and d(TTAGGG)n repeats indicated that it might
play a role in the metabolism of d(GT)n.d(AC)n microsatellites
and telomeres (5). It could also be involved in chromosomal
translocations, as implied previously (2). Other studies,
which were carried out with the mouse Translin, indicated
that the mouse protein binds specific RNA sequences in the
30-untranslated regions of mRNAs purified from testis and
brain (16). Based on these and subsequent studies, it has
been suggested that complexes including Translin and TRAX
might be involved in the control of mRNA translation and
transport (17–21). Thus, it appears likely that Translin and
TRAX are multifunctional proteins that could play various
roles in both DNA and RNA metabolism. However, a defini-
tion of their functions in precise molecular terms is lacking.
We reasoned that the use of S.pombe as a model organism
would be advantageous for such functional analysis, because
S.pombe can be genetically manipulated by techniques that
cannot be easily adopted in research performed on higher
eukaryotic systems.
Hence, we have undertaken a study of the S.pombe Translin
and TRAX homologs and present here the first report on their
properties. We have deleted the genes encoding Translin
and TRAX in S.pombe and found that the proliferation of
the mutant cells was slightly stimulated, suggesting that
these genes are not essential for the fission yeast. We have
also shown that the S.pombe Translin and TRAX interact.
Biochemical analysis of the S.pombe Translin, which was
cloned and expressed in E.coli, revealed that it is octameric
and that it selectively binds single-stranded DNA microsatel-
lite repeats and the corresponding RNA sequences, but that it
does not bind double-stranded DNA. However, it differs from
the human Translin in having a much higher affinity for the
RNA repeats. These data suggest that the S.pombe Translin is
primarily involved in functions related to RNA metabolism.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Oligodeoxynucleotides, oligoribonucleotides and [g-32P]ATP
were purchased from Sigma, Dharmacon and New England
Nuclear, respectively. An S.pombe cDNA library was obtained
from Dr A. Cohen of the Department of Molecular Biology,
Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem,
Israel. The vector expressing human Translin was obtained
from Dr M. Kasai of the Department of Immunology, National
institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, Japan.
S.pombe culture procedures and construction of
new strains
The S.pombe culture procedures described by Moreno et al.
(22) were used. YE medium (0.5% yeast extract and 3%
glucose) was used for vegetative growth. The strains construc-
ted in this study are listed in Table 1 along with strains
obtained from other laboratories. The strain SP1124f, a
ura4 derivate of SP1124, was selected by growth of the latter
strain on YES plates (plates of YE solid medium) containing
5-Fluoroorotic acid (5FOA). The strains AP137 and SP1124f
were crossed on ME plates (3% malt extract) and diploid cells
were selected on EMM plates (0.3% potassium hydrogen
phthalate, 0.2% Na2HPO4, 0.5% NH4Cl and 2% glucose)
lacking adenine. Diploid cells were transformed with a linear
DNA fragment containing the ura4 open reading frame (ORF)
flanked by sequences that also flank the tsn gene. Transformed
cells were selected on EMM plates lacking adenine and uracil.
Translin heterozygote strains were screened by PCR and the
diploid ura4+ strain Spmd49 was found to harbor the correct
gene replacement, as shown in Figure 4. Spmd49 was then
induced to sporulate on ME plates. Asci were dissected and
four viable spores were obtained in all tetrads. The strain
Spm14d was selected from the sporulation offspring colonies
on EMM plates lacking uracil. The correct gene replacement
was confirmed by PCR analysis. The Dtrax strain was obtained
from Dr A. Decottignies (23). Spm14d and Dtrax were allowed
to mate and sporulate on ME plates. Asci were dissected and
four viable spores were obtained in all tetrads. The strain
Spm28a was selected from the sporulation offspring colonies
by growth on EMM plates lacking uracil and on YES plates
containing 100 mg/l of the antibiotic G418.
DNA transfection into S.pombe cells
DNA was transfected into S.pombe cells by electroporation, as
described previously (24). Then, the cells were plated on EMM
Table 1. S.pombe strains used in the present study
Strain Genotype Source
FY370 h+, ade6-DN/N, ura4-D18 (44)
AP137 mat1-PD17::leu2, leu1-32, ura4-D18,
ade6-210, his2
(45)
SP1124 mat1-Msmt0, L(XbaI) ::ura4+, ade-216, ura4-D18 (45)
SP1124fa mat1-Msmt0, L(XbaI) ::ura4, ade-216, ura4-D18 This study
DTRAX h, Dtraxb::kanR, leu1-32, ura4-D18, ade6-216 (23)
Spmd49c mat1-PD17::leu2, mat1-Msmt0, leu1-32, ura4-D18,
L(XbaI)::ura4, Dtsn::ura4+, ade6-210,
ade-216, his2
This study
Spm14d mat1-PD17::leu2, Dtsn::ura4+, leu1-32, ura4-D18,
ade6-210
This study
Spm28a h, Dtsn::ura4, Dtrax::kanR, leu1-32, ura4-D18,
ade6-210
This study
aSelected from SP1124 by growth in medium containing 5FOA.
btrax designates the gene encoding the TRAX protein. In (23) the TRAX open
reading frame is designated spcc736.09c.
cTranslin heterozygous diploid.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 13 4129
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
medium supplemented with 225 mg/l Leucine and 225 mg/l
adenine. The plates were incubated at 30C for 3–4 days.
PCR amplification of chromosomal DNA fragments
Chromosomal DNA was extracted from yeast cells, as
described previously (25). DNA fragments from such chromo-
somal DNA preparations were amplified by PCR, using the
BioTools DNA polymerase, with the primer pairs: P1—
TTATGACAAAGTCATGGTC and P2—AAAAAAACAT-
GCACGCC for analysis of the Translin ORF region in
the S.pombe genome, or P3—CACAGCATAAATTCTTGC
and P4—GTCCAGCATACAGAATCTC for analysis of the
TRAX ORF region in the S.pombe genome.
Cloning and expression of the S.pombe Translin and
TRAX cDNAs, and purification of the proteins
The predicted ORFs of the S.pombe tsn and trax genes have
been identified by the S.pombe genome sequencing project
(10). These ORFs were amplified by PCR from an S.pombe
cDNA library and cloned in-frame into a bacterial expression
of vector (pQE31; QIAGEN) encoding an N-terminal hexahis-
tidine tag. These expression constructs were used for the
expression the proteins in E.coli (26). The recombinant pro-
teins were purified from the transformed bacteria, as described
previously (5) (see Supplementary Material).
Gel mobility shift assays
Gel mobility shift assays were performed to assess the binding
of Translin with oligodeoxynucleotides and oligoribonucleo-
tides that were labeled with 32P at their 50-termini. The labeled
oligonucleotides were mixed with Translin at 4C in 20 ml
of binding buffer [10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, 0.1 mM EDTA,
1 mM DTT and 10% glycerol] containing 20 mM NaCl
(S.pombe Translin) or 75 mM NaCl (human Translin). In the
RNA-binding assays, RNAsine (Promega) at a concentration
of 0.2 U/ml was added. The mixtures were incubated for 15 min
at 30C. Other details of the procedure used for these assays
have been described previously (5).
Glycerol gradient centrifugation
Recombinant S.pombe Translin was loaded on a 10 ml linear
20–40% (v/v) glycerol gradient containing 20 mM Tris–HCl,
pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA and 2 mM DTT. The
tubes were centrifuged for 24 h in a Sorvall ultracentrifuge in
the TH-641 rotor at 38 000 r.p.m. at 8C. Fractions of 0.25 ml
were collected from the bottom of the gradient. The position
attained by the protein was determined by SDS–PAGE
of aliquots withdrawn from each fraction, followed by
Coomassie blue staining of the gel. The positions of the
RNA- and the DNA-binding activities were determined by
gel mobility shift assays of other aliquots withdrawn from
the same gradient fractions, using 32P-labeled (GU)12 and
d(GT)12 as probes and phosphorimaging of the gels. For cent-
rifugation of preformed complexes, recombinant Translin
(20 mg) was preincubated with the 32P-labeled (GU)12 probe
(2 ng) in 100 ml binding buffer for 15 min at 30C. Following
centrifugation, aliquots from each fraction were used to deter-
mine the position attained by the protein, as described above.
Other aliquots were electrophoresed in a native 6% poly-
acrylamide gel and 32P-labeled RNA–protein complexes were
detected by the use of the PhosphorImager. Estimations of the
sedimentation constant and the molecular weight of Translin
were obtained by comparison with sedimentation constants of
known protein markers, as described previously (27).
Yeast two-hybrid assays
The cDNAs encoding the complete ORFs of S.pombe Translin
and TRAX were subcloned into the BamHI/SalI sites of the
pGAD-C and pGBD-C vectors (28). Pairs of binding domain
and activation domain constructs were cotransfected into the
S.cerevisiae strain Y1183 (mata, ura3-52, his3-200, ade2-101,
lys2-801, trp1-901, leu2,3-112, gal4-542, gal80-538, lys2::
gal1UAS-gal1TATA-his3, ura3::gal417mers(x3)-cyc1TATA-lacZ,
gal2-ade2; Y. Kassir and N. Guttmann, personal communica-
tion). Co-transformants were selected on SD medium [0.67%
nitrogen base without amino acids (Difco) and 2% glucose]
lacking leucine and tryptophan. Protein–protein interactions
were detected by growth on SD medium lacking leucine,
tryptophan and adenine and by growth on SD medium lacking
leucine, tryptophan and histidine supplemented with 15 mM
3-amino-1,2,4-Triazole (Sigma).
Western blotting
Antibodies directed against the purified recombinant S.pombe
Translin were raised in rabbits using standard pro-
cedures (29). S.pombe strains were grown to mid-log phase
(A595 ¼ 0.4–0.6) and washed once with ice-cold STOP buffer
(150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, 10 mM EDTA, 1 mM NaN3,
pH 8.0). Pellets were resuspended in a buffer containing
20 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 0.4%
NP-40, 40 mM b-glycerophosphate and 0.1 mM sodium
orthovanadate supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail
(Sigma). Cells were disrupted in a French pressure cell press
and extracts were cleared by centrifugation in an Eppendorf
microfuge (20 min, 10 000 g, 4C). Protein concentrations
were estimated by using the Bradford protein assay (Bio-
Rad). An aliquot of 150 mg of total protein from each strain
were loaded on a 12% SDS–PAGE gel, electrophoresed and
transferred to Imobilon P membrane (Millipore). The mem-
brane was blocked in Tris-buffered saline buffer containing
20% skim milk and 0.1% Tween-20 at room temperature for
1 h and then probed with polyclonal anti-Translin antibodies
(1:500) in the same buffer for half an hour. Peroxidase con-
jugated anti-rabbit IgG (1:5000) (Sigma) and an enhanced
chemiluminescence detection kit (Amersham Biosciences)
were used to detect Translin. Equal sample loading was
confirmed by Coomassie blue staining of the membrane.
RESULTS
Comparison between the sequences and structures of
the S.pombe and the human Translin and TRAX
Figure 1 presents a BLAST alignment of the amino acid
sequences of the human Translin, which consists of 228
amino acids, and the S.pombe Translin, which consists of
236 amino acids. The mouse Translin, which also consists
of 228 amino acids, differs from the human Translin by
three amino acids, whose positions are indicated in Figure 1
by asterisks. None of these amino acids is found within
the regions assigned to functional domains (see below). It is
4130 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 13
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
evident that, while the overall sequences of the S.pombe and
the human Translins share 36% identity and 54% similarity,
the degrees of identity and similarity are higher in the
C-terminal half of the proteins than in their N-terminal half.
In the human Translin, the C-terminal region contains a putat-
ive nuclear export signal and a putative GTP binding site.
Evidently, the nuclear export signal is highly conserved in
the S.pombe Translin. The N-terminal half of the human
and the mouse Translins include two basic regions. One
basic region (amino acids 56–64), particularly the basic
amino acids K60, R62 and H64, was shown by site-directed
mutagenesis to be required for RNA-binding by the mouse
Translin (15). Evidently, these basic amino acids have not
been conserved in the S.pombe Translin. The second region
(amino acids 86–97) also includes basic amino acids (R86,
H88 and H90) that were found to be required for binding
single-stranded DNA and RNA by the human and the mouse
Translins (15,30). As shown in Figure 1, this region has been
only partially conserved in the S.pombe Translin.
The program ClustalW was used to align the amino acid
sequences of the human, mouse and S.pombe TRAX proteins
(data not shown). This alignment revealed that the sequence of
34 amino acids at the N-terminus of the human and the mouse
TRAX proteins, which includes the bipartite nuclear target-
ing signal (amino acids 11–27, RKrkhdnfphnqRRegK) (13),
is missing in the S.pombe TRAX protein (the two clusters
of basic amino acids that constitute the signal are shown in
boldface). However, we observed that the C-terminus of the
S.pombe TRAX contains a putative bipartite nuclear targeting
signal (amino acids 210–229, KRylnlevdtatppeeKRiR).
As noted in the Introduction, the structures of the human and
the mouse Translins have been determined by X-ray crystal-
lography and found to be very similar. We, therefore, built a
sequence-dependent homology-based model of the S.pombe
Translin, using the 3D-JIGSAW comparative modeling server
(31) and the human Translin (PDB code 1J1J) as the structural
template. A similar model based on the mouse Translin (PDB
code 1KEY) using the 3D-PSSM protein fold recognition
server (32) resulted in a highly similar structure (data not
shown). The S.pombe Translin monomer model, shown in
Figure 2A, predicts that the structure of this monomer is
very similar to the structure of the human monomer, shown
in Figure 2B, with an overall root-mean-square deviation of
0.91 s over all superimposable a-carbons. The approximate
positions of the Translin functional subdomains, based on the
positions of these subdomains in the human and the mouse
Translins, are also indicated on the S.pombe model. However,
it should be noted that local structural differences within the
putative RNA- and DNA-binding subdomains would not have
been detected by this approach. Such changes may account
for differences that we observed in the nucleic acids binding
characteristics between the S.pombe and the human Translins
(see below).
Evidence that the endogeneous tsn and trax genes
are expressed in S.pombe
The S.pombe Translin and TRAX have been identified by the
S.pombe genome sequencing project (10). This finding did not
reveal whether the endogeneous genes encoding these proteins
are actually expressed in S.pombe cells. To examine this ques-
tion, we performed a western analysis of cell extracts prepared
from wild-type S.pombe and from tsn and trax S.pombe
strains (see below). The western blots were probed with a
polyclonal anti-Translin antibody that we have prepared
against recombinant S.pombe Translin, as described in
Materials and Methods; Figure 3 shows these blots. It can
be seen (lanes 1 and 2) that a band containing a protein of
an apparent molecular weight of 23 kDa, which specifically
interacted with the antibody, was found in the extracts pre-
pared from a tsn+ wild-type haploid and from a tsn+ haploid
member of a tetrad, which also contained a tsn derivate (see
below). A similar band was observed in an extract prepared
from trax cells (lane 4), but was absent from extracts of
tsn and tsn,trax haploids (lanes 3 and 5). These data indic-
ated that this band contains Translin. Lane 6 shows a band
containing recombinant Translin synthesized in E.coli, which
was run in the same gel. As described below, the apparent
molecular weight of the recombinant protein was 29 kDa. The
discrepancy between the masses of the recombinant and the
Figure 1. Amino acid sequence alignment of the human and the S.pombe
Translins. The sequences of the human Translin (Hs, Homo sapiens,
GenBank	 gi: 12803111) and its S.pombe ortholog (Sp, S.pombe, GenBank	
gi: 19115469) were aligned using BLAST. Identical residues are highlighted
in black. Similar residues are highlighted in gray. Previously identified motifs
in the human Translin (also shared by the mouse Translin) are marked with
boxes and are described in the Results. The asteriks indicate the amino acids in
the human Translin that have been substituted with other amino acids in the
mouse Translin.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 13 4131
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
endogeneous Translins could be due to the presence of a
histidine tag in the recombinant protein.
The authenticity of the endogenous Translin was further
confirmed by immunoprecipitation assays performed with
the anti-Translin antibody, followed by SDS–PAGE of the
immunoprecipitates and mass-spectrometry of the bands.
Similar immunoprecipitation assays performed with an
anti-TRAX antibody revealed that endogenous TRAX is
also expressed in S.pombe cells (O. Laufman and H. Manor,
unpublished data).
Evidence that tsn and trax are non-essential
genes in S.pombe
In order to study the functions of the S.pombe Translin, we
used a genetic approach, whereby we have undertaken the
deletion of the tsn gene in S.pombe cells and the examination
of the consequences. Since it was not known originally
whether Translin was essential for S.pombe viability, we ini-
tially replaced one of the two Translin alleles in diploid
S.pombe cells with the ura4 gene. This was carried out by
homologous recombination with sequences flanking the tsn
gene, as illustrated in Figure 4A. Next, we performed a tetrad
analysis of haploid derivatives of the tsn+/tsn heterozygotes.
The results of this analysis are shown in Figure 4B. It can be
seen that in all the tetrads the four haploid descendents were
viable. To examine the genotypes of these haploids and of the
parental strains, we performed a PCR analysis of DNA extrac-
ted from the cells, using the primers depicted in Figure 4A.
Figure 4C shows an agarose gel profile of the PCR amplifica-
tion products of DNA obtained from wild-type haploid tsn+
cells (lane 1), cells of a tsn+/tsn heterozygote (lane 2) and
Figure 2. Homology-based model of the S.pombe Translin monomer. (A) The S.pombe sequence was folded using the human Translin crystal structure (1J1J) as its
template, by the 3D-JIGSAW comparative modeling server. Putative functional domains are identified by colored ribbons: red, RNA-binding domain; green, DNA/
RNA-binding domain, blue, nuclear export signal; yellow, GTP binding site. (B) Visualization of one monomer of the human Translin structure (1J1J). The color
coding is the same as that of (A). As denoted in Figure 1, the positions of the human functional domains are predicted to be as follows: RNA-binding domain: amino
acids 56–64; RNA- and DNA-binding domain: amino acids 86–97; nuclear export signal: amino acids 147–157; GTP binding site: amino acids 159–163.
Figure 3. Western blot analysis of endogeneous Translin in S.pombe cell
extracts. The western blot procedure was carried out, as described in Materials
and Methods. 150 mg of total protein from wild-type or mutant S.pombe cells
were loaded per lane. Recombinant S.pombe Translin served as a positive
control. Polyclonal anti-S.pombe Translin antibodies were used to probe the
membrane. Lane 1, wild-type strain (FY370); lane 2, tsn+ derivative of a
heterozygous diploid tsn+/tsn; lane 3, tsn derivative of the heterozygous
diploid tsn+/tsn; lane 4, trax mutant; lane 5, tsntrax mutant; lane 6,
Recombinant S.pombe Translin. Closed arrowhead marks the position of
endogenous Translin. Open arrowhead marks the position of recombinant
Translin. Equal sample loading was confirmed by Coomassie blue staining.
The mutant genotypes are described in the legend to Figure 4 and in the text.
4132 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 13
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
haploid tsn cells (lane 3). Clearly, the lengths of the amplified
segments matched the lengths predicted by the diagram shown
in Figure 4A. Additional PCR assays revealed that the larger
colonies among the tetrads shown in Figure 4B contained
tsnura4+ cells.
In a pilot gene deletion project carried out in S.pombe,
Decottignies et al. (23) found that the S.pombe trax gene is
non-essential. We obtained from them the trax S.pombe
strain that they have isolated by replacing the trax gene
with the kanamycin gene, as indicated in Figure 4D. Using
the primers depicted in Figure 4D, we have carried out a PCR
analysis of DNA extracted from these cells and from wild-type
cells (Figure 4E). It can be seen that the PCR assays yielded
fragments of the expected lengths from the wild-type trax+
DNA (lane 1) and trax DNA (lane 2). Next, we crossed our
tsn mutant with the trax mutant and carried out a tetrad
analysis of the haploid derivatives of this cross (data not
shown). These haploids were also viable and included cells
in which both the tsn and the trax genes have been deleted, as
indicated by the PCR analyses shown in Figure 4C (lane 4) and
Figure 4E (lane 3). The tsn,trax+ and the tsn,trax geno-
types were subsequently verified in the haploid strains
described above by Southern blotting and direct sequencing.
Detailed cell proliferation assays shown in the Supplementary
Material confirmed that the deletions did not cause a
reduction in the proliferation rates of the cells; rather,
the growth of the tsn,trax double mutant was slightly
stimulated, while a lesser stimulation observed in the
proliferation of the tsn mutant was within the experimental
error. Thus, both tsn and trax are non-essential genes
in S.pombe.
DNA-binding specificity of the S.pombe Translin
The S.pombe Translin ORF was cloned into an E.coli expres-
sion plasmid, such that it was fused in-frame downstream
to a sequence encoding a histidine tag. The recombinant
protein was expressed and purified, as described in the
Supplementary Material, and used for biochemical studies
described below.
Preliminary studies indicated that, like the human Translin,
the S.pombe Translin binds single-stranded d(GT)n repeats.
Therefore, we carried out more detailed studies, in which we
used the gel mobility shift technique to titrate the oligodeoxy-
nucleotide d(GT)15 with the S.pombe Translin. In these assays,
we incubated the 32P-labeled oligodeoxynucleotide d(GT)15
with increasing concentrations of the protein under conditions
found to be optimal for binding of the DNA to the protein and
ran the mixtures in a native polyacrylamide gel. Figure 5A
(upper panel) shows a phosphorimage of this gel. A single
retarded band containing the DNA–Translin complex is
clearly visible, in addition to the band containing the unbound
DNA. The intensity of the retarded band increased, and the
intensity of the band containing the unbound DNA decreased,
as the input concentration of the protein was increased. The
lower panel in Figure 5A shows a plot of these data. It can be
seen that an apparent plateau level was reached in this experi-
ment, in which the maximal fraction of bound DNA was
0.70. The failure to completely saturate the DNA could
be due to aggregation of the protein at the rather high con-
centrations required for reaching the apparent plateau level.
The aggregation could effectively reduce the concentration of
protein available for binding, such that a true plateau level
Figure 4. Construction of tsn and tsntrax mutants. S.pombe tsn strains were generated by first deleting one of the two Translin alleles in a diploid. This was
accomplished by replacement of one tsn allele with a ura4 gene, through homologous recombination with a linear DNA fragment containing the ura4 open reading
frame flanked on both sides by sequences that also flank the tsn gene. Next, meiosis was induced and a tetrad analysis was performed. Haploid tsn colonies were
found in the tetrads. We obtained a trax S.pombe strain, which was generated by Decottignies et al. (23), and crossed this strain with a tsn haploid. Meiosis was
induced again and strains, in which both Translin and TRAX have been deleted, were found among the haploid descendents of the diploids generated by the cross.
(A) Scheme of the heterozygous diploid, tsn+/tsn. Primers P1 and P2 were used for PCR analysis to confirm the indicated gene replacement. The expected lengths of
the PCR products before and after the gene replacement are indicated. (B) Tetrad analysis of the heterozygous diploid strain tsn+/tsn. Four viable spores were
obtained in all tetrads. The larger colonies were shown to be ura4+,tsn. (C) PCR analysis of a tsn+haploid (lane 1), a heterozygous diploid tsn+/tsn (lane 2), a haploid
tsn::ura4 (lane 3) and a haploid tsn::ura4, trax::kanR (lane 4). The expected length for a tsn+ product (1.8 kb) and a tsn product (2.8 kb) are shown by a closed and
an open arrowhead, respectively. (D) Scheme for trax gene replacement. The TRAX open reading frame has been replaced in S.pombe by the kanamycin-resistant
gene (kanR) (23). We used the primer P3 and P4 for PCR analysis designed to confirm the gene replacement. The expected lengths of the PCR product before and after
the gene replacement are indicated. (E) PCR analysis of a haploid strain trax+ (lane 1), a haploid strain trax::kanR (lane 2) and a haploid strain tsn::ura4,
trax::kanR (lane 3). The expected length for a trax+ product (1.4 kb) and a trax product (2.1 kb) are indicated by closed and open arrowheads, respectively.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 13 4133
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
could not be attained. Nevertheless, an apparent dissociation
constant of 18 nM was estimated from these data, which is
indicative of specific recognition and binding of single-
stranded d(GT)n repeats by the S.pombe Translin.
Figure 6 presents a series of competition assays that lent
support to this conclusion. In these assays, the S.pombe Trans-
lin was incubated with 32P-labeled d(GT)15 in the presence
of increasing concentrations of the indicated unlabeled oli-
godeoxynucleotides, and the mixtures were resolved by
PAGE. It can be seen that the S.pombe Translin bound the
oligodeoxynucleotide d(GTT)10 with an affinity that was com-
parable with the affinity with which it bound the oligodeoxy-
nucleotide d(GT)15. Also, the affinity of the S.pombe Translin
for the oligodeoxynucleotide d(T)30 was relatively high, while
the affinity of the protein for the oligodeoxynucleotide
d(GGTTACA)4, which contains four repeats of S.pombe telo-
meric DNA, was much lower. Evidently, the S.pombe Translin
had an even lower affinity for the oligodeoxynucleotide
d(GA)15 and did not bind the oligodeoxynucleotide d(A)30
at all. These results were corroborated by direct titration assays
of the type shown in Figure 5A that were carried out with other
samples of the same oligodeoxynucleotides, which had been
labeled with 32P. Finally, similar gel shift assays revealed that,
like the human Translin, the S.pombe Translin did not bind
d(GT)n·d(AC)n repeats and other double-stranded DNA
molecules (data not shown).
Comparison of RNA binding by the S.pombe Translin
with RNA binding by the human Translin
Figure 5B shows a titration of the oligoribonucleotide (GU)15
with the S.pombe Translin. This experiment was carried out
by the same procedure used for titrating the oligodeoxynuc-
leotide d(GT)15. It can be seen that the Kdis value for binding
the oligoribonucleotide, 3 nM, was 6-fold lower than the Kdis
value for binding the oligodeoxynucleotide (Figure 5A). It is
also evident that at the relatively low concentrations required
for reaching the plateau level in this experiment, the fraction of
(GU)15 molecules that could be bound by Translin was close
to 1.0. The very small dissociation constant of the complex
S.pombe Translin–(GU)15 is an indication of specific binding
of the protein to the GU repeats. The specificity of the binding
to these GU repeats was also underscored by a much lower
affinity that the S.pombe Translin was found to have for the
oligoribonucleotide (U)24 (data not shown).
Figure 7A and C shows gel shift competition assays, which
confirmed the conclusion that the S.pombe Translin has a
much higher affinity for the oligoribonucleotide (GU)15 than
for the corresponding oligodeoxynucleotide d(GT)15. In the
experiment shown in Figure 7A, 32P-labeled d(GT)15 was
incubated in the presence of various concentrations of either
unlabeled d(GT)15 or unlabeled (GU)15. Clearly, (GU)15 was a
much more efficient competitor than the homologous d(GT)15.
Figure 5. Gel mobility shift assays of the binding of Translin to the single-stranded oligodeoxynucleotide d(GT)15 and the single-stranded oligoribonucleotide
(GU)15. Recombinant S.pombe Translin at the indicated concentrations was incubated with each of the two single-stranded
32P-labeled oligonucleotides. Complexes
were analyzed by the gel mobility shift technique. The phosphorimager images of the gels are shown at the top of (A) and (B). Plots of the fraction of labeled
oligonucleotide in the complex versus the total concentration of Translin in the binding reaction are shown at the bottom. (A) Binding of the S.pombe Translin to the
oligodeoxynucleotide d(GT)15 at a concentration of 0.04 nM. (B) Binding of the S.pombe Translin to the oligoribonucleotide (GU)15 at a concentration of 0.03 nM.
Kdis values were derived from these plots, as described previously (5).
4134 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 13
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
The reciprocal experiment, in which 32P-labeled (GU)15 was
used as a probe, is shown in Figure 7C. It can be seen that
in this experiment too, (GU)15 was a much more efficient
competitor than the homologous d(GT)15.
So far, no direct comparison has been made between
the affinities of either the human or the mouse Translin to
specific single-stranded DNA sequences and homologous
RNA sequences. Figure 7B and D shows gel shift competition
assays of the type shown in Figure 7A and C, which were
carried out with the human Translin. It can be seen that, unlike
the assays performed with the S.pombe Translin, in the
assays of the human Translin, the unlabeled oligonucleotides
d(GT)15 and (GU)15 competed with the
32P-labeled d(GT)15
and (GU)15 probes with approximately equal efficiencies.
Other experiments, in which direct titration assays of the
binding of the human Translin to 32P-labeled (GU)15 and
d(GT)15 were carried out, revealed that the Kdis value for
binding the oligoribonucleotide was only twice smaller than
the Kdis value for binding the oligodeoxynucleotide (data not
shown).
The S.pombe Translin is an octamer
To determine the molecular weight of the native form of the
S.pombe Translin, we centrifuged the protein in a glycerol
gradient, as described in Materials and Methods. Figure 8A,
(i), shows the sedimentation profile of the S.pombe Translin
determined by SDS–PAGE of aliquots withdrawn from frac-
tions collected from the gradient, followed by Coomassie blue
staining of the gel. Figure 8A, (ii) and (iii), shows the sedi-
mentation profiles of the RNA- and the DNA-binding forms
of Translin. These profiles were determined by gel shift
assays of other aliquots withdrawn from the same gradient
fractions, using the 32P-labeled oligoribonucleotide (GU)12
and oligodeoxynucleotide d(GT)12 as probes. Figure 8B,
(i) and (ii), shows the data obtained in a complementary
experiment, in which the S.pombe Translin was first bound
to the 32P-labeled oligoribonucleotide (GU)12 and was sub-
sequently centrifuged in a similar glycerol gradient. Figure 8B,
(i), shows the sedimentation profile of Translin in this gradient,
determined by SDS–PAGE, followed by Coomassie blue
staining. Figure 8B, (ii), shows the sedimentation profile
of the preformed complexes between Translin and the
32P-labeled oligoribonucleotide (GU)12, determined by elec-
trophoresis in a native polyacrylamide gel, followed by
phosphorimaging. It can be seen that both the DNA- and
the RNA-binding activities of Translin, as well as the pre-
formed RNA–Translin complexes, cosedimented with the
bulk of the protein. Using the sedimentation constants and
molecular masses of the marker proteins shown in Figure 8,
we estimated the sedimentation constant and the molecular
mass of the native S.pombe Translin to be 9.9S and 217 kDa,
respectively (27). These data indicated that both the DNA- and
the RNA-binding forms of the S.pombe Translin are octamers,
similar to the human Translin (3,33). Furthermore, the
S.pombe Translin remained an octamer after binding the
RNA probe.
Evidence for specific association of the S.pombe
Translin and TRAX
Figure 9 shows the results of yeast (S.cerevisiae) two-hybrid
analysis of the interaction between the S.pombe Translin
and TRAX in a selective medium lacking adenine. Identical
results were obtained in a medium lacking histidine (data
not shown). It can be seen that Translin specifically interacted
with TRAX (D,E). Specific interactions also occurred between
individual Translin subunits (C), but did not occur between
individual TRAX molecules (F). The specific association of
Translin and TRAX has also been confirmed by coimmuno-
precipitation of the two proteins from S.pombe cell extracts,
using the polyclonal antibodies that we have prepared against
the S.pombe Translin and TRAX, as described in Materials
and Methods (O. Laufman and H. Manor, unpublished data).
DISCUSSION
The S.pombe genes tsn and trax, encoding the Translin and
TRAX homologs, have been identified by the whole genome
sequencing project of the fission yeast (10). In this paper, we
presented the first demonstration that the two genes are actu-
ally expressed in S.pombe (Figure 3), but are non-essential
(Figure 4). It should be noted, in this connection, that the
Figure 6. Competition of unlabeled oligodeoxynucleotides with a 32P-labeled
d(GT)15 probe for binding the S.pombe Translin. Recombinant S.pombe Trans-
lin at a concentration of 5 nM was incubated with 1 nM of the 32P-labeled
d(GT)15 probe in the presence of increasing concentrations of the indicated
unlabeled oligodeoxynucleotides. Gel mobility shift assays were performed,
as described in Materials and Methods. Only the upper parts of the gels, which
contain the retarded band, are shown.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 13 4135
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
mouse, as well as the human, Translin and TRAX have been
recently reported to be involved in the control of cell prolif-
eration. Translin-null mice were generated and found to
develop into mature fertile animals. However, at birth they
were 10–30% smaller than their wild-type littermates and
remained so until the age of 6–9 months (34). Mouse embryo
fibroblasts derived from the tsn mice also showed decreased
proliferation (35). In line with these observations, overexpres-
sion of Translin in human embryo kidney cells accelerated
the proliferation of these cells (36). TRAX was also reported
to be essential for normal proliferation of human HeLa cells
(37). In view of these data on the mammalian Translin and
TRAX, we have carefully measured the rates of proliferation
of cells of the S.pombe deletion mutants. We have detected a
slight stimulation in the rate of proliferation of cells of the
double mutant tsn,trax versus the wild-type cells and a
lesser stimulation in the proliferation of tsn cells that was
within the experimental error (see Supplementary Material).
Additional studies will be required to find out the reason for
these apparent differences between the S.pombe and the
mammalian Translin and TRAX proteins.
As shown in Figure 1, the S.pombe Translin shares only
36% identity and 54% similarity with the human and the
mouse Translins. However, the model shown in Figure 2A
indicates that its 3D structure most likely resembles the struc-
ture of the human and the mouse Translins. This is indeed quite
apparent when compared with the monomer human Translin
structure visualized in Figure 2B. In particular, the model
predicts that, like the two mammalian Translins, the predom-
inant secondary structure features in the S.pombe Translin are
a helices. In addition, the sedimentation analysis presented in
Figure 8 showed that the S.pombe Translin subunits, similar to
the human Translin subunits, assemble into octamers, and that
only the octamers bind DNA or RNA. Furthermore, the sedi-
mentation analysis of complexes formed between the S.pombe
Translin and the oligoribonucleotide (GU)12 revealed that the
octameric configuration of the S.pombe Translin was pre-
served after binding the nucleic acid, as previously observed
in studies of the human Translin (3,33). However, it has been
reported that preformed mouse Translin–DNA complexes
contain dimers of the protein (38).
The conservation of the overall structure of the S.pombe
Translin versus the human Translin could account for the
similarity in their modes of binding to nucleic acids, namely
their ability to bind single-stranded DNA and RNA, and their
inability to bind double-stranded DNA. On the other hand, the
low degree of conservation of the putative single-stranded
DNA and RNA-binding motifs in the S.pombe Translin
(Figure 1) suggests that the local 3D structures of the nucleic
acid binding subdomains were altered in the yeast protein.
Such differences could account for the alteration of the
DNA recognition profile of the fission yeast Translin versus
the human Translin. In particular, we have shown that
even though the S.pombe Translin specifically binds the
Figure 7. Gel shift competition assays designed to determine the relative affinities of the human and the S.pombe Translins for the oligoribonucleotide (GU)15 and
the oligodeoxynucleotide d(GT)15. Recombinant S.pombe Translin or human Translin was incubated with 1 nM of a
32P-d(GT)15 probe, or a
32P-(GU)15 probe, in
the presence of increasing concentrations of the indicated unlabeled competitors. Gel mobility shift assays were performed, as described in Materials and Methods.
Only the upper parts of the gels, which contain the retarded band, are shown. (A) S.pombe Translin, 32P-d(GT)15 probe. (B) Human Translin,
32P-d(GT)15 probe.
(C) S.pombe Translin, 32P-(GU)15 probe. (D) Human Translin,
32P-(GU)15 probe. The numbers at the bottom of each part represent the percentage of bound probe as a
function of the concentration of competitor, relative to the value obtained in the absence of competitor, which was designated as 100%.
4136 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 13
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
oligodeoxynucleotide d(GT)15, it has a 9-fold larger Kdis value
for this oligodeoxynucleotide than the Kdis value found for
the human Translin. Second, unlike the human Translin, the
S.pombe Translin has a relatively high affinity for d(T)n
repeats. Third, although the human Translin has a high affinity
for single-stranded human telomeric repeats (5), the S.pombe
Translin very poorly binds single-stranded S.pombe telomeric
repeats (Figure 6).
As described in the Results, we compared the binding of the
human Translin to the oligodeoxynucleotide d(GT)15 versus
the oligoribonucleotide (GU)15. We found that it had approx-
imately equal affinities for these DNA and RNA repeats. In
contrast, a similar comparison made with the S.pombe Translin
revealed that the yeast protein had a much higher affinity for
the oligoribonucleotide (GU)15 than for the oligodeoxynuc-
leotide d(GT)15 (Figures 5 and 7). This difference between the
human and the S.pombe Translins is also indicative of local
alterations in the 3D structures of the nucleic acid binding
subdomains in the yeast Translin octamer. Since the human
Translin has approximately equal affinities for homologous
single-stranded DNA and RNA sequences, it might perform
functions that depend on its sequence-specific association with
either DNA or RNA. Furthermore, the virtual identity of the
human and the mouse Translins indicates that they are engaged
in similar activities in human and mouse cells, respectively.
On the other hand, our observation that the S.pombe Translin
has much higher affinities for RNA sequences than for homo-
logous DNA sequences suggests that the S.pombe Translin
could be primarily involved in functions related to its RNA-
binding characteristics.
Among the functions proposed for the human and the mouse
Translins on account of their RNA-binding capability are con-
trol of translation of specific mRNAs (19,21) and regulation of
mRNA sorting and transport (20,39). In particular, it has been
suggested that complexes consisting of Translin and asso-
ciated proteins carry specific mRNAs and proteins from the
Figure 8. Glycerol gradient centrifugation of the recombinant S.pombe Translin. (A) Sample of the recombinant S.pombe Translin was centrifuged in a 20–40%
linear glycerol gradient, as described in Materials and Methods. Fractions of equal volumes were collected from the bottom of the gradient. Aliquots withdrawn from
these fractions were analyzed by SDS–gel electrophoresis, followed by Commassie blue staining [A (i)]. Other aliquots withdrawn from the same fractions were
analyzed by the gel mobility shift assay for binding the 32P-labeled oligoribonucleotide (GU)12 [A (ii)] or the
32P-labeled oligodeoxynucleotide d(GT)12 [A (iii)].
Another sample of the recombinant S.pombe Translin was preincubated with the 32P-labeled oligoribonucleotide (GU)12 and then centrifuged in another tube in the
same run. Aliquots withdrawn from this tube were also analyzed by SDS–gel electrophoresis and Coomassie blue staining [B (i)]. Other aliquots were electrophoresed
in a native polyacrylamide gel and the 32P-labeled bands were detected by phosphorimaging [B (ii)]. M indicates the gel lanes including the gel marker proteins.
Horizontal arrows indicate the gel-shifted complexes generated by binding of Translin. Vertical filled arrowheads indicate the peaks of the Coomassie blue-stained
Translin, and the peaks of the RNA- and DNA-binding activities. Vertical open arrowheads indicate the peaks of the centrifugation marker proteins: Cat., Catalase
(232 kDa); Ald., Aldolase (158 kDa); BSA (66 kDa); Ova., Ovalbumin (43 kDa).
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 13 4137
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
nucleus into the cytoplasm, and that proteins associated with
the Translin nuclear export signal are involved in this intra-
cellular traffic (40) [The latter suggestion appears plausible in
view of experiments, which indicated that the mouse Translin
nuclear export signal is functional (15)]. Interestingly, these
functions were proposed to be mediated through binding of
Translin to regions including GU clusters and other G-rich
sequences in mRNAs (39,41). Our demonstration that the
S.pombe Translin strongly binds (GU)n repeats (Figures 5
and 7), and the observation that the nuclear export signal has
been highly conserved in the S.pombe Translin (Figure 1),
suggests that the S.pombe Translin may perform similar
functions in the fission yeast cells.
As noted earlier, there are homologous trax genes in
the various species that also contain tsn orthologs. This co-
evolution of the two genes suggests that Translin and TRAX
are functionally related. We have shown in this study that the
S.pombe Translin specifically interacts with the S.pombe
TRAX, as was previously observed in studies of the human
and the mouse Translins (13,15,42). This observation supports
the notion that in S.pombe cells, as well as in human and mouse
cells, the two proteins are engaged as a complex in a common
metabolic pathway.
It is also possible that either TRAX or Translin has addi-
tional functions, which they perform independently in asso-
ciation with other proteins. One possibility was indicated by a
report that the mouse TRAX (but not Translin) interacts with
two centrosomal proteins and a Golgi-associated protein (43).
These findings suggested that complexes including TRAX
and these proteins might be engaged in biochemical activities
related to the activities that these proteins are known to
perform.
Our observation that neither the tsn gene nor the trax gene is
essential for S.pombe cell growth and division suggests that
S.pombe cells might contain a backup system that can effi-
ciently replace Translin and TRAX in providing the functions
required for cell proliferation. Such a backup system may also
exist in mammalian cells, and in cells of the budding yeast
S.cerevisiae that do not contain Translin and TRAX orthologs.
We are currently using the S.pombe Translin- and TRAX-null
strains for further genetic and biochemical studies. The com-
bined genetic and biochemical approach, which was initiated
by the work reported here, should further clarify the biological
functions of Translin and TRAX.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Material is available at NAR Online.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank Dr A. Decottignies for sending them the
S.pombe trax strain, Dr Y. Kassir for the gift of the
S.cerevisiae two-hybrid host strain Y1183 and Dr A. Cohen
for sending them an S.pombe cDNA library. The authors also
thank Drs A. Cohen, J. Cooper and Y. Kassir for helpful advice.
This work was supported by the Israel Science Foundation
(Grants No. 373/99 and No. 378/03). Funding to pay the
Open Access publication charges for this article was provided
by the Israel Science Foundation.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Aoki,K., Nakahara,K., Ikegawa,C., Seto,M., Takahashi,T., Minowada,J.,
Strominger,J.L., Maziarz,R.T. and Kasai,M. (1994) Nuclear
proteins binding to a novel target sequence within the recombination
hotspot regions of Bcl-2 and the immunoglobulin DH gene family.
Oncogene, 9, 1109–1115.
2. Aoki,K., Suzuki,K., Sugano,T., Tasaka,T., Nakahara,K., Kuge,O.,
Omori,A. and Kasai,M. (1995) A novel gene, Translin, encodes a
recombination hotspot binding protein associated with chromosomal
translocations. Nature Genet., 10, 167–174.
3. VanLoock,M.S., Yu,X., Kasai,M. and Egelman,E.H. (2001) Electron
microscopic studies of the translin octameric ring. J. Struct. Biol.,
135, 58–66.
4. Aharoni,A., Baran,N. and Manor,H. (1993) Characterization of a
multisubunit human protein which selectively binds single stranded
d(GA)n and d(GT)n sequence repeats in DNA. Nucleic Acids Res., 21,
5221–5228.
5. Jacob,E., Pucshansky,L., Zeruya,E., Baran,N. and Manor,H. (2004) The
human protein translin specifically binds single-stranded microsatellite
repeats, d(GT)n, and G-strand telomeric repeats d(TTAGGG)n:
a study of the binding parameters. J. Mol. Biol., 344, 939–950.
6. Cohen,S., Jacob,E. and Manor,H. (2004) Effects of single-stranded DNA
binding proteins on primer extension by telomerase. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta, 1679, 129–140.
7. Han,J.R., Yiu,G.K. and Hecht,N.B. (1995) Testis/brain RNA-binding
protein attaches translationally repressed and transported mRNAs to
microtubules. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 92, 9550–9554.
8. Aoki,K., Inazawa,J., Takahashi,T., Nakahara,K. and Kasai,M. (1997)
Genomic structure and chromosomal localization of the gene encoding
translin, a recombination hotspot binding protein. Genomics, 43,
237–241.
Figure 9. Analysis of the interaction between the S.pombe Translin and the
S.pombe TRAX by the yeast two-hybrid technique. The complete ORFs of the
S.pombe Translin and TRAX were subcloned in-frame into the pGAD-C
(GAL4 activation domain) and pGBD-C (GAL4 binding domain) vectors
(28). Pairs of binding domain (BD) and activation domain (AD) constructs
were cotransfected into the S.cerevisiae strain Y1183. Co-transformants were
assayed for the activation of the ADE2 reporter gene by streaking on SD
medium lacking leucine, tryptophan and adenine, as described in Materials
and Methods. A, AD and BD-Translin; B, AD-Translin and BD; C, AD-
Translin and BD-Translin; D, AD-Translin and BD-TRAX; E, AD-TRAX
and BD-Translin; F, AD-TRAX and BD-TRAX; G, AD-TRAX and BD;
H, AD and BD-TRAX.
4138 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 13
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
9. Castro,A., Peter,M., Magnaghi-Jaulin,L., Vigneron,S., Loyaux,D.,
Lorca,T. and Labbe,J.C. (2000) Part of Xenopus translin is localized in the
centrosomes during mitosis. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 276,
515–523.
10. Wood,V., Gwilliam,R., Rajandream,M.A., Lyne,M., Lyne,R.,
Stewart,A., Sgouros,J., Peat,N., Hayles,J., Baker,S. et al. (2002) The
genome sequence of Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Nature, 415, 871–880.
11. Pascal,J.M., Hart,P.J., Hecht,N.B. and Robertus,J.D. (2002) Crystal
structure of TB-RBP, a novel RNA-binding and regulating protein.
J. Mol. Biol., 319, 1049–1057.
12. Sugiura,I., Sasaki,C., Hasegawa,T., Kohno,T., Sugio,S., Moriyama,H.,
Kasai,M. and Matsuzaki,T. (2004) Structure of human translin at 2.2
angstrom resolution. Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr., 60, 674–679.
13. Aoki,K., Ishida,R. and Kasai,M. (1997) Isolation and characterization of a
cDNA encoding a Translin-like protein, TRAX. FEBS Lett., 401,
109–112.
14. Cho,Y.S., Chennathukuzhi,V.M., Handel,M.A., Eppig,J. and Hecht,N.B.
(2004) The relative levels of translin-associated factor X (TRAX) and
testis brain RNA-binding protein determine their nucleocytoplasmic
distribution in male germ cells. J. Biol. Chem., 279, 31514–31523.
15. Chennathukuzhi,V.M., Kurihara,Y., Bray,J.D. and Hecht,N.B. (2001)
Trax (translin-associated factor X), a primarily cytoplasmic protein,
inhibits the binding of TB-RBP (translin) to RNA. J. Biol. Chem.,
276, 13256–13263.
16. Han,J.R., Gu,W. and Hecht,N.B. (1995) Testis-brain RNA-binding
protein, a testicular translational regulatory RNA-binding protein, is
present in the brain and binds to the 30 untranslated regions of transported
brain mRNAs. Biol. Reprod., 53, 707–717.
17. Wu,X.Q. and Hecht,N.B. (2000) Mouse testis brain ribonucleic
acid-binding protein/translin colocalizes with microtubules and is
immunoprecipitated with messenger ribonucleic acids encoding myelin
basic protein, alpha calmodulin kinase II, and protamines 1 and 2.
Biol. Reprod., 62, 720–725.
18. Finkenstadt,P.M., Kang,W.S., Jeon,M., Taira,E., Tang,W.Z. and
Baraban,J.M. (2000) Somatodendritic localization of Translin,
a component of the Translin/Trax RNA binding complex.
J. Neurochem., 75, 1754–1762.
19. Morales,C.R., Lefrancois,S., Chennathukuzhi,V., El-Alfy,M., Wu,X.Q.,
Yang,J.X., Gerton,G.L. and Hecht,N.B. (2002) A TB-RBP and Ter
ATPase complex accompanies specific mRNAs from nuclei through the
nuclear pores and into intercellular bridges in mouse male germ cells.
Dev. Biol., 246, 480–494.
20. Chennathukuzhi,V., Morales,C.R., El-Alfy,M. and Hecht,N.B. (2003)
The kinesin KIF17b and RNA-binding protein TB-RBP transport specific
cAMP-responsive element modulator-regulated mRNAs in male germ
cells. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 100, 15566–15571.
21. Yang,J.X., Chennathukuzhi,V., Miki,K., O’Brien,D.A. and Hecht,N.B.
(2003) Mouse testis brain RNA-binding protein/translin selectively
binds to the messenger RNA of the fibrous sheath protein glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate dehydrogenase-S and suppresses its translation in vitro.
Biol. Reprod., 68, 853–859.
22. Moreno,S., Klar,A. and Nurse,P. (1991) Molecular genetic-analysis of
fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Methods Enzymol., 194,
795–823.
23. Decottignies,A., Sanchez-Perez,I. and Nurse,P. (2003)
Schizosaccharomyces pombe essential genes: a pilot study. Genome Res.,
13, 399–406.
24. Suga,M. and Hatakeyama,T. (2001) High efficiency transformation of
Schizosaccharomyces pombe pretreated with thiol compounds by
electroporation. Yeast, 18, 1015–1021.
25. Hoffman,C.S. and Winston,F. (1987) A ten-minute DNA preparation
from yeast efficiently releases autonomous plasmids for transformation
of Escherichia coli. Gene, 57, 267–272.
26. Sambrook,J., Fritsch,E.F. and Maniatis,T. (1989) Molecular Cloning,
A Laboratory Manual. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press,
Cold Spring Harbor, NY.
27. Martin,R.G. and Ames,B.N. (1961) A method for determining the
sedimentation behavior of enzymes: application to protein mixtures.
J. Biol. Chem., 236, 1372–1379.
28. James,P., Halladay,J. and Craig,E.A. (1996) Genomic libraries and a host
strain designed for highly efficient two-hybrid selection in yeast.
Genetics, 144, 1425–1436.
29. Harlow,E. and Lane,D.P. (1988) Antibodies: A Laboratory Manual.
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY.
30. Aoki,K., Suzuki,K., Ishida,R. and Kasai,M. (1999) The DNA binding
activity of Translin is mediated by a basic region in the ring-shaped
structure conserved in evolution. FEBS Lett., 443, 363–366.
31. Bates,P.A., Kelley,L.A., MacCallum,R.M. and Sternberg,M.J.E. (2001)
Enhancement of protein modeling by human intervention in applying the
automatic programs 3D-JIGSAW and 3D-PSSM. Proteins, (Suppl. 5),
39–46.
32. Kelley,L.A., MacCallum,R.M. and Sternberg,M.J.E. (2000) Enhanced
genome annotation using structural profiles in the program 3D-PSSM.
J. Mol. Biol., 299, 499–520.
33. Lee,S.P., Fuior,E., Lewis,M.S. and Han,M.K. (2001) Analytical
ultracentrifugation studies of translin: analysis of protein–DNA
interactions using a single-stranded fluorogenic oligonucleotide.
Biochemistry, 40, 14081–14088.
34. Chennathukuzhi,V., Stein,J.M., Abel,T., Donlon,S., Yang,S.C.,
Miller,J.P., Allman,D.M., Simmons,R.A. and Hecht,N.B. (2003)
Mice deficient for testis-brain RNA-binding protein exhibit a coordinate
loss of TRAX, reduced fertility, altered gene expression in the brain,
and behavioral changes. Mol. Cell. Biol., 23, 6419–6434.
35. Yang,S.C., Cho,Y.S., Chennathukuzhi,V.M., Underkoffler,L.A.,
Loomes,K. and Hecht,N.B. (2004) Translin-associated factor X is
post-transcriptionally regulated by its partner protein TB-RBP, and both
are essential for normal cell proliferation. J. Biol. Chem., 279,
12605–12614.
36. Ishida,R., Okado,H., Sato,H., Shionoiri,C., Aoki,K. and Kasai,M. (2002)
A role for the octameric ring protein, Translin, in mitotic cell division.
FEBS Lett., 525, 105–110.
37. Yang,S.C. and Hecht,N.B. (2004) Translin associated protein X is
essential for cellular proliferation. FEBS Lett., 576, 221–225.
38. Wu,X.Q., Xu,L.H. and Hecht,N.B. (1998) Dimerization of the testis brain
RNA-binding protein (translin) is mediated through its C-terminus and is
required for DNA- and RNA-binding. Nucleic Acids Res., 26, 1675–1680.
39. Ohashi,S., Kobayashi,S., Omori,K., Ohara,T., Omae,A., Muramatsu,T.,
Li,Y.M. and Anzai,K. (2000) The single-stranded DNA- and
RNA-binding proteins pur alpha and pur beta link BC1 RNA to
microtubules through binding to the dendrite-targeting RNA motifs.
J. Neurochem., 75, 1781–1790.
40. Hecht,N.B. (2000) Intracellular and intercellular transport of many germ
cell mRNAs is mediated by the DNA- and RNA-Binding protein,
testis-brain RNA-binding protein (TB-RBP). Mol. Reprod. Dev., 56,
252–253.
41. Li,Z. and Baraban,J.M. (2004) High affinity binding of the Translin/Trax
complex to RNA does not require the presence of Y or H elements.
Brain Res Mol Brain Res, 120, 123–129.
42. Finkenstadt,P.M., Jeon,M. and Baraban,J.M. (2002) Trax is a component
of the Translin-containing RNA binding complex. J. Neurochem., 83,
202–210.
43. Bray,J.D., Chennathukuzhi,V.M. and Hecht,N.B. (2002) Identification
and characterization of cDNAs encoding four novel proteins that interact
with translin associated factor-X. Genomics, 79, 799–808.
44. Ayoub,N., Goldshmidt,I., Lyakhovetsky,R. and Cohen,A. (2000)
A fission yeast repression element cooperates with centromere-like
sequences and defines a mat silent domain boundary. Genetics,
156, 983–994.
45. Ayoub,N., Goldshmidt,I. and Cohen,A. (1999) Position effect variegation
at the mating-type locus of fission yeast: a cis-acting element inhibits
covariegated expression of genes in the silent and expressed domains.
Genetics, 152, 495–508.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 13 4139
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 1, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
