Visualization of cardiac muscle thin ﬁlaments and
measurement of their lengths by electron tomography
Thomas Burgoyne, Farina Muhamad, and Pradeep K. Luther*
Molecular Medicine Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, Exhibition
Road, London SW7 2AZ, UK
Received 29 August 2007; revised 19 December 2007; accepted 20 December 2007; online publish-ahead-of-print 4 January 2008
Time for primary review: 29 days
Aims An intriguing difference between vertebrate skeletal and cardiac muscles is that the lengths of the
thin ﬁlaments are constant in the former but variable in the latter. The thick ﬁlaments have constant
lengths in both types of muscles. The contractile behaviour of a muscle is affected by the lengths of
both types of ﬁlaments as the tension generated during contraction depends on the amount of ﬁlament
overlap. To understand the behaviour of cardiac muscle, it is important to know the distribution of the
thin ﬁlament lengths. The previous detailed analysis by Robinson and Winegrad used serial transverse
sections to determine the lengths of the thin ﬁlaments. However, the precision, set by the 100 nm
section thickness, was low. Here, we have used electron tomography to produce 3D images of rat and
mouse cardiac muscles in which we can actually see individual thin ﬁlaments up to the free ends and
see that these free ends have variable locations. For comparison, we also measure the thin ﬁlament
lengths in skeletal muscle (frog sartorius).
Methods and results Cardiac papillary muscles were obtained from a rat (Sprague–Dawley) and a mouse
(C57/B6). Skeletal muscle (sartorius) was obtained from a frog (Rana pipiens). Longitudinal sections
(100 nm thick) were used to produce tilt series and tomograms from which the thin ﬁlament paths
were traced. Cardiac papillary muscle thin ﬁlaments in rat and mouse range from 0.94 to 1.10 mm,
with a mean length of 1.04 mm and standard deviation of 0.03 mm. For frog sartorius muscle, the
thin ﬁlament length was 0.94 mm with standard deviation of 0.01 mm.
Conclusion Electron tomography of cardiac and skeletal muscles allows direct visualization and high
precision measurement of the lengths of thin ﬁlaments.
KEYWORDS
Electron microscopy;
Contractile function;
Contractile apparatus;
Myocytes
1. Introduction
In striated muscles, the thick ﬁlaments and the A-band have
remarkably constant structure.1–4 The thin ﬁlaments have
constant lengths in skeletal muscle but not in cardiac
muscle.4–6 The tension generated during muscular contrac-
tion varies as the overlap of the thick and thin ﬁlaments7
and hence knowledge of the thin ﬁlament lengths and
their variability is very important.4–10 Two previous studies
have measured thin ﬁlament lengths in cardiac muscle by
very different methods. Robinson and Winegrad6 used
serial transverse sections spanning from the Z-disc to the
M-band to measure the thin ﬁlament lengths from the
number of transverse sections spanned. The precision of
the length measurement in this method is low as it is
determined by the section thickness 100 nm. In this
important paper, Robinson and Winegrad showed that thin
ﬁlaments from relatively compliant atria have a large
range of lengths, 0.5 mm, compared with a narrow range,
0.2 mm, in thin ﬁlaments from less compliant ventricles. Lit-
tleﬁeld and Fowler11 used ﬂuorescence microscopy com-
bined with deconvolution analysis to measure the thin
ﬁlament lengths. Their method has higher precision, 9 nm,
for skeletal muscle compared with 50 nm for cardiac
muscle. The obvious method for measuring ﬁlament
lengths with high precision is by electron microscopy of
longitudinal sections. However, direct viewing of electron
micrographs has ambiguity of ﬁlament superimposition
through the section depth, and ambiguity whether the ﬁla-
ment end is true or has obliquely exited the section.
Ideally, we should measure the lengths from a 3D image
where the path of every single thin ﬁlament can be seen* Corresponding author. Tel: þ44 20 7594 3239; fax: þ44 20 7594 3119.
E-mail address: p.luther@imperial.ac.uk
Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. & The Author 2008.
For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display
the open access version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the
Journal, Learned Society and Oxford University Press are attributed as the original place of publication with correct citation details given; if
an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated.
For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
Cardiovascular Research (2008) 77, 707–712
doi:10.1093/cvr/cvm117
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 27, 2014
http://cardiovascres.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
right up to the ﬁlament terminus. This is exactly what elec-
tron tomography can provide.12,13 Here, we have produced
tomograms of longitudinal sections in mammalian cardiac
muscle to view a large region centred at the M-band. We
mapped all the thick and thin ﬁlaments present within a
selected sarcomere region paying special attention to the
terminal points (pointed ends) of the thin ﬁlaments. Follow-
ing measurement of the lengths of the sarcomeres from
which each tomogram was produced, we determined the
lengths of all the thin ﬁlaments to within 10 nm. For com-
parison, the same measurements were also carried out for
skeletal muscle in frog.
2. Methods
2.1 Sample preparation
Rat (Sprague–Dawley) papillary muscle was dissected under Krebs
with 30 mM BDM, pinned on a Petri dish with a Sylgard gel base,
aerated with 95% oxygen/5% carbon dioxide. Then the Krebs/BDM
was replaced with Krebs and the aeration continued for half an
hour. The muscle was ﬁxed in 3% glutaraldehyde for 1 h, rinsed in
Krebs, ﬁxed in aqueous 1% osmium tetroxide, dehydrated in an
acetone series, and embedded in Araldite. The same method was
used for mouse papillary muscle. A cardiac MyBP-C knockout
mouse (C57/B6) was used; we expect the thin ﬁlaments to be
normal in this muscle.14 The investigation conforms to the Guide
for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals published by the US
National Institutes of Health (NIH Publication No. 85-23, revised
1996). Frog sartorius muscle was ﬁxed in 3% glutaraldehyde in situ
by exposing muscle on the dissected limb and then processed as
above. For each sample, 100 nm thin sections were cut with a
Reichert Ultracut-E and stained with 2% uranyl acetate and Reynolds
lead citrate. At this thickness, there are 2.5 unit cells of the
40 nm myosin ﬁlament lattice within the depth of the section.
2.2 Electron microscopy and tilt series
The electron microscopy and tilt series recording of rat papillary
and frog sartorius muscle was done with a JEOL 1200 EX electron
microscope. To record the tilt series, the sample was tilted manually
from 2608 to þ608 in 28 steps and images recorded at 15 000 mag-
niﬁcation on a Teitz Fastscan CCD camera with 1024  1024 pixels. A
tilt/rotate holder was used to obtain dual-axes tilt series. The
defocus was set for the ﬁrst minimum in the Fourier transform to
fall at 1/5 nm21. Hence, we estimate that our ﬁlament length
measurements have precision better than 10 nm. For all the single-
axis tilt series in this study, the tilt axis was along the ﬁlaments. For
the mouse tomography, the tilt series were recorded using a Philips
CM300 FEG electron microscope operated at 300 kV at Florida State
University in Tallahassee, FL, and recorded at 15 000 or 20 000
magniﬁcation on to a Teitz TemCam-F224HD 2k  2k CCD camera.
2.3 Tomography
Single-axis and dual-axes tilt series for rat papillary and frog sartor-
ius muscle were aligned and back-projected using Imod.15 The
mouse tilt series were aligned and back-projected using Protomo
software.16 The tracing and modelling of the actin and myosin ﬁla-
ments were done using Imod and the Slicer option which allows
tilting of the tomogram to move sets of ﬁlaments into the plane
of view.
2.4 Measurement of thin ﬁlament length
To measure the thin ﬁlament lengths, we found it useful to ﬁrst
trace the paths of the thin and thick ﬁlaments using the modelling
option in Imod. During the modelling, each thin ﬁlament was
assigned a number which was used to track the ﬁlament for sub-
sequent measurements. A 2D image of the model rotated to make
the ﬁlaments horizontal and where most of the thin ﬁlaments
ends were visible was exported to ImageJ (http://rsb.info.nih.
gov/ij/). The x-coordinate was recorded for each ﬁlament. Each
ﬁlament could be identiﬁed and its number determined by the
shape of its path or by the path of the surrounding thick or thin ﬁla-
ments. The x-coordinate of the M-band was found from the proﬁle
plot of the tomogram sections or projections of a subset. Calibration
of the electron microscope images and the tomogram is a vital step
for this study, as chemical processing for electron microscopy as
well as the electron radiation during the electron microscopy
causes shrinkage of the sample by varying amounts.17,18 We used
the myosin crossbridge repeat of 43 nm19 to provide internal cali-
bration; this was done from the Fourier transform of selected
regions using ImageJ. If the crossbridge repeat is not clear in the
Fourier transform, then the width of the A-band, 1.63 mm, can be
used for internal calibration.1 The sarcomere lengths for the
regions used were measured from the CCD images or by recording
at 20 000 using electron microscope ﬁlm (Kodak S0-163).
3. Results
We show a schematic view of a striated muscle sarcomere in
Figure 1. Although the actin ﬁlaments span the width of the
Z-disc,20 here we measure the lengths of the thin ﬁlaments
from the centre of the Z-disc to the free (pointed) ends of
the thin ﬁlaments (arrowed). The H-zone is the region in
the middle of the A-band devoid of actin ﬁlaments. It is
only clearly visible in electron micrographs of skeletal
muscle where the thin ﬁlaments have constant lengths.
Figure 2 shows snapshots of the tomograms and models
Figure 1 Components of the muscle sarcomere. The A-band comprises thick ﬁlaments (TF) and the I-band comprises thin ﬁlaments (tf). The Z-disc (Z-line,
Z-band, and label Z) forms the sarcomere boundary and is at the centre of the I-band. Actin ﬁlaments are tethered at the Z-disc in a square lattice. Actin ﬁla-
ments traverse the full width of the Z-disc,20 but in this study, we measure the length to the centre of the Z-disc. The thin ﬁlament lengths from the tomogram
were calculated from the half sarcomere length and the separation of the actin ﬁlament terminal points (arrows) from the centre of the M-band (M). The H-zone
(H) is the central A-band region not overlapped by thin ﬁlaments and is typically clearly seen in electron micrographs of skeletal muscle.
T. Burgoyne et al.708
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 27, 2014
http://cardiovascres.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
produced for rat and mouse cardiac and frog skeletal
muscle. The tomograms for this study were derived from
100 nm thick sections and hence scanning through the
depth of the 3D reconstruction, we could clearly identify
at least two layers of the myosin ﬁlament lattice. The tomo-
grams were ﬁltered using non-linear anisotropic diffusion
methods to improve the visualization of ﬁne structure.21 Dis-
tribution histograms of the thin ﬁlament length measure-
ments are shown in Figure 3 and the overall results are
summarized in Table 1.
3.1 Rat papillary muscle
Figure 2A shows the region from which one of the dual-tilt
axes tilt series for rat papillary muscle was recorded. It is
not necessary to produce a tomogram of a whole sarcomere
or even of a complete half sarcomere. Instead a generously
large 1 mm region centred at the M-band that contains all
the free (pointed) ends of the thin ﬁlaments from both sar-
comeres gives best value per tomogram, as we then only
need the sarcomere length for the region used to measure
Figure 3 Distribution of thin ﬁlament lengths in (A) rat cardiac papillary, (B)
mouse cardiac papillary, and (C) frog skeletal sartorius muscles. Rat and
mouse thin ﬁlaments have a broad distribution of lengths with a mean of
1.04 and 1.03 mm, respectively, and standard deviation of 30 nm. In com-
parison with cardiac thin ﬁlaments, the distribution for skeletal muscle thin
ﬁlaments (C) is very sharp, and within the experimental error, the thin ﬁla-
ments have uniform lengths of 0.94 nm.
Figure 2 Electron tomography to measure thin ﬁlament lengths in rat
cardiac, mouse cardiac, and frog skeletal muscle. (A) Electron micrograph
of a thin section of rat cardiac (papillary) muscle showing the approximate
region used to produce one of the rat muscle tomograms in this study.
Using the crossbridge 43 nm periodicity for internal calibration, the sarco-
mere length was 2.27 mm. M marks the location of the M-band in this
ﬁgure. (B) An example 2D slice from one of the tomograms of rat papillary
muscle. Using Imod, the thick ﬁlaments were traced in red and the thin ﬁla-
ments were traced in various colours. The left side and the right side provided
two independent sets of data for thin ﬁlament measurements. For the ﬁla-
ment tracing, the Imod slicer option was used to tilt the tomogram so that
particular sets of thin ﬁlaments were in the plane of the view. (C) A model
produced with Imod of the thin and thick ﬁlaments contained in the tomo-
gram for (B). (D) An example 2D slice from the tomogram of mouse papillary
muscle. Here, thick and thin ﬁlaments are clearer than for the rat tomogram
in (B). (E) IMOD model produced from the tomogram of mouse papillary
muscle in (D) showing the thick ﬁlaments (red) and thin ﬁlaments (various
colours). (F) An example 2D slice from the tomogram of frog sartorius
muscle. (G) Imod model for frog showing thick (red) and thin (various
colours) ﬁlaments. Scale bars: (A) 0.25 mm, (B, D, F) 100 nm.
Visualization and measurement of cardiac muscle 709
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 27, 2014
http://cardiovascres.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
the thin ﬁlament lengths. A single example slice from the
tomogram is shown in Figure 2B. Although this slice is
noisy, typical of electron tomograms, it shows thick ﬁla-
ments and fragments of thin ﬁlaments. They are seen
more clearly if the image is viewed at a glancing angle
from the left or right side of the page. Both sets of ﬁlaments
were modelled by tracing in Imod using the Slicer option
that tilts the tomogram to move sets of ﬁlaments into the
plane of view. Additionally, the tomogram was frequently
scanned in Z to observe the emergence and disappearance
of ﬁlaments, specially noting the terminal points. Although
it was not essential, we found it useful to trace the
myosin ﬁlaments ﬁrst as this simpliﬁed the subsequent
tracing of the actin ﬁlaments. Part of the modelled tomo-
gram is shown in Figure 2C, with thick red lines depicting
the thick ﬁlaments and thin multi-coloured lines depicting
the thin ﬁlaments. The whole model is shown as a movie
in the Supplementary material online. In this tomogram,
as in the ones from mouse cardiac and frog skeletal, thin
ﬁlaments occasionally had wavy paths. Lack of straightness
is often observed in tomograms.22 The paths of the thin ﬁla-
ments were drawn paying special attention to the terminus.
The variable location of the thin ﬁlament ends shows
directly that thin ﬁlaments have variable lengths in
cardiac muscle. The results of the measurement are sum-
marized in the graph in Figure 3A and in Table 1. The
shape of the distribution is skewed to the smaller lengths.
The thin ﬁlaments range in length from 0.96 to 1.10 mm
and have a mean length of 1.04 mm with a standard devi-
ation of 0.03 mm. We also measured the thin ﬁlaments
along the wavy paths and this resulted in an increase by
10 nm. The overall results in Table 1 are for straight
ﬁlaments.
3.2 Mouse papillary muscle
A single 2D slice from the tomogram of mouse papillary
muscle is shown in Figure 2D. In this case, the favourable
orientation of the ﬁbre in the section cut by ultramicrotomy
resulted in well-aligned ﬁlaments in the tomogram. We see
clear thick ﬁlaments with two actin ﬁlaments between
each pair. Part of the modelled region is shown in Figure 2E.
The variable position of the thin ﬁlament ends is clearly
seen. The results are summarized in the distribution histo-
gram in Figure 3B. As in rat papillary, the shape of the distri-
bution is skewed to the smaller lengths. The thin ﬁlament
lengths are similar to rat papillary muscle; they range
from 0.94 to 1.08 mm and have mean length of 1.03 mm
with a standard deviation of 0.03 mm. We have also calcu-
lated tomograms and ﬁlament models for wild-type murine
papillary muscle and similar values were obtained (data
not shown).
3.3 Frog skeletal muscle
For comparison with cardiac muscle, skeletal muscle (frog
sartorius) was also examined. A single slice of the frog tomo-
gram is shown in Figure 2F. The model of the thick and thin
ﬁlaments is shown in part in Figure 2G and in full in the Sup-
plementary material online. We see directly from the tomo-
gram and the distribution graphs in Figure 3C that the thin
ﬁlaments lengths are sharply deﬁned. We measured a
mean length of 0.94 mm with a very small standard deviation
of 14 nm.
4. Discussion
We have used electron tomography to measure the lengths
of thin ﬁlaments in cardiac muscle with greater precision
than was possible in previous studies.6 The 3D images pro-
duced here allow us to directly visualize a large region of
thin ﬁlaments up to the free ends. In rat and mouse ventri-
cular muscle, we ﬁnd that the mean length of the thin ﬁla-
ments is 1.03 mm with standard deviation of 0.03 mm.
Although the thin ﬁlament lengths are variable, the distri-
bution graphs in Figure 3 have distinct peaks, showing that
there must be some length maintaining mechanism in
cardiac muscle in the absence of stoichiometric amounts
of nebulin.23 Our comparison with skeletal muscle, frog sar-
torius, shows that the skeletal thin ﬁlaments have a length
of 0.94+0.01 mm, and hence have highly uniform lengths.
4.1 Preparation technique
We have used conventional processing methods to prepare
our samples for electron microscopy (consisting of glutaral-
dehyde and osmium ﬁxation, dehydration in acetone series,
and embedding in epoxy resin). Similar methods were used
in previous length measurement studies.4,6 By using electron
tomography, we have been able to measure the lengths with
greater precision than was possible before. We have also
made some measurements on a frog skeletal muscle (sartor-
ius) processed by rapid-freezing/freeze substitution proto-
cols which resulted in overall superior preservation (data
not shown). The thin ﬁlaments were slightly longer in the
rapid frozen sample with mean length of 0.99 mm. Conven-
tional processing may therefore not be able to preserve
the thin ﬁlaments perfectly. Hence, it is possible that the
measurements for rat and mouse may be longer in situ by
0.05 mm. An obvious improvement to the current study
would be to study cardiac muscle by rapid freezing
protocols.
4.2 Application of electron tomography
to measure thin ﬁlament length
The attraction of tomography for this study is that we actu-
ally see the ﬁlaments and hence we can measure their
lengths with precision better than 10 nm. We have used
both single-axis and dual-axes tomograms, but since we
are measuring an essentially linear object, single-axis tilt
series with the tilt axis along the ﬁlament is sufﬁcient for
measurements of the thin ﬁlament lengths. For the tomogra-
phy, our preferred size of sample in the electron microscope
Table 1 Summary of thin ﬁlament lengths
Type of muscle Filament range
(mm)
Filament length (mm)
Rat cardiac
papillary
0.92–1.10 1.04+0.03 (131
ﬁlaments)
Mouse cardiac
papillary
0.94–1.08 1.03+0.03 (103
ﬁlaments)
Frog skeletal
sartorius
0.90–0.97 0.94+0.014 (73
ﬁlaments)
T. Burgoyne et al.710
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 27, 2014
http://cardiovascres.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
was 1 mm square centred at the M-band. This includes suf-
ﬁcient actin ﬁlament regions on each side and hence gave
best value per tomogram. If one used a complete half sarco-
mere to follow the thin ﬁlaments along their entire length,
the greater challenge would be tracing the paths through
the I-band where the lattice transforms from the square
lattice of the Z-band to the hexagonal lattice of the
A-band. For simplicity, we have assumed a straight path
from the Z-band to the thin ﬁlament terminus. Lack of
straightness is often observed in electron tomograms22 and
this may be the cause for the wavy path of the thin ﬁlaments
that we observed in these tomograms. We estimate that if
the measurement of the ﬁlament lengths is done along the
contours, it adds 10 nm to the ﬁlament length within the
tomogram region.
In the previous study by Robinson and Winegrad,5,6 the
precision of the measurement of thin ﬁlament length was
set by the section thickness of 100 nm. They found a
range of 0.9–1.1 mm for rat papillary muscle, almost
exactly what we have found (0.96–1.1 mm). The range was
much larger for atrial muscle, 0.6–1.1 mm. They concluded
that double overlap of the thin ﬁlaments at the M-band
should exist over a large range of sarcomere lengths. In
our tomograms, we only occasionally saw ﬁlaments going
into the M-band region. Tomography would be excellent
for measuring the lengths of thin ﬁlaments in atrial muscle
and for examining the behaviour of thin ﬁlaments if and
when they overlap within the M-band. Tomography would
also resolve any confusion of thin ﬁlaments with M-band
components like M-ﬁlaments.24
Littleﬁeld and Fowler11 used distribution deconvolution
analysis of ﬂuorescence images to measure thin ﬁlament
lengths with high precision in fast and slow skeletal ﬁbres
and cardiomyocytes. It is interesting that thin ﬁlaments in
fast muscles from different species measured with high
10 nm precision by Littleﬁeld and Fowler (chicken pectoralis
major), by Sosa et al.1 (rabbit psoas), and by us (frog sartor-
ius muscles) have nearly the same lengths: 1.003+0.015;
1.11+0.03; 0.99+0.01 mm (fast-freezing) and 0.94+
0.01 mm (conventional processing), respectively.
4.3 Regulation of thin ﬁlament lengths
The length of actin ﬁlaments in muscle is regulated by gain
or loss of monomers at the barbed end at the Z-disc or the
pointed end (free end) in the A-band and by the interaction
of capping proteins, CapZ at the Z-disc, and tropomodulin at
the barbed end.25 The giant protein nebulin (500–800 kDa),
composed of repeating domains of 35 residues, has a length
of 1 mm and is found associated with thin ﬁlaments in stoi-
chiometric amounts in skeletal muscle.26,27 There is now
plenty of evidence that nebulin maintains the length of
the thin ﬁlaments in skeletal muscle.23,27,28 Until recently,
nebulin was not found in cardiac muscle (although the
smaller related protein nebulette located at the Z-band
was found), hence this was thought to be the cause of the
variable thin ﬁlament lengths. However, nebulin has now
been found in cardiac muscle, although in miniscule
amounts.29 Conﬂicting data were obtained by Witt et al.23
when comparing tissue culture/RNAi knockdown approaches
and data in vivo: knockouts for example suggested the
assembly of shorter ﬁlaments in the absence of nebulin,23
whereas knockdowns reported a dramatic elongation in the
presence of reduced nebulin levels.30 With such low
amounts, nebulin may be shared between many thin ﬁla-
ments and Horowits31 has proposed a uniform scanning
model in which a nebulin molecule tethered at the Z-disc
may rotate about its length and hence interact with differ-
ent thin ﬁlaments. Our results allow us to comment on this
model. In Horowits’ model, the longest ﬁlament length
occurs for the most number of ﬁlaments, giving a distri-
bution of ﬁlament lengths quite different from the near bell-
shaped distribution that we have observed here.
4.4 Length–tension relationship in cardiac muscle
The classic length–tension relationship for skeletal muscle
under isometric contraction7 has its equivalence in cardiac
muscle but which is dominated by the steepness of the
ascending limb that arises due to the increasing calcium sen-
sitivity with increasing sarcomere length (Frank-Starling
Law) (for review see Allen and Kentish32). Weiwad et al.33
have used Fourier analysis to show the length–tension
relationship for a single cardiac myocyte. At intermediate
levels of Ca2þ, they found a distinct peak separating the
ascending and descending limbs at 2.4 mm sarcomere
length. Comparison with skeletal muscle suggests that thin
ﬁlaments in cardiac muscle may in fact be longer,
1.2 mm, and have more uniform lengths. Our results and
those of previous workers5,11 show smaller, 1 mm, but vari-
able lengths. Further research is therefore required to
resolve this controversy between the measurements of
thin ﬁlament lengths so far by electron microscopy and the
lengths suggested by length–tension experiments.
In conclusion, electron tomography offers a new method
to measure thin ﬁlament lengths in cardiac muscle with
high precision. The distribution graphs that we have deter-
mined for cardiac muscle thin ﬁlaments give valuable tests
for any model of ﬁlament length regulation.
Supplementary material
Supplementary material is available at Cardiovascular
Research online.
Acknowledgements
We are most grateful to the following scientists: Kenneth Taylor for
providing access to electron microscope facilities for the tomogra-
phy of the mouse sample; Rick Moss for the provision of cardiac
muscle of a cardiac MyBP-C-ko mouse; Cathy Timson for help with
the sample preparations; and Jon Kentish, Steve Marston, and
John Squire for help with the cardiac sample preparations and for
valuable discussions.
Conﬂict of interest: none declared.
Funding
This research was funded by the British Heart Foundation,
Grants PG/06/010/20256 and FS/05/019.
References
1. Sosa H, Popp D, Ouyang G, Huxley HE. Ultrastructure of skeletal muscle
ﬁbers studied by a plunge quick freezing method: myoﬁlament lengths.
Biophys J 1994;67:283–292.
Visualization and measurement of cardiac muscle 711
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 27, 2014
http://cardiovascres.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
2. Squire JM. Architecture and function in the muscle sarcomere. Curr Opin
Struct Biol 1997;7:247–257.
3. Luther PK, Squire JM, Forey PL. Evolution of myosin ﬁlament arrange-
ments in vertebrate skeletal muscle. J Morphol 1996;229:325–335.
4. Page SG, Huxley HE. Filament lengths in striated muscle. J Cell Biol 1963;
19:369–390.
5. Robinson TF, Winegrad S. Variation of thin ﬁlament length in heart
muscles. Nature 1977;267:74–75.
6. Robinson TF, Winegrad S. The measurement and dynamic implications of
thin ﬁlament lengths in heart muscle. J Physiol 1979;286:607–619.
7. Gordon AM, Huxley AF, Julian FJ. The variation in isometric tension with
sarcomere length in vertebrate muscle ﬁbres. J Physiol 1966;184:
170–192.
8. Huxley HE. Electron microscopic studies on the structure of natural and
synthetic protein ﬁlaments from striated muscle. J Mol Biol 1963;7:
281–308.
9. Traeger L, Goldstein MA. Thin ﬁlaments are not of uniform length in rat
skeletal muscle. J Cell Biol 1983;96:100–103.
10. Granzier HL, Akster HA, Ter Keurs HE. Effect of thin ﬁlament length on
the force-sarcomere length relation of skeletal muscle. Am J Physiol
1991;260:C1060–C1070.
11. Littleﬁeld R, Fowler VM. Measurement of thin ﬁlament lengths by distrib-
uted deconvolution analysis of ﬂuorescence images. Biophys J 2002;82:
2548–2564.
12. Frank J, ed. Electron Tomography: Methods for Three-dimensional
Visualization of Structures in the Cell. 2nd ed. New York: Springer; 2006.
13. McIntosh R, Nicastro D, Mastronarde D. New views of cells in 3D: an intro-
duction to electron tomography. Trends Cell Biol 2005;15:43–51.
14. Harris SP, Bartley CR, Hacker TA, McDonald KS, Douglas PS, Greaser ML
et al. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in cardiac myosin binding protein-C
knockout mice. Circ Res 2002;90:594–601.
15. Mastronarde DN. Dual-axis tomography: an approach with alignment
methods that preserve resolution. J Struct Biol 1997;120:343–352.
16. Winkler H. 3D reconstruction and processing of volumetric data in
cryo-electron tomography. J Struct Biol 2007;157:126–137.
17. Luther PK, Lawrence MC, Crowther RA. A method for monitoring the col-
lapse of plastic sections as a function of electron dose. Ultramicroscopy
1988;24:7–18.
18. Luther PK. Sample shrinkage and radiation damage of plastic sections.
In: Frank J, ed. Electron Tomography: Methods for Three-
dimensional Visualization of Structure in the Cell. New York: Springer;
2006. 17–40.
19. Huxley HE, Brown W. The low-angle x-ray diagram of vertebrate striated
muscle and its behaviour during contraction and rigor. J Mol Biol 1967;
30:383–434.
20. Luther PK, Padron R, Ritter S, Craig R, Squire JM. Heterogeneity of
Z-band structure within a single muscle sarcomere: implications for sar-
comere assembly. J Mol Biol 2003;332:161–169.
21. Frangakis AS, Hegerl R. Noise reduction in electron tomographic recon-
structions using nonlinear anisotropic diffusion. J Struct Biol 2001;135:
239–250.
22. Winkler H, Taylor KA. Three-dimensional distortion correction applied to
tomographic reconstructions of sectioned crystals. Ultramicroscopy
1996;63:125–132.
23. Witt CC, Burkart C, Labeit D, McNabb M, Wu Y, Granzier H et al. Nebulin
regulates thin ﬁlament length, contractility, and Z-disk structure in vivo.
Embo J 2006;25:3843–3855.
24. Luther P, Squire J. Three-dimensional structure of the vertebrate muscle
M-region. J Mol Biol 1978;125:313–324.
25. Fischer RS, Fowler VM. Tropomodulins: life at the slow end. Trends Cell
Biol 2003;13:593–601.
26. Wang K, Wright J. Architecture of the sarcomere matrix of skeletal
muscle: immunoelectron microscopic evidence that suggests a set of par-
allel inextensible nebulin ﬁlaments anchored at the Z line. J Cell Biol
1988;107:2199–2212.
27. Kruger M, Wright J, Wang K. Nebulin as a length regulator of thin ﬁla-
ments of vertebrate skeletal muscles: correlation of thin ﬁlament
length, nebulin size, and epitope proﬁle. J Cell Biol 1991;115:97–107.
28. McElhinny AS, Kazmierski ST, Labeit S, Gregorio CC. Nebulin: the nebu-
lous, multifunctional giant of striated muscle. Trends Cardiovasc Med
2003;13:195–201.
29. Kazmierski ST, Antin PB, Witt CC, Huebner N, McElhinny AS, Labeit S
et al. The complete mouse nebulin gene sequence and the identiﬁcation
of cardiac nebulin. J Mol Biol 2003;328:835–846.
30. McElhinny AS, Schwach C, Valichnac M, Mount-Patrick S, Gregorio CC.
Nebulin regulates the assembly and lengths of the thin ﬁlaments in
striated muscle. J Cell Biol 2005;170:947–957.
31. Horowits R. Nebulin regulation of actin ﬁlament lengths: new angles.
Trends Cell Biol 2006;16:121–124.
32. Allen DG, Kentish JC. The cellular basis of the length-tension relation in
cardiac muscle. J Mol Cell Cardiol 1985;17:821–840.
33. Weiwad WK, Linke WA, Wussling MH. Sarcomere length-tension relation-
ship of rat cardiac myocytes at lengths greater than optimum. J Mol Cell
Cardiol 2000;32:247–259.
T. Burgoyne et al.712
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 27, 2014
http://cardiovascres.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
