Normalized Compression Distance for Gene
Expression Analysis
Matti Nykter1,2, Olli Yli-Harja2 and Ilya Shmulevich1
1Cancer Genomics Laboratory, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, USA
2Institute of Signal Processing, Tampere University of Technology, Tampere, Finland
Abstract— In this paper we show that the normalized com-
pression distance can be applied to gene expression data analysis.
Typically, microarray-based classification involves using a feature
subset selection method in connection with a specific distance
metric. The performance is dependent on the selection of the
methods. With our proposed approach there is no need for feature
subset or distance metric selection and all the data can be used
directly with the universal similarity metric. We demonstrate the
method on simulated and real microarray data.
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, microarray technology has become an impor-
tant tool in biomedical research, and in particular, cancer. A
common use involves finding genes that have clinical impor-
tance for the cancer type under study. Another very important
application is classification of microarray samples for clinical
diagnosis. A key element in microarray classification is feature
subset selection (FSS). One difficulty is that feature subset
depends on the method used to find features. Therefore, the
outcome of the classification algorithm depends on the feature
selection algorithm used.
In addition to FSS, another important aspect is the selection
of the distance metric used to determine the similarity of the
genes or samples. Several different distance metrics have been
proposed for microarray data. Despite this, no golden standard
exists. Thus, in addition to FSS the classification results also
depend on the distance metric that has been used.
Here we propose a new kind of approach to microarray
data analysis, based on the universal similarity metric [4]. This
metric is shown to be universal in the sense that it can uncover
all similarities uncovered by any other similarity metric. This
means that if any two data strings are similar in terms
of, for instance, correlation, they are also similar according
to the universal similarity metric. This metric is based on
the Kolmogorov complexity of the data strings. Kolmogorov
complexity K(x) of the string x is the shortest binary program
with no input that outputs x. Further, Kolmogorov complexity
of x given y is the length of the shortest binary program that
on input y outputs x; this is denoted by K(x|y). The universal
similarity metric is defined as
DTSM (x, y) =
max(K(x|y),K(y|x))
max(K(x),K(y))
. (1)
In practice Kolmogorov complexity can not be computed
directly. Thus we need to approximate it with real compres-
sion algorithms. Replacing Kolmogorov complexity by a real
compressor C(x), such as gzip, and performing some manip-
ulations, we obtain a definition for a normalized compression
distance (NCD)
DNCD(x, y) =
C(xy) −min(C(x), C(y))
max(C(x), C(y))
. (2)
Term C(xy) denotes the compression of the concatenation of
x and y. Details about this metric can be found in [4], [2].
Here we show that the NCD can be potentially useful for
microarray data analysis. The proposed approach has two
obvious benefits. First, we do not need to apply any feature
selection algorithm and can use all available data. Second, due
to the universality of the similarity metric we do not need to
concern ourselves with the selection of a similarity metric.
II. METHODS AND RESULTS
Several applications of NCD have been shown previously. It
has successfully been applied to measuring protein similarity
[3], clustering organisms based on mitochondrial genomes, and
classifying music files [2]. These applications have two main
differences compared to microarray data. Firstly, there is a
clear order of the samples and secondly, the sequences are
over a finite alphabet. In addition, microarray data are fairly
noisy, which is a problem in terms of data compression.
An often used technique to reduce noise in microarray data
is to quantize the data into a small number of quantization
levels. With quantization we manage also to obtain a finite
alphabet for the microarray data. The problem of data ordering
is more difficult. It is hard to think of any natural order for
the microarray data. One approach might be to order the genes
by their chromosomal location or to order similarly expressed
genes together.
We first show that the proposed approach works with simu-
lated data and then apply the method to real microarray data.
We would like to simulate data with similar characteristics
to real microarray data. We simulate non-informative genes
by drawing from a normal distribution N(0, σ). Informative
genes are also generated from a normal distribution such that
for samples in class A, the gene is drawn from N(µ1, σ) and
for class B, from N(µ2, σ). Either µ1 > 0 and µ2 = 0 or
µ1 = 0 and µ2 > 0, determined randomly.
We simulate a data set having 25 samples in both classes A
and B. The number of non-informative genes is set to 1000 and
number of informative genes to 2000. We use a binarization
Fig. 1. Two dimensional MDS representation of the NCD matrix. Simulated data with variance σ2 = 10−4 are shown in a) and b). In a) are the results
with random gene order and in b) are the results with ordered genes. Samples from class A are labeled with circles and samples from class B with stars.
Colon data are shown in c) and d). In c) are the results with genes in random order and in d) are the results with t-test ordered genes. Samples from normal
tissue are labeled with circles and samples from tumor with stars.
algorithm presented in [5] to reduce the amount of noise and
to produce a binary alphabet. NCD is applied to binarized
samples to obtain a distance matrix. Gzip compression pro-
gram is used to approximate the Kolmogorov complexity. This
program was selected because it is conceptually simple and
still prowerfull. It also has been used in previously published
NCD applications. To demonstrate the class separation we
show the result of classical multidimensional scaling (MDS,
ie. principal component analysis) applied to the NCD matrix.
Results are shown in Figure 1a.
With simulated data we can study the effect of data ordering.
We can simulate data such that all informative genes are after
each other. That is, all similarly expressed genes are grouped
together. Results are shown in Figure 1b and suggest that if we
can apply the ordering of genes, more noise can be tolerated.
By simulations we can also conclude that if we increase the
number of non-informative genes, the noise variance needs to
be lower to obtain as good class separation in MDS space as
before.
To show results with real data we use the colon cancer
dataset that is publicly available [1]. This dataset contains 62
samples of which 20 are from normal tissue and 42 from
tumor. We standardize the data such that each sample has
zero mean and unit variance. We binarize the data using the
k-means algorithm, which proved to perform best for this
dataset compared to other binarization algorithms tested. Two
dimensional MDS representation of the distance matrix is
shown in Figure 1c.
To find out if the ordering of genes has an effect also with
real data, we apply a t-test to the data using the clinical class
labels. We order all the genes according to the differential
expression significance, i.e., by the obtained p-value. This
ordering is, of course, completely artificial, but still has an
effect (Figure 1d). Class separation is more obvious when
the ordered data are used. Also if only diffrentially expressed
genes are included in analysis, better class separation is
obtained.
III. DISCUSSION
We have shown that the normalized compression distance can
successfully be applied to microarray data. With this approach,
one can avoid the problems of selecting features and suitable
distance metrics. Instead, one can use all the data that are
available and still be able to show class distinction.
Nonetheless, there are problems with the proposed method,
which need to be resolved. The method seems to be very
sensitive to the binarization method used. Thus, more work
needs to be done to find a binarization method that performs
well for all microarray datasets.
REFERENCES
[1] U. Alon, N. Barkai, D. Notterman, K. Gish, S. Ybarra, D. Mack, and
A. Levine, “Broad patterns of gene expression revealed by clustering
analysis of tumor and normal colon tissues probed by oligonucleotide
arrays,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 96, pp. 6745–6750, 1999.
[2] R. Cilibrasi and P. Vitanyi, “Clustering by compression,”
IEEE Transactions on Infomation Theory , Submitted. See
http://arxiv.org/abs/cs.CV/0312044, 2004.
[3] N. Krasnogor and D. Pelta, “Measuring the similarity of protein structures
by means of the universal similarity metric,” Bioinformatics, vol. 20,
no. 7, pp. 1015–1021, 2004.
[4] M. Li, X. Chen, X. Li, B. Ma, and P. Vitanyi, “The similarity metric,”
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory (to appear), 2004.
[5] I. Shmulevich and W. Zhang, “Binary analysis and optimization-based
normalization of gene expression data,” Bioinformatics, vol. 18, no. 4,
pp. 555–565, 2002.
