CAGE Basic/Analysis Databases: the CAGE resource
for comprehensive promoter analysis
Hideya Kawaji1, Takeya Kasukawa1,2, Shiro Fukuda2, Shintaro Katayama2,*, Chikatoshi
Kai2, Jun Kawai2,3, Piero Carninci2,3 and Yoshihide Hayashizaki2,3
1NTT Software Corporation, Teisan Kannai Building 209, Yamashita-cho Naka-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa,
231-8551, Japan, 2Genome Exploration Research Group (Genome Network Project Core Group),
RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku,
Yokohama, Kanagawa, 230-0045, Japan and 3Genome Science Laboratory, Discovery Research Institute,
RIKEN Wako Institute, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama, 351-0198, Japan
Received August 15, 2005; Revised and Accepted September 26, 2005
ABSTRACT
Cap-analysis gene expression (CAGE) Basic and
Analysis Databases store an original resource pro-
duced by CAGE, which measures expression levels
of transcription starting sites by sequencing large
amounts of transcript 50 ends, termed CAGE tags.
Millions of human and mouse high-quality CAGE
tags derived from different conditions in.20 tissues
consisting of .250 RNA samples are essential
for identification of novel promoters and promoter
characterization in the aspect of expression profile.
CAGE Basic Database is a primary database of
the CAGE resource, RNA samples, CAGE libraries,
CAGE clone and tag sequences and so on. CAGE
Analysis Database stores promoter related informa-
tion, such as counts of related transcripts, CpG
islands and conserved genome region. It also pro-
vides expression profiles at base pair and promoter
levels. Both databases are based on the same frame-
work,CAGEtagstartingsites, tagclusters fordefining
promotersand transcriptionalunits (TUs). Their asso-
ciationsandTUattributesareavailable to findpromot-
ers of interest. These databases were provided for
Functional Annotation Of Mouse 3 (FANTOM3), an
international collaboration research project focusing
on expanding the transcriptome and subsequent
analyses. Now access is free for all users through
the World Wide Web at http://fantom3.gsc.riken.jp/.
INTRODUCTION
Cap-analysis gene expression (CAGE) is a high-throughput
method to measure expression levels by counting large
amounts of sequenced capped 50 ends of transcripts, termed
CAGE tags (1). A similar approach is proposed as 50 end
SAGE (2). The average length of these 50 end tags of tran-
scripts is 20 bp and the tags are aligned with the genome
directly, although original SAGE (3) tags are aligned with
30 ends of transcripts (4). CAGE tags are an essential resource
for profiling transcriptional starting sites and can be used for
profiling gene expressions by counting CAGE tags associated
with genes. Millions of mouse and human high-quality CAGE
tags derived from different conditions in >20 tissues con-
sisting of >250 RNA samples are subjected for analysis in
the international collaboration research project, Functional
Annotation Of Mouse 3 (FANTOM3). The CAGE tags are
used for the analysis of the transcriptional landscape of mam-
malian genome (5), antisense transcription in the mammalian
transcriptome (6), comprehensive promoter analysis
(P.Carninci, A.Sandelin, B.Lenhard, S.Katayama,
K.Shimokawa, J.Ponjavic, C.A.Semple, M.S.Taylor,
P.Engstrom, M.C.Frith, A.R.Forrest, W.B.Alkema, S.L.Tan,
C.Plessy, R.Kodzius, T.Ravasi, T.Kasukawa, S.Fukuda,
M.Kanamori-Katayama, Y.Kitazume, H.Kawaji, C.Kai,
H.Konno, K.Nakano, S.Mottagui-Tabar, P.Arner, A.Chesi,
S.Gustincich, F.Persichetti, H.Suzuki, S.M.Grimmond,
C.Wells, V.Orlando, C.Wahlestedt, E.T.Liu, M.Harbers,
J.Kawai, V.B.Bajic, D.A.Hume and Y.Hayashizaki, manu-
script submitted) and subsequent analyses.
We constructed two database systems to utilize the CAGE
resource, CAGE Basic and Analysis Databases. Their aims are
(i) to manage and trace the CAGE data consistently and (ii) to
demonstrate the promoter usage (using CAGE and other data).
The former is required to support the novel experimental pro-
cesses of CAGE and to manage the large amount of RNA
samples provided in the FANTOM3 collaboration. The latter
is to support subsequent analyses using all of the required data,
without influence of our management of the CAGE data. Addi-
tionally, we constructed CAGE Expression 3D Viewer for
*To whom corresponding should be addressed. Tel: +81 45 503 9222; Fax: +81 45 503 9216; Email: rgscerg@gsc.riken.jp
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
D632–D636 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gkj034
novel type of expression view (K.Shimokawa, Y.Okamura-
Oho, C.Kai, P.Carninci and Y.Hayashizaki, manuscript in
preparation). The database systems described here were
used in FANTOM3 and are now publicly accessible. Here,
we present the systems’ overview and functions to facilitate
the use of the CAGE resource.
DATA BASIS
A consistent and comprehensive dataset is crucial to allow
biological analyses in different kinds of viewpoints. Our two
database systems are built on the same basis: CAGE tag start-
ing site (CTSS), tag cluster (TC) and transcriptional unit (TU).
CTSS is a nucleotide position on the genome from which an
alignment of CAGE tag starts. Counts of CAGE tags sharing
the same starting sites represent expression profiles in base
pairs level. TC is an operationally defined unit to characterize
promoters. It is constructed by clustering 50 end overlapped
region of transcripts (P.Carninci, A.Sandelin, B.Lenhard,
S.Katayama, K.Shimokawa, J.Ponjavic, C.A.Semple,
M.S.Taylor, P.Engstrom, M.C.Frith, A.R.Forrest,
W.B.Alkema, S.L.Tan, C.Plessy, R.Kodzius, T.Ravasi,
T.Kasukawa, S.Fukuda, M.Kanamori-Katayama, Y.Kitazume,
H.Kawaji, C.Kai, H.Konno, K.Nakano, S.Mottagui-Tabar,
P.Arner, A.Chesi, S.Gustincich, F.Persichetti, H.Suzuki,
S.M.Grimmond, C.Wells, V.Orlando, C.Wahlestedt, E.T.Liu,
M.Harbers, J.Kawai, V.B.Bajic, D.A.Hume and
Y.Hayashizaki, manuscript submitted), such as 50 end 20 bp
long of RIKEN full-length cDNA and RIKEN-50-expressed
sequence tag (EST), 50 end tags of GIS (7) and GSC (4) ditags,
DBTSS (8), 50 end SAGE and CAGE. Of these, overlapping
sequences on the genome with at least 1 bp are clustered, and
define a TC. Counts of CAGE tags within TCs represent
expression profiles on promoter level. TU is also an opera-
tionally defined unit proposed in FANTOM2 (9), defined as a
region or a set of discontinuous regions in the genome from
where all exons of a mature full-length mRNA are derived
(10). Counts of CAGE tags within TUs represent expression
profiles on gene level. TUs are associated with Entrez Gene
(11) and gene ontology term (12) by means of transcripts
belonging to them, if possible. CTSS are associated with
TCs, and TCs are associated with TUs. Users can access
the CAGE resource of interest by searching TUs with their
own keywords.
SYSTEM OVERVIEW
Figure 1 is an overview of the CAGE database systems. CAGE
Basic Database is a primary database of the CAGE resource,
and provides a central view of CAGE resources. CAGE Anal-
ysis Database stores TC related information, and provides
a central view of promoters. As a complementary system,
Genomic Elements Database is constructed to provide a cen-
tral view of genome positions. Their main contents are
described in Table 1. CAGE Analysis Database would be
the most convenient gateway for users, especially new to
the CAGE data. Hyperlinks from the database to the others
are available depending on their interests, CAGE Basic Data-
base for CAGE sequences themselves and Genomic Elements
Database for a conventional genome view.
CAGE BASIC DATABASE
In the CAGE protocol, 50 ends of full-length cDNA synthe-
sized from RNA samples are cleaved with MmeI, a class II
restriction enzyme, which cleaves 20/18 bp outside the
CAGE
Basic DB
CAGE
Analysis DB
Genomic
Elements DB
CAGE resource
Central view
CAGE resource
Central view
Promoter
Central view
Promoter
Central view
Genome
Central view
Genome
Central view
External DBs
Transcripts
Genome attributesCAGE data
Figure 1. An overview of the CAGE supporting systems and data flow among
them.
Table 1. Main contents of the database systems
Database Contents
CAGE Basic
Database
RNA sample information
CAGE library information
CAGE clone plate/spot
CAGE clone sequence
CAGE clone sequence quality
CAGE tag sequence
CAGE tag mapping status
Associations of CAGE tags with CTSS
Associations of CTSS with TCs
Associations of TCs with transcript and TUs
CAGE Analysis
Database
Base pair level expression profile
TC expression profile within TUs
Statistical significance expression fluctuations
Presence of predicted core promoter elementsa
in upstream region
Presence of conserved genome region between
human and mouse (axtNet)
Presence of CpG islands
Counts of TC related mRNA, 50-EST, GIS/GSC
ditags
Genomic Elements
Database
TC
Predicted core promoter elementsa
mRNA
GIS/GSC ditag
50- and 30-ESTs
Candidates of imprited transcripts in
EICO DB
Transcription factors listed in TFdb
Gene predictionb
CpG islandsb
Repeat detected by repeatmasker and tandem
repeats finderb
Assemble gapb
Conserved genome region between human and
mouse (axtNet)b
aTATA box, CCAAT box, GC box and initiator.
bRetrieved from the UCSC Genome Browser Database.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D633
recognition sequence. The cleaved 50 end cDNA tags (CAGE
tags) are ligated to form concatemers and cloned as CAGE
clones in CAGE library. After sequencing the CAGE clone,
CAGE tag sequences are extracted and mapped computation-
ally onto the genome.
CAGE clone sequence, CAGE tag location on the clone
and its genome mapping information are stored to facilitate
their traceability. To manage a broad range of RNA sam-
ples provided in the FANTOM3 collaboration, RNA sample
ID, tissue name, developmental stage, sample treatment,
Figure 2. Screenshots ofCAGEAnalysisDatabase: (A) a viewof base pair scale expressionwithin aTC,whereCAGE tag count of each genomeposition is displayed
in histogram, (B) a view of TC expressions within a TU, in which expression levels are represented by a heat map like representation, (C) a view of statistical
significances of expression fluctuations between RNA samples, and their E-values are displayed in a matrix.
D634 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
cell type and collaboration name are stored. The amount of
the CAGE data derived from each RNA sample is pre-
sented to examine if targeted samples are analyzed with
CAGE and to which extent CAGE tags in the samples
were sequenced.
CAGE ANALYSIS DATABASE
Expression levels are measured by counting associated CAGE
tags, and they can be used to measure different levels of
expression profiles from base pair to chromosomal band
level. Two levels of expression profiles are presented in the
CAGE Analysis Database for each RNA sample: base pair
scale expressions inside a TC are displayed in histogram
(Figure 2A), and TC expressions within a TU are represented
by a heat map like representation (Figure 2B). CAGE tag
counts and transcripts per million, (tag counts)/(total mapped
tag counts in the sample) · 1 000 000, are used as units
of expression level. Additionally, statistical significances of
expression fluctuations between RNA samples are also acces-
sible in a matrix (Figure 2C). They provide users with graphi-
cal views of transcriptional start variation, promoter variation
and expression fluctuation of promoters.
Rarely expressed promoters contain only a few tags.
Although our RACE experiment using an oligo-capping
method supported 91% of the tested cases (5), some CAGE
tags could be artifacts caused by some errors in library pre-
paration, sequencing and genome mapping. To provide some
evidences for promoters, associations of TCs with (genome)
conserved regions (13), CpG islands (14), predicted core pro-
moter elements (15–17) and different transcript counts are
stored. Users can search TCs with different reliability levels
by specifying search conditions.
GENOMIC ELEMENTS DATABASE
Genomic Elements Database is a supplementary database to
the two CAGE databases. The aim is to integrate TCs and other
data onto the genome and display them in a conventional
way. Generic Genome Browser (18) with MySQL DBMS is
used to present a genome view. Candidates of imprinted
transcripts in EICO DB (19,20), transcription factors in
TFdb (21) and other data in the UCSC Genome Browser
Database (22) are stored in addition to the utilized data
above. This system is also utilized in full-length cDNA anno-
tation in FANTOM3 (5).
CONCLUSION
The CAGE database systems have successfully provided a
large amount of mouse and human CAGE tags derived
from various RNA samples for the FANTOM3 project, result-
ing in biological analyses in various viewpoints. The systems
have supported these analyses by providing central views of
CAGE resource, promoter and genome position depending
on the aspects of interests to researchers. They are publicly
available now, and are expected to promote subsequent
analyses by using the CAGE resource in scientific research
community.
AVAILABILITY
The database systems described here are hyperlinked from
http://fantom3.gsc.riken.jp/. Their user’s guide, glossary
and/or database schema are available from their help pages,
and their raw data files, table definitions in SQL and tab-
delimited data files, are also available for download from
http://fantom3.gsc.riken.jp/download.html.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank A. Hasegawa for data processing;
A. Karlsson for English editing; K. Nakano and H.
Murakami for building computational systems; K. Yoshida
for support; and all members of the FANTOM consortium.
This study was supported by Research Grant for the RIKEN
Genome Exploration Research Project from the Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of the
Japanese Government to Y.H., a grant of the Genome
Network Project from the Ministry of Education, Culture,
Sports, Science and Technology, Japan. to Y.H., Grant for
the Strategic Programs for R&D of RIKEN to Y.H. Funding
to pay the Open Access publication charges for this article
was provided by RIKEN.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Shiraki,T., Kondo,S., Katayama,S., Waki,K., Kasukawa,T., Kawaji,H.,
Kodzius,R., Watahiki,A., Nakamura,M., Arakawa,T. et al. (2003) Cap
analysis gene expression for high-throughput analysis of transcriptional
starting point and identification of promoter usage. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA, 100, 15776–15781.
2. Hashimoto,S., Suzuki,Y., Kasai,Y., Morohoshi,K., Yamada,T., Sese,J.,
Morishita,S., Sugano,S. and Matsushima,K. (2004) 50-end SAGE for the
analysis of transcriptional start sites. Nat. Biotechnol., 22, 1146–1149.
3. Velculescu,V.E., Zhang,L., Vogelstein,B. and Kinzler,K.W. (1995)
Serial analysis of gene expression. Science, 270, 484–487.
4. Harbers,M. and Carninci,P. (2005) Tag-based approaches for
transcriptome research and genome annotation. Nature Methods,
2, 495–502.
5. Carninci,P.,Kasukawa,T.,Katayama,S.,Gough,J.,Frith,M.C.,Maeda,N.,
Oyama,R., Ravasi,T., Lenhard,B., Wells,C. et al. (2005) The
transcriptional landscape of the mammalian genome. Science, 309,
1559–1563.
6. Katayama,S., Tomaru,Y., Kasukawa,T., Waki,K., Nakanishi,M.,
Nakamura,M., Nishida,H., Yap,C.C., Suzuki,M., Kawai,J. et al. (2005)
Antisense transcription in the mammalian transcriptome. Science, 309,
1564–1566.
7. Ng,P., Wei,C.L., Sung,W.K., Chiu,K.P., Lipovich,L., Ang,C.C.,
Gupta,S., Shahab,A., Ridwan,A., Wong,C.H. et al. (2005) Gene
identification signature (GIS) analysis for transcriptome characterization
and genome annotation. Nature Methods, 2, 105–111.
8. Suzuki,Y., Yamashita,R., Sugano,S. and Nakai,K. (2004) DBTSS,
DataBase of Transcriptional Start Sites: progress report 2004. Nucleic
Acids Res., 32, D78–D81.
9. Okazaki,Y., Furuno,M., Kasukawa,T., Adachi,J., Bono,H., Kondo,S.,
Nikaido,I., Osato,N., Saito,R., Suzuki,H. et al. (2002) Analysis of the
mouse transcriptome based on functional annotation of 60 770
full-length cDNAs. Nature, 420, 563–573.
10. Kasukawa,T., Katayama,S., Kawaji,H., Suzuki,H., Hume,D.A. and
Hayashizaki,Y. (2004) Construction of representative transcript and
protein sets of human,mouse, and rat as a platform for their transcriptome
and proteome analysis. Genomics, 84, 913–921.
11. Maglott,D., Ostell,J., Pruitt,K.D. and Tatusova,T. (2005) Entrez
Gene: gene-centered information at NCBI. Nucleic Acids Res., 33,
D54–D58.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D635
12. Ashburner,M., Ball,C.A., Blake,J.A., Botstein,D., Butler,H.,
Cherry,J.M., Davis,A.P., Dolinski,K., Dwight,S.S., Eppig,J.T.
et al. (2000) Gene ontology: tool for the unification of biology.
The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nature Genet., 25,
25–29.
13. Kent,W.J., Baertsch,R., Hinrichs,A., Miller,W. and Haussler,D. (2003)
Evolution’s cauldron: duplication, deletion, and rearrangement in the
mouse and human genomes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 100,
11484–11489.
14. Gardiner-Garden,M. and Frommer,M. (1987) CpG islands in vertebrate
genomes. J. Mol. Biol., 196, 261–282.
15. Smale,S.T. and Kadonaga,J.T. (2003) The RNA polymerase II core
promoter. Annu. Rev. Biochem., 72, 449–479.
16. Bucher,P. (1990) Weight matrix descriptions of four eukaryotic RNA
polymerase II promoter elements derived from 502 unrelated promoter
sequences. J. Mol. Biol., 212, 563–578.
17. Schmid,C.D., Praz,V., Delorenzi,M., Perier,R. and Bucher,P. (2004)
The Eukaryotic Promoter Database EPD: the impact of in silico primer
extension. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D82–D85.
18. Stein,L.D., Mungall,C., Shu,S., Caudy,M., Mangone,M.,
Day,A.,Nickerson,E., Stajich,J.E.,Harris,T.W.,Arva,A. et al. (2002)The
generic genome browser: a building block for a model organism system
database. Genome Res., 12, 1599–1610.
19. Nikaido,I., Saito,C., Wakamoto,A., Tomaru,Y., Arakawa,T.,
Hayashizaki,Y. and Okazaki,Y. (2004) EICO (Expression-based
Imprint Candidate Organizer): finding disease-related imprinted genes.
Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D548–D551.
20. Nikaido,I., Saito,C., Mizuno,Y., Meguro,M., Bono,H., Kadomura,M.,
Kono,T., Morris,G.A., Lyons,P.A., Oshimura,M. et al. (2003) Discovery
of imprinted transcripts in te mouse transcriptome using large-scale
expression profiling. Genome Res., 13, 1402–1409.
21. Kanamori,M., Konno,H., Osato,N., Kawai,J., Hayashizaki,Y. and
Suzuki,H. (2004) A genome-wide and nonredundant mouse transcription
factor database. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 322, 787–793.
22. Karolchik,D., Baertsch,R., Diekhans,M., Furey,T.S., Hinrichs,A.,
Lu,Y.T., Roskin,K.M., Schwartz,M., Sugnet,C.W., Thomas,D.J. et al.
(2003) The UCSC Genome Browser Database. Nucleic Acids Res., 31,
51–54.
D636 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
