Contact-based sequence alignment
Jens Kleinjung*, John Romein, Kuang Lin1 and Jaap Heringa
Bioinformatics Unit, Faculty of Sciences and Faculty of Earth and Life Sciences, Vrije Universiteit, De Boelelaan
1081A, 1081HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands and 1Division of Mathematical Biology, National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK
Received March 15, 2004; Revised and Accepted April 5, 2004
ABSTRACT
This paper introduces the novel method of contact-
based protein sequence alignment, where structural
information in the form of contact mutation prob-
abilities is incorporated into an alignment routine
using contact-mutation matrices (CAO: Contact
Accepted mutatiOn). The contact-based alignment
routine optimizes the score of matched contacts,
which involves four (two per contact) instead of two
residues per match in pairwise alignments. The ®rst
contact refers to a real side-chain contact in a
template sequence with known structure, and the
second contact is the equivalent putative contact
of a homologous query sequence with unknown
structure. An algorithm has been devised to perform
a pairwise sequence alignment based on contact
information. The contact scores were combined
with PAM-type (Point Accepted Mutation) substitu-
tion scores after parameterization of gap penalties
and score weights by means of a genetic algorithm.
We show that owing to the structural information
contained in the CAO matrices, signi®cantly
improved alignments of distantly related sequences
can be obtained. This has allowed us to annotate
eight putative Drosophila IGF sequences. Contact-
based sequence alignment should therefore
prove useful in comparative modelling and fold
recognition.
INTRODUCTION
Protein sequence alignments reveal information about the
relation between homologous sequences. Closely related
sequences yield mostly unambiguous alignments, but distantly
related sequences with sequence identities between 15 and
30% (the so-called twilight zone) pose a dif®cult problem to
sequence alignment routines, because the signal of similarity
is heavily disturbed by `noise' from mutations (1). Protein
structure alignments serve as standard of truth for judging
evolutionary relatedness, since structures are much better
conserved than sequences (2). Although the structure of most
sequences is unknown, it can be inferred in many cases by
comparative modelling and fold recognition. Comparative
modelling delivers useful models that can attain a quality
comparable to experimentally derived structures. However,
the quality is crucially dependent on the accuracy of the
underlying sequence alignment (3), which is exponentially
decreasing with increasing evolutionary distance of the related
sequences (4).
In conventional sequence alignment (5±17), structural
information available from the template is ignored, because
alignment programs use PAM-type (Point Accepted Mutation)
substitution matrices (18), which incorporate only sequence
information. For the purpose of improving sequence align-
ment accuracy, we introduce here an alignment method that
uses structural information from side-chain contacts. Contacts
describe constraints between residues and particularly long-
range contacts can help de®ning the relative arrangement of
sequence elements. Alignment scores are provided by the
CAO substitution matrices (Contact Accepted mutatiOn),
which are derived from an evolutionary Markov model of
side-chain contact substitution (19). The CAO matrices
describe the mutation probability of side-chain contacts within
a protein and therefore they combine sequence and structure
information in a single scoring scheme. CAO scores often
re¯ect evolutionary relatedness better than PAM scores. We
introduce a contact-based sequence alignment algorithm,
which transfers information from a template protein structure
to the alignment process by means of CAO scores. The
predictive power of the method is illustrated by the annotation
of eight putative Drosophila IGF sequences through alignment
to a human IGF-I sequence. The annotation is supported by a
comparative model based on the contact-based alignment and
independently generated de novo structural models.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Programs were written in the `ANSI C' programming
language and compiled with the GNU or Intel compiler on
Linux 2.4.
The CAO contact matrix
The CAO substitution matrix is based on a Markov model of
protein side-chain contact evolution (19). CAO scores are an
intermediate between the purely sequence-based PAM scores
and the purely structure-based `Root Mean Square Deviation'
(RMSD) values. The CAO matrix comprises 400 3 400
contact substitution scores, where rows and columns consist of
the 20 3 20 possible combinations of residue contacts, and
each matrix cell contains a score for the evolutionary
transition (mutation) from a contact denoted by the row axis
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +31 20 4447783; Fax: +31 20 4447653; Email: jkleinj@cs.vu.nl
2464±2473 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, No. 8
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkh566
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 32 No. 8 ã Oxford University Press 2004; all rights reserved
 Published online April 30, 2004
to a contact denoted by the column axis. Thus, knowing the
side-chain contacts within a template structure, an alignment
of the template sequence with a query sequence can be scored
by summing up the CAO substitution matrix values of all
contacts.
The contact-based alignment algorithm
Structural information of the template is passed to the
alignment program in the form of a side-chain contact map.
A contact is de®ned if the distance between two side-chain
spheres is smaller than the diameter of a solvent molecule
(19), which is 2.8 AÊ for water. A sequence alignment method
using the CAO matrix considers contact pairs consisting of
four residues: two residues that are known to contact in the
template sequence are aligned to two contact residues of the
query sequence. For example, if the template residues A and B
are in contact (A_B), and aligned to query residues X and Y,
the CAO score of A_B:X_Y can be assigned (`_' indicates a
contact, `:' indicates an alignment).
Needleman-Wunsch-type dynamic programming is not
suited for using CAO contact scores directly, because the
alignment of the second matched pair (B:Y) needs to be
known to correctly score the ®rst matched pair (A:X) and vice
versa. This violates the independence assumption, i.e. the
prerequisite that the score of each matrix cell should be
independent of any other cell.
Therefore, we devised an alignment algorithm that incor-
porates CAO contact scores by pre-processing into a dynamic
programming (DP) matrix, such that DP can be performed on
this matrix after pre-processing. The algorithm works as
follows: the structure of the query sequence (containing
residues X and Y) is unknown and therefore the position of the
putative homologous contact X_Y in the query is unknown.
Thus, the query has to be probed for potential positions of this
contact by testing all possible realizations on the query
sequence, assuming that the query residues are in contact as
well (X_Y) (Fig. 1). When this scheme is applied to a DP
matrix, all contacts of the template are slid over the query
sequence (Fig. 2). Each possible (and hypothetical) realization
of a contact is probed with CAO scores: likely contact
mutations yield positive scores, unlikely contact mutations
yield negative scores. At each position of the sliding contact,
the CAO score of the contact match is added to each of the two
DP matrix cells involved. Most residues form multiple
contacts, and their scores are summed up in the matrix.
After scoring all contacts (pre-processing), the optimal
alignment is found by forward score addition and back-tracing
as in the standard DP alignment algorithms. Routines for local
and global alignment have been implemented. To compensate
for potentially missing local contact information in the
template, the DP matrix is complemented with PAM-type
substitution matrix scores.
The algorithm can be summarized as follows: (i) Slide each
contact of the template over the query sequence and, at each
position, add the (weighted) CAO score of the four involved
residues to the two corresponding matrix cells. (ii) Fill the
alignment matrix with PAM-type substitution scores. (iii) Find
the optimal path through the matrix by forward score addition
and back-tracing.
A complication is the use of ¯oat values in the CAO matrix,
which can, without precaution, lead to rounding errors and
failure of the DP routine during the traceback phase. This has
been solved by incorporating a small allowance for score
deviations caused by rounding errors.
Benchmarking
The contact-based alignment was benchmarked using the
Homstrad database (20). Only families containing two single-
chain sequences were considered (624 alignments in total),
since multiple alignments could change the pairwise relation-
ships: the result of aligning two sequences in an optimal
pairwise alignment or in a multiple alignment is not neces-
sarily identical. Of the 5304 PDB structures used for the
design of the CAO matrices, 355 (6.7%) were contained in the
Homstrad benchmark set. The fraction of identical alignment
positions when comparing the CAO alignment with the
reference Homstrad alignments served as quality measure (or
®tness function) and was reported as `fraction correct pairs'.
The T-Coffee alignment program (version 1.37) was used for
comparison (16). T-Coffee is invariably the top performing
algorithm in recent multiple sequence alignment benchmarks.
Parameterization
To scale the CAO scores relative to PAM-type scores from
Blosum62 (21) or PAM120 (18), four parameters were
optimized by running the CAO alignment algorithm using a
Figure 1. Principle of contact information transfer from structure to
sequence. (A) Scheme of template protein structure with contact between
side-chains of residues F and I. (B) The same contact is marked on the
template sequence (EFG...HIK) by the solid bracket between F and I.
Alignment of the homologous query sequence (DYG...KIR) implies struc-
tural equivalence of the aligned residue pairs. Therefore, a contact can be
tentatively assumed to exist in the query between D and K (dashed bracket).
The CAO matrix yields a score for the contact match F_I:D_K. The putative
contact (dashed bracket) is probed at all possible positions of the query
sequence, which is illustrated here by sliding the query sequence along the
template sequence as indicated by the arrows.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, No. 8 2465
genetic algorithm (GA): a CAO matrix constant c, the relative
weight w of CAO versus PAM-type scores, gap-opening
penalty p and gap extension penalty q. Thus, CAO and PAM
scores are combined to
sCAO(i,k) = sPAM(i,k) + wsCAO(i,j,k,l) + c and sCAO(j,l) =
sPAM(j,l) + wsCAO(i,j,k,l) + c
while gap penalties p,q in¯uence the ®nal path through the
matrix. The GA was performed with a population size of 100
individuals (genomes) over eight generations, where the 20
®ttest individuals were selected for mating. Mating was
performed on randomly chosen parent pairings (of the 20
®ttest individuals) and the child inherited parameters from
either parent at random. An individual's genome was
composed of four parameter values (genes). The starting
population was random with target ranges (step width in
parentheses): CAO matrix constant c [0±0.9 (0.1)], relative
weight w [0±0.45 (0.05)], gap-opening penalty p [5±14 (1)]
and gap-extension penalty q [0±4.5 (0.5)]. Each GA run
reached convergence within eight generations and was
repeated three times. To prove the optimized parameters'
independence of the particular sequence set, the GA
parameterization was additionally jack-knifed by splitting
the database into two parts (®rst jack-kni®ng) and ®ve parts
(second jack-kni®ng). The variation of the parameters is given
as standard deviation in Table 1.
Drosophila IGFs
Drosophila protein sequences were downloaded from the
Ensembl site (ftp://ftp.ensembl.org/pub/current_¯y/data/fasta/
pep/). The ®rst stage of the identi®cation was achieved
by pattern matching using the regular expression
/C\w{11,14}C\w{4,}C\w{12,15}CC/ that ¯exibly matches the
canonical inter-chain disul®de bridges of insulin-like proteins.
In the second stage, the programs Psi_Blast (22) and Quest
were used (23) with relaxed parameters (E-value < 10), since
standard sequence searching methods failed to detect the (low)
sequence similarity. The protein access codes of the identi®ed
sequences are AAF47991 (DIGF-1), AAF47993 (DIGF-2),
AAF48005 (DIGF-3), AAF48006 (DIGF-4), AAF48007
(DIGF-5), AAF48078 (DIGF-6), AAF50020 (DIGF-7) and
AAF51015 (DIGF-8). Most of the DIGFs are surely expressed
as the cDNAs of all but DIGF-3 and DIGF-7 are known.
Sequence alignments were produced using the contact-based
sequence alignment algorithm with a CAO weight of 0.2.
Comparative modelling was performed using the DeepView
program (24). The DIGF-3 query sequence was modelled onto
the crystal structure of hIGF-I (PDB databank entry 1GZR)
(25). Ten de novo structural models for the DIGF-3 sequence
were predicted by the ROBETTA structure prediction server
(26).
RESULTS
Benchmarking
The improvement of the alignment quality in terms of
structurally correct sequence relation was assessed using
Figure 2. Illustration of the contact-based alignment by dynamic program-
ming. Newly assigned scores are highlighted in bold font. (A) The template
sequence EYR contains three contacts: E_Y (1), E_R (2) and Y_R (3). The
query sequence is EFK. (B) Contact (1) is slid over the query sequence,
realising positions (1a) and (1b). In position (1a), the CAO score for
E_Y:E_F yields score 0.15 for the two matrix cells EE and YF on the main
diagonal. Position (1b) yields ±0.09 for E_Y:F_K. (C) Contact (2) has only
one possible realization in this example. The score of E_R:E_K is 0.37 as
can be seen in cell RK, whereas the score of cell EE is 0.37 + 0.15 = 0.52.
(D) Contact (3) is comparable to contact (1), with scores ±0.18 for
Y_R:E_F and ±0.07 for Y_R:F_K.
Table 1. GA-optimized parameters and total scores of parameterization runs over 624 pairwise alignments of the Homstrad database for the contact-based
alignment routine (CB) and Needleman-Wunsch dynamic programming (NW)
Matrixa pb qb wc cd Max. scoree f.c.f (%)
CB B + C 14.0 6 0.8 1.0 6 0.5 0.1 6 0.05 2.8 6 0.5 510.6 81.8
CB P + C 14.0 6 1.0 1.0 6 0.5 0.2 6 0.1 2.4 6 0.5 502.5 80.5
NW B 11.0 6 1.2 1.5 6 0.5 ± ± 492.0 78.8
NW P 10.0 6 0.8 1.5 6 0.5 ± ± 465.5 74.6
Alignments were performed using CAO (C) and Blosum62 (B) or PAM120 (P) matrices.
aSubstitution matrices; B: Blosum62, C: CAO120, P: PAM120.
bGap opening parameter p and gap extension parameter q.
cRelative weight w of CAO versus Blosum62 or PAM120 scores.
dMatrix constant c for CAO scores.
eMaximal sum of `fraction correct pairs' scores over the benchmark set.
fAverage of `fraction correct pairs' scores.
2466 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, No. 8
pairwise alignments from the Homstrad database (20) as
standard of truth. The agreement between the contact-based
alignments with the Homstrad alignments was calculated as
the fraction of identical alignment positions, given as `fraction
correct pairs'. Optimized parameters resulting from GA runs
contact-based alignment are shown in Table 1. Each CAO
score receives a weight factor w of 0.1 (in combination with
Blosum62) to 0.2 (in combination with PAM120). Thus, CAO
scores are one-tenth to one-®fth as important as PAM scores,
but taking into account that each residue has about seven
contacts, the overall contribution per residue is similar. The
Blosum62 matrix performs better (81.8%) than the PAM120
matrix (80.5%). It is reasonable to use the CAO matrix with
positive scores in combination with the Blosum62 matrix. The
difference to the `fraction correct pairs' from Needleman-
Wunsch alignment is plotted as a function of sequence identity
in Figure 3. Alignment quality is improved in the region of low
sequence identity.
We compared our method to the multiple alignment
program T-Coffee (16), which also yielded signi®cant
improvements over Needleman-Wunsch alignment, although
for a different reason. The contact-based alignment routine
adds structural information to the alignment, while T-Coffee
combines local and global sequence information to optimize
the alignment. Benchmark results are summarized in Table 2.
The contact-based program performs well on the benchmark
set and improves 64% of the sequences when compared to
Needleman-Wunsch alignment, and with 16% more align-
ments than T-Coffee. The computational speed of the contact-
based alignment is 1.6-fold slower than Needleman-Wunsch
alignment, measured for a benchmark run over 624 sequences,
but twice as fast as T-Coffee on the same sequence set. It is
interesting to analyse the correlation between the contact-
based alignments and T-Coffee alignments. The change in
alignment quality of both methods was monitored by counting
the number of correlated changes: 276 alignments (43%) were
improved, 76 (12%) were worsened and 78 (12%) were
unchanged by both methods. About one-third of all alignments
[203 (33%)] showed no correlation. Thus, a combination of
the two methods should further improve the quality of
alignments with low sequence identity.
An example for the improvement by contact information is
shown in Figure 4. The C-terminal domain of the protein
chondroitinase (Homstrad family `Lyase_8_C') forms a
b-sandwich, containing nine strands in Flavobacterium
heparinum (top sequence) and eight strands in Streptococcus
pneumoniae. Repetitive secondary structure elements often
exhibit a spurious sequence similarity, resulting in register-
shifted alignments as shown in the T-Coffee example. In
contrast, the contact-based alignment keeps the alignment in
register except for the C-terminal short strand, and thus
dramatically improves the alignment. The predominant 1 ® 3
side-chain contacts in b-sheets each correlate four residues
and register shifts are less likely to yield high scores.
Evaluation of contacts
By sliding contacts over the query sequence, we implicitly
make the assumption that the distance between the contacting
residues has been conserved. This assumption keeps the
contact-based alignment algorithm computationally ef®cient
and it holds for the majority of contacts, but obviously not for
locations with insertion/deletion (indel) events, which disrupt
the original local contact pattern. Contacts with changed
residue distance add noise to the DP matrix by scoring non-
homologous contact pairs, in most cases with negative scores.
Figure 5A,B illustrates the conservation of sequence and
structure information. Whereas the fraction of correctly
aligned residues decreases toward zero with decreasing
sequence identity (Fig. 5A), the fraction of conserved contacts
(including the contact length) approaches 30% (Fig. 5B). This
is an illustration of the commonly known fact that `structure is
more conserved than sequence' (2), and it supports the above
approximation of conserved contact length. Figure 6A shows
the distribution of contact distances averaged over the
benchmark set of proteins from the Homstrad database.
Many of the contacts are short ranged (about 24%), within a
distance of 1±5 residues. The highest peaks (distances 1 and 3)
originate from contacts within helices. Strands account for
most of the contacts at a distance of two residues. The long-
range contacts are quite evenly spread out over a large range of
distances. Long-range contacts can be important in de®ning
the correct relative arrangement of distant sequence elements,
which is hard to achieve with classical sequence alignment.
The distribution of contact numbers is given in Figure 6B.
Most residues form about seven contacts, but the distribution
Figure 3. Benchmark of alignment routines. Difference D between the
`fraction correct pairs' as produced by contact-based alignment and by
Needleman-Wunsch alignment. Improvement of alignment quality is
apparent at low sequence identity, where contacts add valuable information
to the sequence alignment.
Table 2. Benchmark of alignment routines: Needleman-Wunsch, contact-
based and T-Coffee
Needleman-Wunsch Contact-based T-Coffee
Fraction correct (%) 78.8 81.8 80.8
Improved ± 400 (64%) 299 (48%)
Unchanged ± 116 (18%) 115 (18%)
Worsened ± 108 (18%) 210 (34%)
cpu time (s) 12.6 19.6 40.3
Numbers are given for 624 pairwise alignments of the Homstrad database.
Performance comparison is made against Needleman-Wunsch alignments.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, No. 8 2467
is quite broad, leading to considerably different contributions
of residues to the DP matrix.
In this context, it is instructive to plot the dependence of
contact conservation upon contact distance, as given in
Figure 7A. Surprisingly, the contact conservation is nearly
invariant to the contact distance, with the exception of short-
ranged helical contacts, which give rise to the peaks at
distances 1 and 3 (compare to Fig. 6). However, the level of
Figure 4. Sequence alignments of the C-terminal domain of the protein chondroitinase (Homstrad family `Lyase_8_C'). Numbers in parentheses show the
`fraction correct pairs'. The top alignment represents the reference alignment derived from structural super-positioning. Secondary structure elements of the
b-sheet sandwich structure are indicated by horizontal lines. The T-Coffee alignment reveals a register shift in the matched secondary structure elements,
which is prevented in the contact-based alignment except for the short C-terminal strand of the bottom sequence.
Figure 5. Comparison between sequence and structure information. (A) Fraction of correctly aligned residue pairs as a function of sequence identity.
Homstrad families containing two sequences (624 families) were aligned by Needleman-Wunsch dynamic programming using the Blosum62 matrix and gap
penalties 14,1 (opening and extension) and compared to the reference Homstrad alignments. Alignment quality decreases exponentially with decreasing
sequence identity. (B) The same set of families as in panel (A) was used to compare the contacts within homologous protein structures. A contact is conserved
when it is found at the same relative position in both structures and consequently at aligned positions in the reference sequence alignment (which is derived
from structural super-positioning) as well. Even at very low sequence identity (10±20%), about 30% of contacts are conserved.
2468 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, No. 8
conservation is very dependent upon the number of contacts
that each residue forms. The curve in Figure 7A reveals a good
level of conservation for residues with 1±8 contacts, and a
steep decrease in conservation at higher contact numbers. A
plausible explanation is that single contacts can be more easily
replaced without losing essential interactions, because each
single contact is less important.
Drosophila IGFs
Contact-based sequence alignment proved instrumental in our
annotation of insulin-like Drosophila genome sequences.
Insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) and insulin are hormones
belonging to the insulin protein family. IGFs are essential
growth factors in development, whereas insulin acts as a
regulator of the blood glucose level (27). The main structural
difference between IGF and insulin is the post-translational
tryptic cleavage of the C-peptide between A- and B-chain in
insulin, while IGF remains a single-chain protein due to the
lack of tryptic cleavage sites. The insulin protein family
occurs predominantly in vertebrates, although insulin-like
proteins are known in lower organisms, for example
molluscan MIP (28), locust LIRP (29), bombyxin in the
silkworm Bombyx mori (30), insulin-like peptides in the
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans (31) and DILPs in the fruit
¯y Drosophila (32). The reported DILP proteins possess
tryptic cleavage sites in the C-peptide and therefore they are
considered as insulin-type proteins.
We report here the identi®cation of eight putative IGF-type
sequences (DIGFs) in the genome of Drosophila (33) that
have no tryptic cleavage sites. A multiple alignment of the
DIGF sequences is shown in Figure 8. The DIGFs exhibit a
cysteine pattern that resembles closely the characteristic
pattern of the insulin family. However, an excess amount of
cysteines and the low sequence identity between human IGF
(hIGF-I) and DIGFs render the matching of cysteines
ambiguous when using sequence-only alignment.
Figure 6. Average distribution of contact distance and contact number.
(A) The contact distance is de®ned as the difference of residue numbers
between two contacting residues. The distribution is dominated by helices,
whose 1 ® 2 (distance = 1) and 1 ® 4 (distance = 3) side-chain contacts
are most frequent. Although most contacts are short-ranged, long-range
contacts are generally present and provide valuable information about the
packing of secondary structure elements. (B) The contact number is de®ned
as the number of contacts a single residue forms with other residues.
Figure 7. Contact conservation. (A) Fraction of conserved contacts as a
function of contact distance. Contact conservation is marginally in¯uenced
by the contact distance. The short-range pattern originates from intra-helical
contacts, which exhibit a better conservation than other contacts.
(B) Fraction of conserved contacts as a function of contact number.
Conservation is constant from 1 to 8 contacts per residue, after which it
decreases rapidly. Residues forming many contacts seem to accept
mutations more than those with few contacts.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, No. 8 2469
Contact-based sequence alignment between the structure of
hIGF-I and DIGFs yields an overall consistent picture
(Fig. 9A). The multiple alignment between the hIGF-I
sequence and some DIGFs was derived from pairwise
contact-based alignments, and it illustrates the corresponding
cysteine patterns (®lled boxes); the connectivity is shown in
Figure 9B. The canonical inter-chain disul®de bridges CA7±
CB7 and CA20±CB19 are conserved in DIGFs, but not the intra-
chain disul®de bridge CA6±CA11.
We have generated a structural model of DIGF by means of
comparative modelling, based on the alignment in Figure 9A
and the crystal structure of hIGF-I (25). The model shows that
the spatial proximity of cysteines CA19 and CB24 allows for the
formation of an additional inter-chain disul®de bridge. A
slightly different pairing CA19±CB19 and CA20±CB24 has been
proposed for insulin-like proteins of C. elegans (31). Both
bonding patterns seem to be viable in principle when judged
on the basis of our comparative model; however, the pattern
proposed in Figure 9B appears more favourable.
To further investigate our hypothesis about the insulin-like
nature of the DIGFs, we submitted the DIGF-3 sequence to the
ROBETTA structure prediction server that produces de novo
structural models for submitted sequences (26). Analysis of
the 10 predicted structures reveals predominant topological
features of A- and B-chain. The superposition of a selected
model (Fig. 10, yellow) with the hIGF-I chains (blue)
illustrates the close resemblance. The B-chain is predicted to
be a-helical in agreement with insulin-like B-chains. The
A-chain tends to adopt the helix-coil-helix motif that is typical
for the A-chain of insulin-like proteins.
Figure 8. Multiple sequence alignment of putative DIGFs. Positions with conserved cysteines are indicated with a star.
2470 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, No. 8
CONCLUSION
Contact-based sequence alignment closes a gap between pure
sequence and pure structure alignments. Structural informa-
tion can be used to improve alignments of homologous
sequences, even if the structure of only one sequence is
known. The described contact-based alignment algorithm is
fast and produces improved alignments when compared to
Needleman-Wunsch alignments.
The use of side-chain contact information in a sequence
alignment routine introduces information about structural
constraints between residues, which is ignored in classical
PAM-type alignments, where the score of each aligned residue
pair is independent of any other residue match. Contrastingly,
in CAO contact-based alignment, the score of a residue pair
match is dependent on the composition of a second match,
because a contact consists of two (correlated) residues and the
alignment of two contacts includes four residues. It proved
advantageous to use CAO and PAM scores together, although
the combination of two different scoring matrices (PAM and
CAO) is non-trivial, in particular because the number of added
CAO scores to a cell depends on the number of contacts the
Figure 9. Primary structure of putative DIGFs. (A) Multiple sequence alignment of the hIGF-I sequence with DIGFs. The alignment was constructed from
pairwise contact-based alignments using the crystal structure of hIGF-I as template (25). Numbering is according to the hIGF-I sequence. The N-terminal
residues `GP' (B-chain) and residues `RRAP' (36±39, C-peptide) are not resolved in the structure. (B) Schematic illustration of chain structure and disul®de
bridges in IGFs. The C-peptide connects the C-terminus of the B-chain with the N-terminus of the A-chain. Inter-chain bridges CA7±CB7 and CA20±CB19 are
present in hIGF-I and DIGFs. The intra-chain disul®de bridge CA6±CA11 is absent in DIGFs (dotted line). However, an alternative inter-chain disul®de bridge
CA19±CB24 might be formed in DIGFs (dashed line).
Figure 10. Superpositioning of chain structures from a predicted
ROBETTA model for DIGF-3 (yellow) and the hIGF-I crystal structure
(blue). DIGF-3 shows the typical features of vertebrate IGFs: A mainly a-
helical B-chain and an A-chain with a `horse shoe' shaped helix-loop-helix
motif. N- and C-termini are denoted; N22¢ signi®es that the residue is
positioned in a gapped region of IGF-I in the sequence alignment (Fig. 9A).
Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, No. 8 2471
respective residue is involved in. This problem was addressed
by using a GA.
Sequence alignment often serves as a ®rst step in compara-
tive modelling projects. Ambiguous regions in the resulting
alignment are then corrected at a later stage according to the
evidence from structural or functional investigations. The ¯ow
of information is typically in the order sequence ® structure
® function. In contact-based alignment, the ¯ow of informa-
tion is partially reversed to sequence ¬ structure, because
structural information is incorporated a priori. The relevance
of this method is illustrated here by its application in
annotating eight putative IGF sequences from Drosophila.
The structural information from the template hIGF-I is
essential for the correct alignment of canonical cysteines
and thus assignment of the A- and B-chain, from which a
comparative model was derived. Independently generated
de novo ROBETTA models support the comparative model.
Alignment routines operate with the information that is
passed to them in the form of substitution scores and gap
penalties. This fact has several implications: ®rst, the scoring
scheme has to match a variety of biological (evolutionary)
processes; second, more information from distinct sources
should improve alignments; and third, different scoring
matrices can be combined but the scoring scheme requires
careful parameterization. The alignment routine presented
here demonstrates how, in principle, biological or physico-
chemical information about sequence, structure and function
can be summed up by pre-processing in a single DP matrix.
Particularly interesting is the fact that long-range correlations
between residues can be included. Here we have used contact
information, but the scheme can be extended to include other
classes of information such as phylogeny, motifs, solvation,
fold, function and NMR constraints. One can envision a set of
generic properties that characterize the speci®c features of a
protein family. Similar approaches exist for fold recognition
and threading tools (34±38), but in terms of sequence
alignment, a systematic analysis remains to be performed.
Sequence similarity is a very good indicator for evolution-
ary relationship, because the enormous dimension of sequence
space renders chance similarity highly improbable. Improving
the alignment quality of distant sequences therefore allows for
a better estimation of the common ancestry of proteins.
Moreover, by ®nding appropriate features that can provide
essential information to correct alignments, we might be able
to learn more about the features that are important during the
course of protein evolution.
Availability
The contact-based alignment program `ALICAO', the pro-
gram `GETCONT' to compute contact maps from coordinate
®les (Protein Database format) and the CAO matrices are
available from our website at http://ibivu.cs.vu.nl/ftp/.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank Dr G. Dodson, Dr A. Gould and Dr I.
Robinson for stimulating discussions and help. We thank Dr F.
Fraternali and V. Simossis for advice.
REFERENCES
1. Rost,B. (1999) Twilight zone of protein sequence alignments. Protein
Eng., 12, 85±94.
2. Chothia,C. and Lesk,A. (1986) The relation between the divergence of
sequence and structure in proteins. EMBO J., 5, 823±826.
3. Venclovas,C. (2003) Comparative modeling in CASP5: Progress is
evident, but alignment errors remain a signi®cant hindrance. Proteins
Struct. Funct. Genet., 53, 380±388.
4. Vogt,G., Etzold,T. and Argos,P. (1995) An assessment of amino acid
exchange matrices in aligning protein sequences: The twilight zone
revisited. J. Mol. Biol., 249, 816±831.
5. Needleman,S.B. and Wunsch,C.D. (1970) A general method applicable
to the search for similarities in the amino acid sequence of two proteins.
J. Mol. Biol., 48, 443±453.
6. Smith,T.F. and Waterman,M.S. (1981) Identi®cation of common
molecular subsequences. J. Mol. Biol., 147, 195±197.
7. Taylor,W.R. (1986) Identi®cation of protein sequence homology by
consensus template alignment. J. Mol. Biol., 188, 233±258.
8. Barton,G.J. and Sternberg,M.J. (1987) A strategy for the rapid multiple
alignment of protein sequences. J. Mol. Biol., 198, 327±337.
9. Higgins,D.G. and Sharp,P.M. (1988) CLUSTAL: a package for
performing multiple sequence alignment on a microcomputer. Gene, 73,
237±244.
10. Corpet,F. (1988) Multiple sequence alignment with hierarchical
clustering. Nucleic Acids Res., 16, 10881±10890.
11. Altschul,S.F., Carroll,R.J. and Lipman,D.J. (1989) Weights for data
related by a tree. J. Mol. Biol., 207, 647±653.
12. Gotoh,O. (1993) Optimal alignment between groups of sequences and its
application to multiple sequence alignment. Comput. Appl. Biosci., 9,
361±370.
13. Gotoh,O. (1996) Signi®cant improvement in accuracy of multiple protein
sequence alignments by iterative re®nement as assessed by reference to
structural alignments. J. Mol. Biol., 264, 823±838.
14. Thompson,J.D., Higgins,D.G. and Gibson,T.J. (1994) Improved
sensitivity of pro®le searches through the use of sequence weights and
gap excision. CABIOS, 10, 19±29.
15. Heringa,J. (1999) Two strategies for sequence comparison: Pro®le-
preprocessed and secondary structure-induced multiple alignment.
Comput. Chem., 23, 341±364.
16. Notredame,C., Higgins,D.G. and Heringa,J. (2000) T-Coffee: A novel
method for fast and accurate Multiple Sequence Alignment. J. Mol. Biol.,
302, 205±217.
17. Lee,C., Grasso,C. and Sharlow,M.F. (2002) Multiple sequence alignment
using partial order graphs. Bioinformatics, 18, 452±464.
18. Dayhoff,M.O., Schwart,R.M. and Orcutt,B.C. (1978) A model of
evolutionary change in proteins. In Dayhoff,M.O. (ed.), Atlas of Protein
Sequence and Structure, Vol. 5, Ch. 22, National Biomedical Research
Foundation, Washington, DC, pp. 345±352.
19. Lin,K.X., Kleinjung,J., Taylor,W.R. and Heringa,J. (2003) Testing
homology with CAO: A contact-based Markov model of protein
evolution. Comput. Biol. Chem., 27, 93±102.
20. Mizuguchi,K., Deane,C.M., Blundell,T.L. and Overington,J.P. (1998)
HOMSTRAD: A database of protein structure alignments for
homologous families. Protein Sci., 7, 2469±2471.
21. Henikoff,S. and Henikoff,J.G. (1992) Amino acid substitution matrices
from protein blocks. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 89, 10915±10919.
22. Altschul,S.F., Madden,T.L., Schaeffer,A.A., Zhang,J., Zhang,Z.,
Miller,W. and Lipman,D.J. (1997) Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: A
new generation of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res.,
25, 3389±3402.
23. Taylor,W.R. (1998) Dynamic sequence databank searching with
templates and multiple alignment. J. Mol. Biol., 280, 375±406.
24. Guex,N. and Peitsch,M.C. (1997) SWISS-MODEL and the Swiss-
PdbViewer: An environment for comparative protein modeling.
Electrophoresis, 18, 2714±2723.
25. Brzozowski,A.M., Dodson,E.J., Dodson,G.G., Murshudov,G.N.,
Verma,C., Turkenburg,J.P., de Bree,F.M. and Dauter,Z. (2002) Structural
origins of the functional divergence of human insulin-like growth factor-I
and insulin. Biochemistry, 41, 9389±9397.
26. Chivian,D., Kim,D.E., Malmstrom,L., Bradley,P., Robertson,T.,
Murphy,P., Strauss,C.E.M., Bonneau,R., Rohl,C.A. and Baker,D. (2003)
Automated prediction of CASP-5 structures using the Robetta Server.
Proteins, 53, 524±533.
2472 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, No. 8
27. Rechler,M.M. and Nissley,S.P. (1990) Insulin-like growth factors. In
Sporn,M.B. and Roberts,A.B. (eds), Peptide Growth Factors and Their
Receptors, Vol. I, Springer Verlag, Berlin, pp. 263±367.
28. Smit,A.B., Vreugdenhil,E., Ebberink,R.H., Geraerts,W.P., Klootwijk,J.
and Joosse,J. (1988) Growth-controlling molluscan neurons produce the
precursor of an insulin-related peptide. Nature, 331, 535±538.
29. Lagueux,M., Lwoff,L., Meister,M., Goltzene,F. and Hoffmann,J.A.
(1990) cDNAs from neurosecretory cells of brains of Locusta migratoria
(Insecta, Orthoptera) encoding a novel member of the superfamily of
insulins. Eur. J. Biochem., 187, 249±254.
30. Kondo,H., Ino,M., Suzuki,A., Ishizaki,H. and Iwami,M. (1996) Multiple
gene copies for bombyxin, an insulin-related peptide of the silkmoth
Bombyx mori: Structural signs for gene rearrangement and duplication
responsible for generation of multiple molecular forms of bombyxin.
J. Mol. Biol., 259, 926±937.
31. Pierce,S.B., Costa,M., Wisotzkey,R., Devadhar,S., Homburger,S.A.,
Buchman,A.R., Ferguson,K.C., Heller,J., Platt,D.M., Pasquinelli,A.A.,
Liu,L.X., Doberstein,S.K. and Ruvkun,G. (2001) Regulation of DAF-2
receptor signaling by human insulin and ins-1, a member of the unusually
large and diverse C. elegans insulin gene family. Genes Dev., 15,
672±686.
32. Brogiolo,W., Stocker,H., Ikeya,T., Rintelen,F., Fernandez,R. and
Hafen,E. (2001) An evolutionarily conserved function of the Drosophila
insulin receptor and insulin-like peptides in growth control. Curr. Biol.,
11, 213±221.
33. Adams,M.D., Celniker,S.E., Holt,R.A., Evans,C.A., Gocayne,J.D. et al.
(2000) The genome sequence of Drosophila melanogaster. Science, 287,
2185±2195.
34. Bowie,J.U., Luethy,R. and Eisenberg,D. (1991) A method to identify
protein sequences that fold into a common structure. Science, 253,
164±170.
35. Rodionov,M.A. and Johnson,M.S. (1994) Residue±residue contact
substitution probabilities derived from aligned three-dimensional
structures and the identi®cation of common folds. Protein Sci., 3,
2366±2377.
36. Simons,K.T., Kooperberg,C., Huang,E. and Baker,D. (1997) Assembly
of protein tertiary structures from fragments with similar local sequences
using simulated annealing and Bayesian scoring functions. J. Mol. Biol.,
268, 209±225.
37. Russell,A.J. and Torda,A.E. (2002) Protein sequence threading:
averaging over structures. Proteins Struct. Funct. Genet., 47, 496±505.
38. Teodorescu,O., Galor,T., Pillardy,J. and Elber,R. (2004) Enriching the
sequence substitution matrix by structural information. Proteins, 54,
41±48.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, No. 8 2473
