Targeting Multiple Signaling Pathways by Green Tea
Polyphenol ()-Epigallocatechin-3-Gallate
Naghma Khan, Farrukh Afaq, Mohammad Saleem, Nihal Ahmad, and Hasan Mukhtar
Department of Dermatology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin
Abstract
Cell signaling pathways, responsible for maintaining a
balance between cell proliferation and death, have emerged
as rational targets for the management of cancer. Emerging
data amassed from various laboratories around the world
suggests that green tea, particularly its major polyphenolic
constituent ()-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), possesses
remarkable cancer chemopreventive and therapeutic poten-
tial against various cancer sites in animal tumor bioassay
systems and in some human epidemiologic studies. EGCG
has been shown to modulate multiple signal transduction
pathways in a fashion that controls the unwanted prolifer-
ation of cells, thereby imparting strong cancer chemopre-
ventive as well as therapeutic effects. This review discusses
the modulations of important signaling events by EGCG and
their implications in cancer management. (Cancer Res 2006;
66(5): 2500-5)
Introduction
Cancer chemoprevention. The multistage process of cancer
development (i.e., carcinogenesis) leading to clinically visible and
metastasized cancers in humans is a long process, generally
taking many years through well-defined stages known as
initiation, promotion, and progression. Because advanced metas-
tasized cancers are mostly incurable, an effort to prolong or
block the process of carcinogenesis through chemoprevention
has become an important and feasible strategy for cancer
control and management. The concept of chemoprevention is to
control the occurrence of cancer by slowing, blocking, or
reversing the development of the disease by the administration
of naturally occurring or synthetic compounds. For a variety of
reasons, the most important of which is potential human
acceptance, naturally occurring dietary substances for chemo-
prevention are preferred. Many studies with a number of
different diet-derived compounds indicate that many such agents
are capable of prolonging one or more stages of the carcinogenic
process (1).
Cancer chemoprevention through modulation of intracel-
lular signaling network. Center to the cancer biology is
disrupted intracellular signaling network, which transmits aber-
rant signals resulting in abnormal cellular function. Consistent
with this notion, targeting deregulated intracellular signaling cas-
cades is considered to be a rational approach in achieving chemo-
prevention. Recent research is clarifying that many dietary cancer
chemopreventive agents exert their effects by modulating one or
more cell signaling pathways in a manner that interrupts the
carcinogenic process (2).
Tea in chemoprevention of cancer. Tea produced from the
leaves of the plant Camellia sinensis is, next to water, the most
widely consumed beverage in the world. Among all teas consumed
in the world, green tea is the best studied for health benefits,
including chemopreventive efficacy, because its chemistry com-
pared with other teas is better known (3). A search of literature
shows that there are >765 published studies showing the effects of
green tea on cancer, mostly dealing with its chemopreventive
effects. It is generally agreed that much of cancer che-
mopreventive effects of green tea are mediated by its polyphenols.
The major catechins in green tea are ()-epigallocatechin-3-
gallate (EGCG), ()-epicatechin-3-gallate, ()-epigallocatechin, and
()-epicatechin. EGCG is the major catechin in green tea and
accounts for 50% to 80% representing 200 to 300 mg in a brewed
cup of green tea.
In recent years, many studies from our and other laboratories
have shown strong chemopreventive and possibly cancer chemo-
therapeutic effects of green tea polyphenols and EGCG against
cancers of the skin (UV radiation and chemically induced),
lung, breast, colon, liver, stomach, prostate, and other sites (3, 4).
The purpose of this brief review is to present recent research
data focusing on the modulation of cellular signaling events by
EGCG.
Induction of Apoptosis and Cell Cycle Arrest by
EGCG
Apoptosis is a highly ordered protective mechanism through
which unwanted or damaged cells are eliminated from the
system. It is essential for normal development, turnover, and
replacement of cells in the living system. In addition, apoptosis
serves as a protective mechanism against neoplastic development
in an organism by eliminating genetically damaged cells or
excess cells that have improperly been induced to divide. The
very first study documenting selective effects of EGCG for
induction of apoptosis and cell cycle arrest for cancer cells was
from our laboratory in which it was shown that EGCG induces
apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in many cancer cells without
affecting normal cells (5). Many subsequent studies have verified
this observation in several cell types, including lung, colon,
pancreas, skin, and prostate (4). Various studies show that there
is link between cell cycle regulation and cancer and the
inhibition of the cell cycle is considered as a target for the
management of cancer. Although EGCG has been shown to
affect a number of factors associated with cell cycle progression,
Requests for reprints: Hasan Mukhtar, Department of Dermatology, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, 1300, University Avenue, Medical Sciences Center, B-25, Madison,
WI 53706. Phone: 608-263-3927; Fax: 608-263-5223; E-mail: hmukhtar@wisc.edu.
I2006 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-05-3636
Cancer Res 2006; 66: (5). March 1, 2006 2500 www.aacrjournals.org
Review
the direct inhibition of cyclin-dependent kinases is considered as
the primary event. The induction of various negative regulators
of the cell cycle may be the consequence of this inhibition.
EGCG also induces the expression of p21 and p27 while
decreasing the expression of cyclin D1 and the phosphorylation
of retinoblastoma. The primary events in green tea polyphenol–
induced apoptosis include nuclear condensation, caspase-3
activation, and poly(ADP)ribose polymerase cleavage. In addition,
EGCG also invokes Bax oligomerization and depolarization of
mitochondrial membranes to facilitate cytochrome c release into
cytosol. The observation that addition of catalase in the cell
culture system prevented EGCG-induced apoptosis suggest that
H2O2 generated from EGCG plays a role in apoptosis induction.
Using nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, the direct
binding of tea polyphenols to the BH3 pocket of antiapoptotic
Bcl-2 family proteins is shown, suggesting a mechanism for
EGCG to inhibit the antiapoptotic function of Bcl-2 proteins. The
BH3 domain was recognized as one of the binding sites of tea
polyphenols (6).
Modulation of Cell Signaling by EGCG
Inhibition of nuclear factor-KB signaling pathway. Nuclear
factor-nB (NF-nB) is an oxidative stress–sensitive transcription
factor that plays a critical role in the regulation of a variety of
genes important in cellular responses, including inflammation,
innate immunity, growth, and cell death. NF-nB is sequestered in
the cytoplasm in an inactive form through interaction with InB
(Fig. 1). Phosphorylation of InB by InB kinase causes ubiquiti-
nation and degradation of InB, thus releasing NF-nB that
then translocates to the nucleus. Phosphorylation and activation
of InB kinase is controlled by an NF-nB-inducing kinase and
there is crosstalk between activation of the mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK) pathway, and the NF-nB-inducing kinase/InB kinase/NF-
nB pathway. It has been shown that the galloyl and hydroxyl
groups at the 3V position on EGCG are responsible for its strong
anti-inflammatory properties. EGCG has been shown to inhibit
NF-nB activity in human colon cancer cells (7). Treatment with
EGCG (10-40 Amol/L) in a dose- and time-dependent manner
was found to inhibit UVB-mediated activation of NF-nB in
normal human epidermal keratinocytes (8). We have identified
NF-nB/p65 component of the NF-nB complex as a target for
specific cleavage by caspases during EGCG-mediated apoptosis
(9). Because based on recent studies, NF-nB is considered as a
target for the management of cancer, modulation of this
pathway by EGCG could contribute to its chemopreventive
potential.
Inhibition of MAPKs and activator protein-1. MAPKs have
been implicated in many physiologic processes, including cell
proliferation, differentiation, and death. There are three major
types of MAPKs in mammalian cells, the extracellular signal-
regulated protein kinases (ERK), the p38 MAPKs, and the c-Jun
NH2-terminal kinases (JNK). The major pathways that lie
downstream of the membrane-associated receptor tyrosine
kinases (RTK) are shown in Fig. 1. In this cascade, Ras inter-
acts with and activates Raf-1, which in turn phosphorylates and
activates MAP/ERK kinase 1/2 (MEK1/2). Activated MEK1/2
then phosphorylates ERK1/2. The JNK1/2/3 and p38a/h/g
pathways are parallel MAPK cascades in mammalian cells.
Once activated, MAPKs (ERK, JNK, and p38) activate ELK and
c-Jun. Phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) is activated by RTKs
and it synthesizes the second messenger, phosphatidyl inositol-
3,4,5-triphosphate, which is necessary for phosphorylation of
Akt. Akt directly phosphorylates the proapoptotic protein Bad,
thus enhancing the antiapoptotic function of Bcl-xL. In JB6
mouse epidermal cell line, it was shown that EGCG (5-20 Amol/
L) inhibited the MAPK pathway (10). The treatment of EGCG
(10-40 Amol/L) to NHEK before UVB exposure was shown to
inhibit UVB-induced hydrogen peroxide production concomi-
tant with the inhibition of UVB-induced phosphorylation of
ERK1/2, JNK, and p38 proteins (8). Recently, EGCG (10-20 Ag/
mL) has been shown to inhibit MAPK pathway and activator
protein-1 (AP-1) activity in human colon cancer cells (7). We
have shown that p.o. feeding of EGCG containing green tea
polyphenols inhibits PI3K pathway in transgenic adenocarcino-
ma of the mouse prostate (TRAMP) model system (11). Because
the deregulation of the MAPK pathway is frequently seen in
a variety of human cancers, modulation of MAPKs by EGCG
may provide novel strategies for the prevention or treatment
of cancer.
AP-1 transcription factor is a protein dimer composed of
members of the basic region leucine zipper protein superfamily,
specifically, the Jun, Fos, and activating transcription factor
proteins. High AP-1 activity has also been shown to be involved
in the tumor promotion and progression of various types of cancers,
such as lung, breast, and skin cancer. EGCG was shown to
inhibit 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate or epidermal growth
factor–induced transformation of mouse epidermal cell line JB6,
and the inhibitory activity was closely related to the inhibition of
AP-1 (10).
Inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor–mediated
signal transduction pathway. The epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) is a plasma membrane glycoprotein with an
extracellular ligand-binding domain, a single transmembrane
region, and an intracellular domain that exhibits intrinsic
tyrosine kinase activity. Overexpression of EGFR produces a
neoplastic phenotype in tumor cells. EGCG (10-20 Ag/mL) was
recently shown to inhibit the activation of the EGFR, HER2, and
multiple downstream signaling pathways in colon cancer cell
lines (7). EGCG binds to a specific metastasis associated 67 kDa
laminin receptor that is expressed on a variety of tumor cells. It
was shown using a subtraction cloning strategy involving cDNA
libraries constructed from cells treated or untreated with all
trans-retinoic acid that the anticancer action of EGCG is
mediated by laminin receptor and it allows EGCG to bind to
the cell surface (12). The cell-laminin interaction via the 67LR is
an important step in several signal transduction pathways and
67LR is involved in kinase-phosphatase cascades. There is an
association between 67LR and the integrin a6 subunit, which is
a part of laminin-binding integrins a6h4 and a6h1. Recent
evidence has also suggested the involvement of MAPK in the
laminin signaling pathway in metastatic human melanoma cells
(13). Based on these data, it was suggested that there exist a
receptor for EGCG. This suggestion awaits follow-up and
confirmation.
Inhibition of insulin-like growth factor-I–mediated signal
transduction pathway. Insulin-like growth factor (IGF) family
of ligands, binding proteins, and receptors is an important
growth factor system involved in the maintenance of normal
functions of cells. The binding of free IGFs to IGF-I results in
Targeting Multiple Signaling Pathways by Green Tea
www.aacrjournals.org 2501 Cancer Res 2006; 66: (5). March 1, 2006
intramolecular receptor autophosphorylation and phosphoryla-
tion of critical downstream targets. This leads to activation of
several signaling pathways, including the PI3K/Akt pathway and
the Ras/MAPK pathway, thus inducing activation of specific
genes, DNA synthesis, and cell proliferation (Fig. 1). We have
shown that green tea polyphenols resulted in substantial reduc-
tion in the levels of IGF-I and significant increase in the levels
of IGF binding protein 3 (IGFBP-3) in TRAMP mice (11). There-
fore, targeting the IGF-I signaling pathway by EGCG may be
an effective strategy for the prevention and treatment of some
cancers.
Inhibition of overexpression of cyclooxygenase-2. Cyclo-
oxygenase-2 (COX-2) is induced by a variety of factors, such
as cytokines, growth factors, and tumor promoters. Inappropri-
ate COX-2 activity has been observed in many pathologic
conditions, including cancer. We have shown that EGCG
(10-100 Amol/L) inhibits mitogen-stimulated COX-2 expression
in androgen-sensitive LNCaP and androgen-insensitive PC-3
human prostate carcinoma cells (14). It has been shown that
EGCG reduced the protein expression and activity of COX-2
following interleukin-1h stimulation of human chondrocytes
(15). Most research findings strongly suggest that development
of chemopreventive compounds, which can block COX-2
expression preferably without affecting COX-1, is a high priority
for cancer research.
Inhibition of proteasome activity. The proteasome is a
massive multicatalytic protease complex that is responsible
for degrading most of the cellular proteins. The ubiquitin/
proteasome–dependent degradation pathway plays an essential
role in up-regulation of cell proliferation, down-regulation of
cell death, and development of drug resistance in human tumor
cells, suggesting the use of proteasome inhibitors as potential
novel anticancer drugs. Nam et al. (16) revealed that EGCG
potently and specifically inhibits the chymotrypsin-like but not
Figure 1. Effect of EGCG on EGFR, MAPK cascades, and activation of the transcription factors AP-1 and NF-nB. Activation of EGFR or HER-2/neu elicits the
autophosphorylation of the receptors and the phophotyrosine residues are bound by other protein kinases in the cytosol. The activated RTKs then phosphorylate several
downstream molecules, thus activating several signaling pathways. Activation of Ras, Raf-1, and PI3K stimulates several intracellular processes. The activated Raf-1
stimulates MAPK kinase and MEK1/2 cascade, which then phosphorylate the MAPK protein ERK1/2. When activated, MAPKs activates various transcription factors,
including ELK and c-Jun. The binding of free IGFs to IGF-I results in intramolecular receptor autophosphorylation and phosphorylation of critical downstream targets.
This leads to activation of several signaling pathways, including the PI3K/Akt pathway and the Ras/MAPK pathway, thus inducing activation of specific genes, DNA
synthesis, and cell proliferation. Her-3 activates PI3K and this causes synthesis of phosphatidyl inositol-3,4,5-triphosphate (PIP3), which activates downstream
pathways that involve Akt. NF-nB-inducing kinase and Akt phosphorylate and activate InB kinase. Activated InB kinase (IKK ) phosphorylates InB, which triggers
ubiquitinylation and subsequent degradation of the InB. NF-nB-inducing kinase (NIK ) enhances the NF-nB activity through activation of MEK1/2 and ERK1/2. EGCG
blocks the autophosphorylation of EGFR and Her-2/neu as well as the MAPK cascade, such as RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK/JNK pathways and PI3K pathways. EGCG also
caused substantial reduction in the levels of IGF-I and significant increase in the levels of IGFBP-3. Green, molecules on which both the in vivo and in vitro effects of
EGCG have been shown; pink, molecules on which only in vitro effects of EGCG have been shown.
Cancer Research
Cancer Res 2006; 66: (5). March 1, 2006 2502 www.aacrjournals.org
trypsin-like activity of the proteasome in vitro and in vivo .
Inhibition of the chymotrypsin-like activity of the proteasome
has been associated with induction of tumor cell apoptosis.
EGCG was also found to block the catalytic activities of
the 20S/26S proteasome complex, resulting in intracellular
accumulation of InBa and subsequent inhibition of NF-nB
activation. This suggests that the proteasome is a cancer-
related molecular target of EGCG and that inhibition of the
proteasome activity by EGCG may contribute to its cancer-
preventive effect.
Modulation of Cell Signaling Associated with
Angiogenesis, Metastasis, and Migration by EGCG
Inhibition of vascular endothelial growth factor. Vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a mitogen for endothelial
cells and is associated with tumor-induced angiogenesis. VEGF
binds to VEGF receptors 1 and 2, the latter being responsible
for most of its mitogenic and chemotactic effects. Recently,
EGCG was found to decrease VEGF receptor phosphorylation and
induces apoptosis in chronic lymphocytic leukemia B cells (17).
Treatment with EGCG (5-50 Amol/L) was shown to result in an
inhibition of human umbilical arterial endothelial cell (HUAEC)
mitogenesis. The signal transduction pathways of VEGF in
HUAEC, including autophosphorylation of VEGF receptors 1 and
2, phosphorylation of ERK1/2, and mRNA expression of the early
growth response factor-1 were also inhibited in EGCG-pretreated
cells (18). Thus, the inhibition of VEGF binding to its receptor may
contribute to the antiangiogenic and cancer chemopreventive
effects of EGCG.
Inhibition of matrix metalloproteinase. The progression
of human tumors involves the matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP) family. Two particular members of this family, MMP-
2 and MMP-9, seem to play an important role in tumor
invasion and metastasis. They are involved in the turnover of
basement membrane collagen under basal conditions and of
other matrix proteins during angiogenesis, tissue remodeling,
and repair. EGCG has been shown to affect MMP activity
both directly and indirectly. We have shown that p.o. admin-
istered green tea polyphenols (0.1% in drinking water) caused
marked inhibition of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in the prostate in
TRAMP mice (11). EGCG (25-100 Amol/L) has been also been
reported to inhibit the MMP-2 and MMP-9 in endothelial
cells (19). Thus, it seems that EGCG could inhibit or delay
cancer invasion, metastasis, and angiogenesis via modulations
in MMPs.
Inhibition of urokinase-plasminogen activator. Urokinase-
plasminogen activator (uPA) is a trypsin-like protease that
converts the zymogen plasminogen into active plasmin. It has
the ability to prevent apoptosis, stimulate angiogenesis, mito-
genesis, cell migration, and to modulate cell adhesion.
Inhibition of urokinase can decrease tumor size or even cause
complete remission of cancers in mice. The known urokinase
inhibitors are unlikely to be used in anticancer therapy because
of their weak inhibitory activity or high toxicity. Jankun et al.
(20) showed that EGCG inhibits the activity of uPA. With the
use of molecular modeling, the authors showed that EGCG
binds to urokinase, blocking His57 and Ser195 of the urokinase
catalytic triad, and extending toward Arg35 from a positively
charged loop of urokinase. Thus, it was suggested that the
anticancer activity of EGCG is mediated by inhibition of uPA,
one of the most frequently overexpressed enzymes in human
cancers.
EGCG in Adjuvant Settings
Several studies have suggested that EGCG may reduce the
toxicity of certain anticancer drugs. These studies suggest that
EGCG could be used in adjuvant settings for cancer management.
The synergistic effects of EGCG with sulindac on the inhibition of
intestinal tumors in multiple intestinal neoplasia (Min) mice have
been reported. The results also indicated that green tea extract
inhibited tumor growth in Min mice almost as potently as achieved
by sulindac itself (21). The effects of green tea and EGCG were also
tested in Kaposi sarcoma tumor model and on endothelial cells.
Green tea or purified EGCG when administered to mice in
the drinking water inhibited angiogenesis in vivo in the Matrigel
sponge model and restrained Kaposi sarcoma tumor growth.
Histologic analyses of the tumors were consistent with an
antiangiogenic activity of EGCG and green tea (19). These data
suggest that green tea or EGCG may find use in the prevention and
treatment of vascular tumors in a chemoprevention or adjuvant
setting.
Clinical Trials
EGCG delivered in the form of capsule (200 mg p.o. for 12 weeks)
has been reported to be effective in the patients with human
papilloma virus–infected cervical lesions (22). The antineoplastic
effects of green tea were seen in patients with androgen-
independent prostate carcinoma (23). A prospective cohort study
with over 8,000 individuals revealed that the daily consumption of
green tea resulted in delayed cancer onset and a follow-up study of
breast cancer patients found that stages I and II breast cancer
patients experienced a lower recurrence rate and longer disease-
free period (24). The positive results observed in phase II and phase
III clinical trials along with exciting preclinical results indicate that
ways and means to take EGCG ‘‘from bench to real-life situations’’
are on the horizon.
Conclusions and Future Prospects
Currently, there is much interest in the design and develop-
ment of chemopreventive agents that act on specific molecular
and cellular targets. The broader outlook of this goal is to define
a chemopreventive/chemotherapeutic agent that can target most,
if not all, targets in a manner that control unwanted cellular
proliferation. As depicted in Fig. 1, EGCG is an agent, which, both
under in vitro and in vivo situations, can target multiple
pathways. However, it should be noted that most of the effects
of EGCG in cell culture systems have been obtained with
relatively high concentrations than observed in the plasma or
tissues of animals or in human plasma after administration of
green tea or EGCG. The pharmacokinetic studies in humans
indicate that the peak plasma concentration after single p.o. dose
of EGCG is <1.0 Amol/L. Therefore, it is not clear whether the
activities observed with high EGCG concentrations in cell lines
can be observed in vivo . However, it is possible that extended use
Targeting Multiple Signaling Pathways by Green Tea
www.aacrjournals.org 2503 Cancer Res 2006; 66: (5). March 1, 2006
of green tea by humans could build sufficient EGCG in the
plasma. The activities observed at submicromolar concentrations
of EGCG may be more relevant to the in vivo situations. EGCG is
autooxidized under cell culture conditions and the half-life of
EGCG is rather short, forming dimers that are also subjected to
autooxidation. During this process, superoxide is generated and
hydrogen peroxide is produced. Under normal conditions, the
oxygen partial pressure in the internal organs (40 mm Hg) is
much lower than that under cell culture conditions (160 mm Hg)
and cells are endowed with antioxidative enzymes, such as
superoxide dismutase and glutathione peroxidase. It remains to
be determined whether EGCG autooxidation occurs in target
tissues, at sites of inflammation, or in cancer cells.
Although there are several studies supporting the preventive
potential of EGCG against cancer, a proper understanding of the
mechanisms by which they reduce the risk is necessary to establish
the efficacy. Here, we provide evidence that the inhibitory effects of
EGCG on carcinogenesis are mediated through the regulation of
cell signaling pathways. To better understand the mechanisms
responsible for the chemopreventive efficacy of EGCG, it is crucial
to identify, in animal models and human clinical trials, molecules
in the signaling network that are affected as the deregulation of the
intracellular cascades leads to the development of many diseases
including cancer. By modulating cell signaling pathways, EGCG
activate cell death signals and induce apoptosis in precancerous or
cancer cells, resulting in the inhibition of cancer development or
progression.
The understanding of the cell signaling pathways and the
molecular events leading to carcinogenesis will provide more
insight into the identification and development of potent chemo-
preventive/chemotherapeutic agents that specifically target these
pathways. Future studies from cell cultures should be integrated
with studies in vivo , especially in ongoing clinical trials, to evaluate
the applicability of these mechanisms in cancer prevention in
humans. To fully elucidate the molecular mechanisms of action of
EGCG in future studies, more in-depth in vitro and in vivo
experiments are needed. Furthermore, because EGCG can modu-
late multiple pathways, it seems to be an attractive agent for a
combination chemoprevention/chemotherapeutic approach, which
seems ideal for the management of cancer.
Summary
Naturally occurring substances that are derived from diet
provides a new insight in cancer therapy. The mechanisms of
action of several chemopreventive agents derived from edible
plants have gained considerable attention in cancer research.
Tea is the most widely consumed beverage worldwide. There
is extensive research going on in elucidating the molecular
mechanisms of cancer chemoprevention by green tea. Although
there are several studies supporting the preventive potential of
EGCG against cancer, a proper understanding of the mecha-
nisms by which EGCG reduces the risk is necessary to establish
its efficacy for the population where it could be most useful.
Several mechanisms to explain the chemopreventive effects of
EGCG have been presented, among which its effect to target
specific cell signaling pathways have received considerable
attention for regulating cellular proliferation and apoptosis.
The diversified effects of EGCG may explain its broad
pharmacologic effects in modulating cell signaling pathways.
EGCG, in addition to other mechanisms, at human achievable
dose, is known to activate cell death signals and induce
apoptosis in precancerous or cancer cells, resulting in the
inhibition of cancer development and/or progression. Impor-
tantly, these antiproliferative and proapoptic effects of EGCG
have been shown to be selective for cancer cells, as normal
cells were not affected by this treatment. In cancer cells, EGCG
also causes inhibition of the activity of specific receptor
tyrosine kinases and related downstream pathways of signal
transduction. This review summarizes recent research data
focusing on the green tea polyphenols especially on EGCG-
induced cellular signal transduction events that seems to have
implications in the inhibition of cell proliferation and
transformation, induction of apoptosis of preneoplastic and
neoplastic cells as well as inhibition of angiogenesis, tumor
invasion, and metastasis.
Acknowledgments
Received 10/7/2005; revised 12/6/2005; accepted 12/21/2005.
Grant support: USPHS grants RO1 CA 78809, RO1 CA 101039, and P50 DK065303.
References
1. Mukhtar H, Ahmad N. Cancer chemoprevention:
future holds in multiple agents. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
1999;158:207–10.
2. Surh YJ. Cancer chemoprevention with dietary phy-
tochemicals. Nat Rev Cancer 2003;3:768–80.
3. Mukhtar H, Ahmad N. Tea polyphenols: prevention of
cancer and optimizing health. Am J Clin Nutr 2000;71:
1698–702S.
4. Yang CS, Maliakal P, Meng X. Inhibition of carcino-
genesis by tea. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2002;42:
25–54.
5. Ahmad N, Feyes DK, Nieminen AL, Agarwal R,
Mukhtar H. Green tea constituent epigallocatechin-3-
gallate and induction of apoptosis and cell cycle arrest
in human carcinoma cells. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:
1881–6.
6. Lambert JD, Hong J, Yang GY, Liao J, Yang CS.
Inhibition of carcinogenesis by polyphenols: evidence
from laboratory investigations. Am J Clin Nutr 2005;81:
284–91S.
7. Shimizu M, Deguchi A, Lim JT, Moriwaki H,
Kopelovich L, Weinstein IB. ()-Epigallocatechin gal-
late and polyphenon E inhibit growth and activation of
the epidermal growth factor receptor and human
epidermal growth factor receptor-2 signaling pathways
in human colon cancer cells. Clin Cancer Res 2005;11:
2735–46.
8. Afaq F, Adhami VM, Ahmad N, Mukhtar H. Inhibition
of ultraviolet B-mediated activation of nuclear factor nB
in normal human epidermal keratinocytes by green tea
constituent ()-epigallocatechin-3-gallate. Oncogene
2003;22:1035–44.
9. Gupta S, Hastak K, Afaq F, Ahmad N, Mukhtar H.
Essential role of caspases in epigallocatechin-3-gallate-
mediated inhibition of nuclear factor nB and induction
of apoptosis. Oncogene 2004;23:2507–22.
10. Dong Z, Ma W, Huang C, Yang CS. Inhibition of
tumor promoter-induced activator protein-1 activation
and cell transformation by tea polyphenols, ()-
epigallocatechin gallate and the aflavins. Cancer Res
1997;57:4414–9.
11. Adhami VM, Siddiqui IA, Ahmad N, Gupta S,
Mukhtar H. Oral consumption of green tea polyphenols
inhibits insulin-like growth factor-I-induced signaling in
an autochthonous mouse model of prostate cancer.
Cancer Res 2004;64:8715–22.
12. Tachibana H, Koga K, Fujimura Y, Yamada K. A
receptor for green tea polyphenol EGCG. Nat Struct Mol
Biol 2004;11:380–1.
13. Givant-Horwitz V, Davidson B, Reich R. Laminin-
induced signaling in tumor cells: the role of the
M(r) 67,000 laminin receptor. Cancer Res 2004;64:
3572–9.
14. Hussain T, Gupta S, Adhami VM, Mukhtar H. Green
tea constituent epigallocatechin-3-gallate selectively
inhibits COX-2 without affecting COX-1 expression in
human prostate carcinoma cells. Int J Cancer 2005;113:
660–9.
15. Ahmed S, Rahman A, Hasnain A, Lalonde M,
Goldberg VM, Haqqi TM. Green tea polyphenol
epigallocatechin-3-gallate inhibits the IL-1h-induced
activity and expression of cyclooxygenase-2 and nitric
oxide synthase-2 in human chondrocytes. Free Radic
Biol Med 2002;33:1097–105.
Cancer Research
Cancer Res 2006; 66: (5). March 1, 2006 2504 www.aacrjournals.org
16. Nam S, Smith DM, Dou QP. Ester bond-containing
tea polyphenols potently inhibit proteasome activity
in vitro and in vivo . J Biol Chem 2001;276:13322–30.
17. Lee YK, Shanafelt TD, Bone ND, Strege AK, Jelinek
DF, Kay NE. VEGF receptors on chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL) B cells interact with STAT 1 and 3:
implication for apoptosis resistance. Leukemia 2005;19:
513–23.
18. Neuhaus T, Pabst S, Stier S, et al. Inhibition of the
vascular-endothelial growth factor-induced intracellular
signaling and mitogenesis of human endothelial cells by
epigallocatechin-3 gallate. Eur J Pharmacol 2004;483:
223–7.
19. Fassina G, Vene R, Morini M, et al. Mechanisms of
inhibition of tumor angiogenesis and vascular tumor
growth by epigallocatechin-3-gallate. Clin Cancer Res
2004;10:4865–73.
20. Jankun J, Selman SH, Swiercz R, Skrzypczak-Jankun
E. Why drinking green tea could prevent cancer. Nature
1997;387:561.
21. Suganuma M, Ohkura Y, Okabe S, Fujiki H. Combi-
nation cancer chemoprevention with green tea extract
and sulindac shown in intestinal tumor formation in
Min mice. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 2001;127:69–72.
22. Ahn WS, Yoo J, Huh SW, et al. Protective effects of
green tea extract (polyphenon E and EGCG) on human
cervical lesions. Eur J Cancer Prev 2003;12:383–90.
23. Jatoi A, Ellison N, Burch PA, et al. A phase II trial of
green tea in the treatment of patients with androgen
independent metastatic prostate carcinoma. Cancer
2003;97:1442–6.
24. Fujiki H. Two stages of cancer prevention with green
tea. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1999;125:589–97.
Targeting Multiple Signaling Pathways by Green Tea
www.aacrjournals.org 2505 Cancer Res 2006; 66: (5). March 1, 2006
