Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM), a
knowledgebaseofhumangenesandgeneticdisorders
Ada Hamosh*, Alan F. Scott, Joanna S. Amberger, Carol A. Bocchini and
Victor A. McKusick
Received September 15, 2004; Revised and Accepted September 22, 2004
ABSTRACT
Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIMTM) is a
comprehensive, authoritative and timely knowledge-
base of human genes and genetic disorders compiled
to support human genetics research and education
and the practice of clinical genetics. Started by
Dr Victor A. McKusick as the definitive reference
Mendelian Inheritance in Man, OMIM (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/) isnowdistributedelec-
tronically by the National Center for Biotechnology
Information, where it is integrated with the Entrez
suite of databases. Derived from thebiomedical litera-
ture, OMIM is written and edited at Johns Hopkins
University with input from scientists and physicians
around theworld.EachOMIMentryhasa full-textsum-
mary of a genetically determined phenotype and/or
gene and has numerous links to other genetic data-
bases such as DNA and protein sequence, PubMed
references, general and locus-specific mutation data-
bases, HUGO nomenclature, MapViewer, GeneTests,
patient support groups and many others. OMIM is an
easy and straightforward portal to the burgeoning
information in human genetics.
INTRODUCTION
Mendelian Inheritance in Man (MIM), which has been
published in 12 print editions since 1966 (1), is a compendium
of information on genetic disorders and genes. Its electronic
counterpart, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man
(OMIMTM), is updated daily and is freely available on the
World Wide Web (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/).
OMIM is an authoritative full-text overview of genes and
genetic phenotypes that can be used by students, researchers
and clinicians. Curation of the database and editorial decisions
take place at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.
Authors are located at Johns Hopkins and around the world.
Distribution of OMIM and software development are provided
by the National Center for Biotechnology Information
(NCBI) at the National Library of Medicine (NLM).
MIM has been computerized since 1964 and periodically
published, first in 1966 and the 12th edition in 1998 (1). The
print editions began as ‘Catalogs of Autosomal Dominant,
Autosomal Recessive and X-linked Phenotypes’; since 1992
the subtitle of MIM has been ‘Catalogs of Human Genes and
Genetic Disorders’. OMIM has been available online since
1987, first from Johns Hopkins University and since 1995
from the NCBI. Figure 1 illustrates the growth of the database
in terms of numbers of entries in each edition of the book and
in OMIM through September 13, 2004. OMIM averages at
least 8500 unique users and 100 000 queries per day.
SEARCHING OMIM
OMIM can be searched from its homepage or from any page in
the NCBI Entrez suite of databases. Information in OMIM can
be retrieved by queries on MIM number, disorder, gene name
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 410 614 3313; Fax: +1 410 955 4999; Email: ahamosh@jhmi.edu
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use permissions, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org.
ª 2005, the authors
Figure 1.Growth of the database in terms of number of entries in each edition of
MIM and in OMIM as of September 13, 2004.
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 33, Database issue ª Oxford University Press 2005; all rights reserved
D514–D517 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gki033
and/or symbol, or plain English (e.g. ‘cryptorchidism webbed
neck’). The limits function may be used to perform a restricted
search of parts of a MIM entry (number, titles, references, etc.)
and/or type of MIM entry (gene or phenotype). Regardless of
the method used, the search engine ranks the entries that match
the query so that the entries that are most relevant to the
question are generally in the top 10 retrievals.
Each OMIM entry is assigned a unique six-digit number
whose first digit indicates whether its inheritance is autosomal,
X-linked, Y-linked or mitochondrial: 1, autosomal loci or
phenotypes (entries created before May 15, 1994); 2, autoso-
mal loci or phenotypes (entries created before May 15, 1994);
3, X-linked loci or phenotypes; 4, Y-linked loci or phenotypes;
5, mitochondrial loci or phenotypes; and 6, autosomal loci or
phenotypes (created after May 15, 1994).
In addition, MIM entries are categorized by whether they
contain information on genes, phenotypes or both. This is
denoted by the symbol that precedes a MIM number. An
asterisk (*) before an entry number indicates a gene of
known sequence. A number symbol (#) before an entry num-
ber indicates that it is a descriptive entry, usually of a pheno-
type, and does not represent a unique locus. The reason for the
use of the #-sign is given in the first paragraph of the entry.
Discussion of any gene(s) related to the phenotype resides in
appropriate entry(ies) as described in the first paragraph. A
plus sign (+) before an entry number indicates that the entry
contains the description of a gene of known sequence and a
phenotype. A percentage sign (%) before an entry number
indicates that the entry describes a confirmed Mendelian phe-
notype or phenotypic locus for which the underlying molecu-
lar basis is not known. No symbol before an entry number
generally indicates a description of a phenotype for which the
Mendelian basis, although suspected, has not been clearly
established or that the distinctness of this phenotype from that
in another entry is unclear. A caret symbol (^) before an entry
number means the entry was removed from the database or
moved to another entry as indicated. As of September 13,
2004, OMIM had 10 208 entries describing genes with
known sequence and 5777 entries describing phenotypes
(Table 1).
HOME PAGE
From the OMIM home page, one can review OMIM Statistics
including the current count of the number of entries in OMIM
(15 593 on September 13, 2004) organized by catalog (auto-
somal, X-linked, Y-linked and mitochondrial) as well as a
count by chromosome of OMIM’s Synopsis of the Human
Gene Map (9098 loci on September 13, 2004). The Update
Log allows a quick check of the latest additions and changes to
OMIM. About 70 entries are created and 600 updated each
month. Restrictions on Use informs the user that OMIM is
copyrighted by the Johns Hopkins University and is made
available to the general public subject to certain restrictions.
Finally, the OMIM home page maintains links to many useful
genetic resources including the Genetic Alliance, an umbrella
organization of over 600 genetic support groups.
WITHIN AN ENTRY
Within an OMIM entry, the blue bar along the left-hand side
provides a menu for direct access to subheadings in the entry
(Figure 2A and B). In addition, there are links to resources both
within and outside OMIM. Clinical Synopsis takes one to a
listing of the clinical features of the disorder. There are over
4500 clinical synopses in OMIM. Genemap takes the user to
OMIM’s Synopsis of the Human Gene Map. The links within a
phenotype or gene entry are not necessarily the same. In the
case of the cystic fibrosis (OMIM 219700) and cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator (OMIM 602421)
entries, the links may include Entrez Gene (NCBI LocusLink
database), Nomenclature (HUGO Nomenclature Committee),
RefSeq (NCBI reference sequences), GenBank (NCBI nucleo-
tide sequence database), Protein (NCBI protein sequence data-
base) and UniGene (NCBI UniGene project). Additional
external links include the cystic fibrosis locus-specific mutation
database (CFMDB), the Coriell Cell Repository (CCR) and the
HumanGeneMutationDatabase at Cardiff (HGMD). The CCR
lists CF cell lines available for research. In all cases, the
links take one directly to the relevant entry within the
other database. When available, gene and phenotype entries
contain links to GeneTests to the right-hand side of the
entry title. The GeneTests link takes the user directly to the
relevant gene entry in GeneTests, a database of information on
genetic testing and its use in diagnosis,management and genetic
counseling.
An OMIM entry includes the primary title and symbol,
alternative titles and symbols, and ‘included’ titles (i.e. related
but not synonymous information that is not addressed in
another entry). The gene map locus displays the cytogenetic
location of the gene or disorder. This information is derived
from the OMIM gene map. Multiple map locations may be
given if a disease is known to be genetically heterogeneous.
The light bulb icons located at the end of every paragraph link
to the NCBI’s ‘neighboring’ feature. This feature takes key-
words from the paragraph preceding the light bulb and
searches PubMed to create a list of related articles. References
within an OMIM entry are linked to the complete citation at
Table 1. Number of gene and phenotype entries in OMIM as on September 13, 2004
Autosomal X-linked Y-linked Mitochondrial Total
* Gene with known sequence 9318 414 47 37 9816
+ Gene with known sequence and phenotype 356 36 0 0 392
# Phenotype description, molecular basis known 1462 134 1 25 1622
% Mendelian phenotype or locus, molecular basis unknown 1288 130 4 0 1422
Other, mainly phenotypes with suspected mendelian basis 2185 154 2 0 2341
Total 14 609 868 54 62 15 593
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D515
the end of the entry. The PubMed ID at the end of the OMIM
reference is linked to the PubMed abstract and in some
instances to the full text of the article if the journal is
online. Following the references is a list of credits and edit
history: the Creation Date lists the date when the entry was
created and the name of the author; authors who subsequently
contribute additions or changes to the entry are given credit in
the Contributors field; changes made by the editorial staff are
documented in the Edit History field.
Allelic Variants with functional significance are main-
tained within the relevant gene entry. Allelic variants are
given a 10-digit number: the six-digit number of the parent
entry followed by a decimal point and a unique four-digit
variant number. For most genes, only selected mutations are
included as specific subentries. Criteria for inclusion are: first
several mutations to be discovered, high population fre-
quency, distinctive phenotype, historic significance, unusual
mechanism of mutation, unusual pathogenetic mechanism
and distinctive inheritance [e.g. dominant with some muta-
tions, recessive with other mutations in the same gene (see
OMIM entry 601079)]. Most of the allelic variants represent
disease-producing mutations. A few polymorphisms are
included, mainly those that show statistical association
with particular common disorders. As of September 13, 2004,
OMIM listed 12 715 allelic variants in 1651 entries.
THE OMIM GENE MAP
OMIM’s Synopsis of the Human Gene Map is maintained as a
convenience to users and focuses on the ‘Morbid Map’, i.e. the
mapping of disorders. In chromosome-by-chromosome tabu-
lar form, the OMIM Synopsis of the Human GeneMap lists for
each gene, the cytogenetic location, gene symbols, method(s)
of mapping and disorder(s) related to the specific gene. Links
to the sequence-based MapViewer are available from the cyto-
genetic location in the Gene Map. The Morbid Map is an
alphabetical tabular listing of all mapped disorders. As of
September 13, 2004, there were at least 3659 disorders spread
across 2558 loci. In 2563 of these disorders, the molecular
basis has been identified at the DNA level. These 2563 dis-
orders of known molecular basis are distributed over the
1651 loci with at least one allelic variant; many genes are
the site of more than one mutation causing phenotypically
(A)
D516 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
distinct disorders (e.g. cystic fibrosis and congenital
bilateral absence of the vas deferens caused by different muta-
tions in CFTR). The Morbid Map may be displayed from
within NCBI’s MapViewer program to allow integration
with finer physical and sequence-based maps of the human
genome.
As a continuously updated repository of intersecting data on
genes and disorders, OMIM offers help to clinicians, students
and researchers in unraveling the complex relationship
between genes and disease. OMIM’s priorities continue to
be to provide timely information about single gene disorders
and select complex diseases, along with the molecular bases
underlying them, and to provide descriptions of genes with
known function.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Funding is provided by the National Human Genome Research
Institute (NHGRI) through a contract administered by theNLM
(N01-LM-43504). Maintenance of OMIM is also supported by
licensing fees, and the terms of these arrangements are being
managed by the Johns Hopkins University in accordance with
its conflict of interest policies.
REFERENCES
1. McKusick,V.A. (1998) Mendelian Inheritance in Man. A Catalog of
HumanGenes andGeneticDisorders, 12th edn. JohnsHopkinsUniversity
Press, Baltimore, MD.
(B)
Figure 2. (A) Entry for cystic fibrosis and (B) CFTR showing links to EntrezGene,Nomenclature, RefSeq,GenBank, Protein andUniGene databases, aswell as links
to the CFTR mutation database (CFMDB), the Coriell Cell Repository (CCR) and the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD).
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D517
