DILIMOT: discovery of linear motifs in proteins
Victor Neduva and Robert B. Russell*
EMBL, Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany
Received February 14, 2006; Revised March 9, 2006; Accepted March 20, 2006
ABSTRACT
Discovery of protein functional motifs is critical in
modern biology. Small segments of 3–10 residues
play critical roles in protein interactions, post-
translational modifications and trafficking. DILIMOT
(DIscovery of LInear MOTifs) is a server for the pre-
diction of these short linear motifs within a set of
proteins. Given a set of sequences sharing a common
functional feature (e.g. interaction partner or localiza-
tion) the method finds statistically over-represented
motifs likely to be responsible for it. The input
sequences are first passed through a set of filters
to remove regions unlikely to contain instances of
linear motifs. Motifs are then found in the remain-
ing sequence and ranked according to a statistic
that measure over-representation and conservation
across homologues in related species. The results
are displayed via a visual interface for easy perusal.
The server is available at http://dilimot.embl.de
INTRODUCTION
The modular nature of proteins is well established. Resources
like SMART (1) and Pfam (2) contain thousands of sequence
modules, most of which are globular protein domains of 30 or
more residues, which cover a variety of functions. These data-
bases have long been complemented by dozens of sequence
comparison tools that have enabled the detection of both new
domains, and instances of those already known [e.g. (3–6)].
Though very useful, these resources and tools are limited
in the kinds of sequence features they cover: specifically they
are normally restricted to relatively long stretches of sequence
that normally fold into compact globular entities. They are
not well suited to study the many hundreds of known short
linear segments (usually shorter than 10 residues) known to
participate in protein interactions, localization and post-
translational modifications throughout many biological pro-
cesses. Segments performing similar molecular functions
often show a conserved sequence pattern, or linear motif
that captures the key features important for their function.
In contrast to most domains, linear motifs very often reside
in disordered or non-globular regions of proteins (7) and are
usually only conserved between closely related species (8).
This, together with their short length, has to date made them
difficult to detect either computationally or experimentally.
Efforts are underway to catalogue linear motifs and particu-
lar instances that are known to be functional. These include the
eukaryotic linear motif (ELM) resource (7), Phospho.ELM (9),
NetPhos (10), Prosite (11) and ScanSite (12). Many of these
resources also allow users to find instances of known motifs
within proteins of interest. However, tools to uncover new
linear motifs are not generally available. Estimates of hun-
dreds of still to be discovered motifs mediating protein inter-
actions (13) make applications to do so very timely. DILIMOT
(DIscovery of LInear MOTifs; http://dilimot.embl.de/) is a
tool for doing just this. Users with a set of proteins sharing
some common attribute can use the server to find candidate
motifs likely to be responsible for it. The method is robust and
sensitive: it performed well in a benchmark, and was previ-
ously able to rediscover dozens of previously known motifs
from very noisy high-throughput protein interaction data (13).
METHODOLOGY OVERVIEW
The general principle behind the approach is that proteins with
a common function will share a feature that mediates it, either
a domain or a linear motif. In the absence of a domain, the
linear motif is often the only common sequence feature, and is
often detectable, simply by virtue of over-representation (13).
The methodology is shown schematically in Figure 1. In the
first stage of the procedure, parts of a given set of protein
sequences least likely to contain linear motifs are removed,
and the set is made non-redundant in terms of sequence sim-
ilarity. Then all over-represented motifs in the remaining
sequences are identified and ranked according to scores that
consider the background probability of the motif been found
in randomly selected sequences, the number of sequences
containing the motif, the size of the set of sequences, and
the degree to which instances of the motif are preserved in
available orthologous proteins.
Filtering sequences and motif detection
Protein regions known to be depleted for linear motifs, such
as globular domains, signal peptides, trans-membrane and
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +49 6221 387 8473; Fax: +49 6221 387 8517; Email: russell@embl.de
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
W350–W355 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gkl159
coiled-coil regions are defined using SMART (1) and Pfam (2)
with default parameters. Globular regions not found in these
resources can also be predicted using GlobPlot (14). Note
that removal of low-complexity sequence regions is not sens-
ible as linear motifs often reside in them. Users can specify the
combination of particular features to be removed, and can
moreover filter sequences themselves down to particular
parts they know to be important for binding (e.g. deduced
from deletion experiments). In this way, they can avoid spuri-
ous removal of motifs by overzealous automatic filtering, and
can greatly improve the sensitivity by removing potential false
motifs found in non-interacting parts of the sequence. Each set
of sequences is also made non-redundant: just one represent-
ative of long sequence similar stretches, as defined by BLAST
(6) (E < 0.001), is kept in the set. This avoids the discovery of
motifs owing to multiple occurrences of long homologous
segments that are not defined as domains in SMART or
Pfam. Sequences with >97% of their residues filtered are
removed from the set. Motifs are then uncovered in the
remaining sequences using the TEIRESIAS pattern-matching
algorithm (15), with parameters that can be specified by the
user. Currently we do not allow for conservative substitutions
(R/K, D/E, etc.), though we will provide these once we have
tested their performance in a benchmark.
Scoring and ranking motifs
Short protein motifs follow a binomial distribution in random-
ized protein sequences (data not shown). We exploit this
observation to compute the probability (P) of observing a
motif a certain number of times in a set of a particular size.
This calculation requires a background probability (P) of
Figure 1. The server process and output. (A) Schematic showing how submitted sequences are filtered, motifs found and arranged into a ranked list sorted by P (left).
When the species is provided, sequences are assigned to the orthologous groups, species–specific probabilities for over-represented motifs are calculated (coloured
box) the list resorted by SCONS (right). (B) Example of server output. A list of putative motifs is reported in an interactive table (left), which gives general details for
each of them. Clicking on each motif launches an additional page (right) showing sequences containing the motif, where the motif is found in them and the degree to
which the motif is conserved in related species. Motif locations (red bars) and other features found in the sequences, such as domains, are shown graphically and
detailed below each image.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue W351
finding the motif within similarly filtered, randomly selected
sequences, which we compute by selecting random proteins
from SWISS-PROT (16). The calculation does not currently
explicitly account for protein length: we assume that sets will
consist of proteins with a typical length distribution. This can
lead to motifs within sets of very long sequences having
lower probabilities (i.e. more significant). However the relat-
ive ranking of the motifs for a particular set would not change
as all are affected equally. We are currently revising the
calculations to correct for length.
As true instances of known motifs are often conserved
over short evolutionary distances (8), it is also possible to
increase sensitivity by combining multiple P-values from
different species. We combine these as a product of separate
P-values for all species (13). We refer to this product as SCONS.
The server currently contains orthologous groups from some
nine complete eukaryotic genomes (Hsa, Homo sapiens;
Mmu, Mus musculus; Rno, Rattus norwegicus; Gga, Gallus
gallus; Fru, Fugu rubripes; Aga, Anopheles gambiae; Cel.
Caenorhabditis elegans; Dme, Drosophila melanogaster;
Ath, Arabidopsis thaliana) as defined by STRING (17) and
aligned using MUSCLE (18); we will add reliable, completed
eukaryotic genomes as they arrive. The user must merely
provide the species to which the set of proteins belongs or
in principle the closest relative among the complete genomes
(e.g. one might select H.sapiens if working with Chimpanzee
proteins). Motifs are ranked by SCONS or by the single species
P-value if conservation is not possible to compute, or not
selected.
Performing many different queries at the same time creates
problems because of multiple-testing: certain values of SCONS/
P-values will necessarily be smaller when results from many
sets are compared. Note, however, that our thresholds, repor-
ted below and on the server, were derived under a multiple-
testing scenario: many motifs derived from dozens of sets.
SERVER DETAILS
The site comprises a Perl-CGI front end, which calls the
various parts of the underlying method and parses the results
to produce user-specific display pages. Jobs are assigned an
identifier; this or link, which is sent to the users e-mail address
can be used to access the results for up to two weeks after the
job is completed. Computationally, jobs take a few seconds or
minutes to process, though actual response time depends on
the number of sequences in the set and on the number of jobs in
the queuing system.
Users are required to input at least three sequences in
FASTA format, corresponding to the set of proteins in
which to search for motif candidates. We have also developed
an interface to the STRING (17) interaction server to aid the
construction of sequence sets for motif hunting (see below). It
is also possible to adjust several parameters to alter the output,
including the type of filtering to be performed (see above), the
species the sequences come from, the length limits for motif
candidates, the number of fixed (i.e. non-‘x’) positions, and
the minimum number of sequences in the set required to
contain a reported motif. Results, when ready, are displayed
in the current browser window, and a link to the results pages is
sent to the users e-mail address if it is supplied.
Results are provided as a table of motifs ranked by the P or
SCONS value. The number of results displayed can be changed
according to user-defined criteria, such as the number of
sequences containing each candidate motif, or the maximum
P or SCONS value. When clicked, each motif is displayed
individually (Figure 1), showing the location of candidate
motifs in the sequence, the location of other features identified
by SMART and Pfam, and how well the motif is conserved
across orthologues from related species (in the form of a
sub-alignment showing only the motif-containing region).
Note that additional instances of the motifs within filtered
regions are also reported to the user. Although these are not
used in the scoring scheme, they might still be functional,
perhaps residing in loop regions inside globular domains, or
being homologues of other motif instances reported.
EXAMPLE APPLICATIONS OF THE SERVER
In previous work we applied the method on a set of proteins
from high-throughput Yeast two-hybrid studies and other
sources (13). However, the method can be applied to any
other set of proteins with a common attribute. For example,
sets of proteins sharing an interaction partner from biochem-
ical experiments (e.g. literature derived interaction data,
kinase substrates, etc.), or a common cellular localization
[e.g. as determined by high-throughput experiments (19)].
Below we discuss some examples: the diversity of applications
highlights both the methods utility and the general importance
of short linear motifs in biological systems. Summary details
for the motifs mentioned are given in Table 1.
Binding site prediction for end-binding protein 1 (EB1)
EB1 is one of a large family serving pivotal roles in eukaryotic
microtubule dynamics. Several proteins that are proposed to
interact with EB1 or its Yeast homologues have been identified
in human [e.g. adenomatous polyposis coli protein, APC (20);
cytoplasmic linker protein, CLIP-170 (21)] and in various
species of Yeast [e.g. Karyogamy protein, Kar9 (22); temper-
ature shock-inducible protein, Tip1 (21)] (Figure 2). For this
example, there are not sufficient numbers of interaction part-
ners in a single species to apply the method, so we tried
combining sequences from different species into a single set.
om different species into a single set. Although this prevented
the strict use of motif conservation, the method still returned
some interesting candidate motifs. The best scoring motif was
Table 1. Identification of linear motifs in various protein sets
Domain!motif Source 1st correct
motif (rank)
SCONS N/M
EB1!IP Manual SxIP(1) N/A* 7/9
Nuclear localization LifeBD KxxKxK(1) 9.4 · 1034 9/27
PKB!RxRxx(ST) Phospho.ELM RxRxxS(1) 1.7 · 1064 17/28
CDK!(ST)Px(KR) Phospho.ELM SPxR(2) 8.5 · 1031 13/42
PKA!(KR)(KR)x(ST) Phospho.ELM RRxS(1) 0.0 36/77
CK-2!(ST)xxE Phospho.ELM SDxE(4) 1.5 · 1065 19/70
Source indicates where the set of proteins came from (see text). N is the number
of proteins in the set containing the motif, M is the number of sequences in
the set.
*SCONS could not be calculated for EB1 as the proteins came from different
species. The corresponding P-value is 2.1 · 1010.
W352 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue
SxIP, and inspection of others suggested a longer variant
P(T/S)x(L/V/I)P (i.e. this was constructed manually by com-
bining different motifs). The best motif is well conserved in
orthologues of the human and Yeast interactors. Interestingly,
this motif agrees very well with a recently published crystal
structure of EB1 bound to a peptide segment and with kinetic
assays involving peptides containing the motif (23), which the
authors propose to be centred around an IP pattern.
Cellular localization signals
We applied the approach to the detection of potential cellular
transit signals by searching for patterns in groups of proteins
sharing a common localization as described in LifeDB, a
database of mammalian proteins with experimentally verified
cellular locations (19). There were 19 localization sets with at
least four sequence dissimilar proteins in them (sets of three or
smaller only rarely give statistically significant signals). The
sets include all major cellular compartments (e.g. nucleolus,
peroxisome, etc.). Among the motifs we detected were several
typical basic nuclear localization signals (NLS), which are
clearly over-represented in nuclear/nucleolar localized
proteins (Table 1).
Kinase phosphorylation sites
Phosphorylation sites for particular kinases often show
very weak patterns, with little more than the phosphorylated
Serine, Threonine or Tyrosine common to the substrates.
Nevertheless, our approach correctly identifies four phos-
phorylation sites when presented with the nine datasets spe-
cific to kinases taken from the Phospho.ELM resource (9) that
had regular expressions with two or more non-wildcard (‘x’)
residues in the ELM database (7). These are detailed in
Table 1.
PRACTICAL HINTS FOR FINDING TRUE MOTIFS
Our previous work (8,13) gave us considerable experience in
finding both previously known, and new motifs, some of which
we subsequently verified experimentally. What follows are
some pointers as to how to distil true motifs from noise.
This is particularly important when one is dealing with sets
of sequences where a common function is open to question,
due to experimental limitations (e.g. sets from error-prone
two-hybrid interaction datasets). It is also sometimes difficult
to find motifs that are highly variable in nature (e.g. containing
only two fixed positions), as many known motifs are.
It is first useful to study the nature of previously determined
linear motifs. The majority of these are between 4–8 residues
in length, have 2–4 specified (i.e. non-‘x’) positions, of which
1–3 are a single invariant amino acid (Figure 3A). They also
have different preferences for particular amino acids relative
to globular proteins (Figure 3B). These preferences also vary
Figure 2. The EB1 motif SxIP detected by the server. (A) A sequence logo (27) for the EB1 binding motif, generated using all instances of the motif in the input set.
(B) Examples of EB1 binding proteins from the input set (represented as boxes) and multiple alignments of putative motif containing regions. Dark blue regions in the
boxes denote those removed by the domain and redundancy filters. A known EB1 binding region (in APC) lies at the C-terminus of a Pfam domain. To avoid its
removal, we simply cut the sequence down to this region alone (switching the Pfam filter off will have similar effect). Sequences for the motif-containing region are
shown aligned to the best homologues in closely related species. Amino acids in the alignments are coloured according to residue type: blue, positive; red, negative;
light-blue, small; yellow, hydrophobic; green, aromatic; magenta, polar; Proline, orange. Positions within the predicted motif are denoted by red triangles. Species
abbreviations: Hsa, H.sapiens; Mmu, M.musculus; Rno, R.norwegicus; Gga, G.gallus; Fru, F.rubripes; Cgi, Candida glabrata; Kla, Kluyveromyces lactis; Kwa,
Kluyveromyces waltii; Ego, Eremothecium gossypii; Sce, Saccharomyces cerevisiae; Dha, Debaryomyces hansenii.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue W353
across different types of motifs (ligands, targeting signals or
post-translational modifications). Proline features in many
ligands, which is not surprising as many of the best known
motifs contain it (e.g. SH3!PxxP and WW!PPxY). As
would be expected, post-translational modification motifs
contain more Cysteine, Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine
residues than average sequences. Aromatic residues are also
popular in all classes of motif. There are some curious differ-
ences between chemically similar amino acids. For example,
Leucine and Methionine are common, but the b-branched
aliphatic residues Valine and Isoleucine are not; Arginine is
favoured, but not Lysine. The range of P and SCONS corres-
ponding to real motifs is dependent on the particular species
being considered. In our previous study we calculated maxi-
mum SCONS confidence values (P < 0.001) of 3.0 · 1017 for
Yeast, 7.5 · 1014 for Nematode, 8.0 · 1015 for Fly and
7.0 · 1038 Human (13). These are reasonable starting points
for motif hunting when looking in these species or their rela-
tives, but are only a rough guide in practice, as real motifs can
still occur with higher (less significant) values.
In practice, one should be prepared for the situation that a
true motif might not be ranked first according to our metrics.
This was the case even in a benchmark using sets of experi-
mentally validated motifs (13). It tends to happen when motifs
are very simple in nature, containing few residues, or those
that are naturally abundant (e.g. the endosome sorting signal
ExxxLL).
For more tentative motifs, we found it also useful to con-
sider the number of times a motif is observed relative to the
size of the set (beside the P and SCONS values). In our hands,
spurious motifs scored better when they occurred in a few
members of a large set of proteins (e.g. 4 out of 30; most
sets considered were 10 or fewer in size). This could be
because large sets (e.g. 20 or more sequences) contain more
putative false positives, and might also begin to deviate from
the binomial distribution.
It is also always important to question the integrity of the
set itself—i.e. do all the proteins really belong together, or
are some more weak members than others? This is particularly
so when one is dealing with interaction data from high-
throughput techniques like the two-hybrid system [e.g.
(13,24,25)], or protein chips (26).
The complexity of available interaction data can make
it difficult to provide sets of sequences to the server, parti-
cularly if the user is not used to searching interaction
databases. For easier access to interactions, and to provide
suitable sets of query sequences, we developed an interface
to the STRING (17) database. STRING allows users to look
at interaction partners from a variety of sources for any
protein of interest, to navigate around the network of inter-
actions, and to select the type of interaction data displayed.
STRING now allows users to run DILIMOT directly from
any set of interactions. By navigating around the network
centered on a single protein, it is possible to define sets
suitable for finding either putative motifs that the protein
might interact with or contain.
OUTLOOK
There are likely dozens or even hundreds of additional linear
motifs still to be discovered, and we anticipate that DILIMOT
will be central in uncovering these critically important func-
tional sites. The method is applicable any time a common
feature is sought within a set of protein sequences. We are
constantly looking for new ways to apply the approach, and to
improve performance and sensitivity. We hope that use by the
computational and molecular biology community will
improve the service, and welcome any comments from our
users.
Figure 3. Features of known linear motifs. (A) Distributions of length (red),
number of specified (i.e. non-‘x’; green) and invariant (i.e. a single specific
residue; blue) positions for 120 known linear motifs extracted from the ELM
database (7). Note that four motifs with lengths of 13–18 are not shown in the
first (red) plot for clarity. (B) Degree to which residues are over-represented in
known motifs. Numbers show the ratio of the abundance of the residue within
the 120 motifs from ELM to the abundance in globular domains as computed
from the protein databank [PDB; (28)]. ‘ALL’ includes all 120, ‘LIG’ are the 66
ligand binding, ‘TRG’ the 16 targeting and ‘MOD’ the 30 modification site
motifs. For 7 of 40 residues in the latter two categories there were too few counts
to obtain a confident measurement (i.e. <5); these are denoted by an asterix.
Note that we have not included a fourth ELM category CLV, which includes
protein cleavage sites, as there were too few examples to compute meaningful
numbers. Colour scheme: red, strongly favoured in linear motifs compared
to globular proteins; orange, moderately favoured; light-blue moderately
disfavoured; blue strongly disfavoured.
W354 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors are grateful to Damian Brunner (EMBL) and
Andreia Feijao (EMBL) for advice on the EB1 binding
motif, Christian von Mering (EMBL) for help defining
orthologues and Francesca Diella (EMBL) for help with
Phospho.ELM. The authors thank Toby Gibson (EMBL) for
the critical reading of the manuscript. Funding to pay the Open
Access publication charges for this article was provided by
EMBL.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Letunic,I., Copley,R.R., Schmidt,S., Ciccarelli,F.D., Doerks,T.,
Schultz,J., Ponting,C.P. and Bork,P. (2004) SMART 4.0: towards
genomic data integration. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D142–D144.
2. Bateman,A., Birney,E., Cerruti,L., Durbin,R., Etwiller,L., Eddy,S.R.,
Griffiths-Jones,S., Howe,K.L., Marshall,M. and Sonnhammer,E.L.
(2002) The Pfam protein families database. Nucleic Acids Res., 30,
276–280.
3. Eddy,S.R. (1998) Profile hidden Markov models. Bioinformatics, 14,
755–763.
4. Madera,M. and Gough,J. (2002) A comparison of profile hidden Markov
model procedures for remote homology detection. Nucleic Acids Res.,
30, 4321–4328.
5. Bork,P. and Gibson,T.J. (1996) Applying motif and profile searches.
Meth. Enzymol., 266, 162–184.
6. Altschul,S.F., Madden,T.L., Schaffer,A.A., Zhang,J., Zhang,Z.,
Miller,W. and Lipman,D.J. (1997) Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a
new generation of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res.,
25, 3389–3402.
7. Puntervoll,P., Linding,R., Gemund,C., Chabanis-Davidson,S.,
Mattingsdal,M., Cameron,S., Martin,D.M., Ausiello,G., Brannetti,B.,
Costantini,A. et al. (2003) ELM server: a new resource for investigating
short functional sites in modular eukaryotic proteins. Nucleic Acids Res.,
31, 3625–3630.
8. Neduva,V. and Russell,R.B. (2005) Linear motifs: evolutionary
interaction switches. FEBS Lett., 579, 3342–3345.
9. Diella,F., Cameron,S., Gemund,C., Linding,R., Via,A., Kuster,B.,
Sicheritz-Ponten,T., Blom,N. and Gibson,T.J. (2004) Phospho.ELM: a
database of experimentally verified phosphorylation sites in eukaryotic
proteins. BMC Bioinformatics, 5, 79.
10. Blom,N., Gammeltoft,S. and Brunak,S. (1999) Sequence and
structure-based prediction of eukaryotic protein phosphorylation sites.
J. Mol. Biol., 294, 1351–1362.
11. Hulo,N., Sigrist,C.J., Le Saux,V., Langendijk-Genevaux,P.S.,
Bordoli,L., Gattiker,A., De Castro,E., Bucher,P. and Bairoch,A. (2004)
Recent improvements to the PROSITE database. Nucleic Acids Res., 32,
D134–D137.
12. Obenauer,J.C., Cantley,L.C. and Yaffe,M.B. (2003) Scansite 2.0:
proteome-wide prediction of cell signaling interactions using short
sequence motifs. Nucleic Acids Res, 31, 3635–3641.
13. Neduva,V., Linding,R., Su-Angrand,I., Stark,A., de Masi,F.,
Gibson,T.J., Lewis,J., Serrano,L. and Russell,R.B. (2005) Systematic
discovery of new recognition peptides mediating protein interaction
networks. PLoS Biol., 3, e405.
14. Linding,R., Russell,R.B., Neduva,V. and Gibson,T.J. (2003) GlobPlot:
exploring protein sequences for globularity and disorder. Nucleic Acids
Res., 31, 3701–3708.
15. Rigoutsos,I. and Floratos,A. (1998) Combinatorial pattern discovery in
biological sequences: the TEIRESIAS algorithm. Bioinformatics, 14,
55–67.
16. Boeckmann,B., Bairoch,A., Apweiler,R., Blatter,M.C., Estreicher,A.,
Gasteiger,E., Martin,M.J., Michoud,K., O’Donovan,C., Phan,I. et al.
(2003) The SWISS-PROT protein knowledgebase and its supplement
TrEMBL in 2003. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 365–370.
17. von Mering,C., Huynen,M., Jaeggi,D., Schmidt,S., Bork,P. and Snel,B.
(2003) STRING: a database of predicted functional associations
between proteins. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 258–261.
18. Edgar,R.C. (2004) MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high
accuracy and high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, 1792–1797.
19. Simpson,J.C., Wellenreuther,R., Poustka,A., Pepperkok,R. and
Wiemann,S. (2000) Systematic subcellular localization of novel proteins
identified by large-scale cDNA sequencing. EMBO Rep., 1, 287–292.
20. Su,L.K., Burrell,M., Hill,D.E., Gyuris,J., Brent,R., Wiltshire,R.,
Trent,J., Vogelstein,B. and Kinzler,K.W. (1995) APC binds to the novel
protein EB1. Cancer Res., 55, 2972–2977.
21. Busch,K.E., Hayles,J., Nurse,P. and Brunner,D. (2004) Tea2p kinesin is
involved in spatial microtubule organization by transporting tip1p on
microtubules. Dev. Cell, 6, 831–843.
22. Miller,R.K., Cheng,S.C. and Rose,M.D. (2000) Bim1p/Yeb1p mediates
the Kar9p-dependent cortical attachment of cytoplasmic microtubules.
Mol. Biol. Cell, 11, 2949–2959.
23. Honnappa,S., John,C.M., Kostrewa,D., Winkler,F.K. and
Steinmetz,M.O. (2005) Structural insights into the EB1-APC
interaction. EMBO J., 24, 261–269.
24. Ito,T., Chiba,T., Ozawa,R., Yoshida,M., Hattori,M. and Sakaki,Y.
(2001) A comprehensive two-hybrid analysis to explore the yeast protein
interactome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 98, 4569–4574.
25. Rual,J.F., Venkatesan,K., Hao,T., Hirozane-Kishikawa,T., Dricot,A.,
Li,N., Berriz,G.F., Gibbons,F.D., Dreze,M., Ayivi-Guedehoussou,N.
et al. (2005) Towards a proteome-scale map of the human
protein–protein interaction network. Nature, 437, 1173–1178.
26. Zhu,H., Bilgin,M., Bangham,R., Hall,D., Casamayor,A., Bertone,P.,
Lan,N., Jansen,R., Bidlingmaier,S., Houfek,T. et al. (2001) Global
analysis of protein activities using proteome chips. Science, 293,
2101–2105.
27. Crooks,G.E., Hon,G., Chandonia,J.M. and Brenner,S.E. (2004)
WebLogo: a sequence logo generator. Genome Res., 14, 1188–1190.
28. Berman,H.M., Westbrook,J., Feng,Z., Gilliland,G., Bhat,T.N.,
Weissig,H., Shindyalov,I.N. and Bourne,P.E. (2000) The Protein Data
Bank. Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 235–242.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue W355
