Near-surface diagnostics of dripping or delaminating lithosphere
Og˘uz H. Go¨g˘u¨s¸1 and Russell N. Pysklywec1
Received 17 April 2007; revised 21 December 2007; accepted 2 April 2008; published 7 November 2008.
[1] In various geological regions, it has been postulated that the mantle lithosphere has
been thinned or completely removed. Two of the primary removal mechanisms that have
been put forward include: (1) delamination, a wholesale peeling away of a coherent block
of the mantle lithosphere, and (2) lithospheric ‘‘dripping,’’ viscous Rayleigh-Taylor
instability of the mantle lithosphere. Using computational models, we investigate several
near-surface observables to determine if these may be diagnostic of either (often
ambiguous) removal mechanism. Surface topography associated with delamination has a
broad region of uplift above the lithospheric gap and a localized and mobile zone of
subsidence at the delaminating hinge. With dripping lithosphere, the topographic
expression is symmetric and fixed above the downwelling. Delamination of mantle
lithosphere is more efficient than dripping for thermal heating of the crust; the onset is
more rapid and the elevated temperatures persist longer. The resultant crustal P-T-t paths
show modest pressure variations and high temperature increases with large-scale
delamination or dripping. Delamination also causes contraction directly above the
(migrating) hinge and distal extension. Dripping lithosphere induces superimposed
contraction and extension above and symmetric about the viscous instability. For all the
observables, if only a portion of the mantle lithosphere is removed by viscous instability
(delamination inherently removes all of the mantle lithosphere), the differences
between the two removal mechanisms are even more pronounced. With only partial
removal of the mantle lithosphere, uppermost mantle lithosphere remains well coupled to
the crust, leading to lower surface temperature variations and broad zones of crustal
deformation/thickening.
Citation: Go¨g˘u¨s¸, O. H., and R. N. Pysklywec (2008), Near-surface diagnostics of dripping or delaminating lithosphere, J. Geophys.
Res., 113, B11404, doi:10.1029/2007JB005123.
1. Introduction
[2] The removal of the mantle lithosphere (i.e., the sub-
crustal portion of the lithosphere) has been invoked in a
variety of tectonic regimes to account for a range of
geological, geophysical and geochemical observations. For
example, anomalous heating, topography, and gravity has
led to interpretations that mantle lithosphere has been
removed during some phase of the plate convergence at
the Andean margin [Kay and Kay, 1993; Beck and Zandt,
2002], India-Eurasia collision [Bird, 1978; Houseman et al.,
1981], New Guinea collisional zone [Cloos et al., 2005],
and Eastern Anatolian Plateau [Keskin, 2003]. Within the
interior of continental tectonic plates, such as at the Sierra
Nevada mountains [Ducea and Saleeby, 1998; Jones et al.,
2004; Zandt et al., 2004] and beneath the Colorado Plateau
[Bird, 1979] the removal of the mantle lithosphere has been
proposed to explain regional uplift. These mantle litho-
sphere removal events are generally based on the density
contrast of the mantle lithosphere with respect to the less
dense underlying mantle. The density contrast can arise as a
result of thermal contraction of the cold mantle lithosphere,
although compositional density variations of the lower crust
have also been called upon to explain lithospheric instability
[Jull and Kelemen, 2001; Elkins-Tanton, 2005].
[3] The geodynamic mechanisms in which mantle litho-
sphere is removed are still debated, but there are funda-
mentally two primary removal scenarios that have been put
forward. Bird [1978, 1979] proposes a model of mantle
lithosphere delamination, where the cold and dense mantle
lithosphere peels away as a coherent slice from the crust
along the Moho. The removed slice of mantle lithosphere is
replaced by hot and buoyant asthenosphere (Figure 1A).
Generally, delamination is predicated on the idea that the
hot-weak lower crust is the most pronounced strength
discontinuity in the lithosphere. This results in separation
between the strong crust and strong mantle lithosphere
portions of the plate. Morency and Doin [2004] used 2-D
numerical simulations of convection with a viscoplastic
rheology to study the delamination mechanism and in
particular consider the geodynamic conditions that cause
this type of lithospheric removal. They suggest that delam-
ination begins with localized thinning of the mantle litho-
sphere and where the highest Moho temperature is
JOURNAL OF GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH, VOL. 113, B11404, doi:10.1029/2007JB005123, 2008
Click
Here
for
Full
Article
1Department of Geology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
Copyright 2008 by the American Geophysical Union.
0148-0227/08/2007JB005123$09.00
B11404 1 of 11
achieved, progressive thermomechanical erosion of litho-
spheric mantle occurs because of asthenospheric upwelling.
This leads to sinking of the dense mantle lithosphere slice
into the asthenosphere. The authors intimate that delamina-
tion is only possible when Moho temperatures exceed
approximately 800C.
[4] Delamination has been associated with topographic
and thermal perturbation of the crust. It is suggested that
regional uplift of the Sierra Nevadas, Andes, and Colorado
plateau has developed through mantle lithosphere delami-
nation events in these areas [Bird, 1979; Jones et al., 2004;
Le Pourhiet et al., 2006]. Uplift is largely the result of
isostatic adjustment from replacing dense mantle litho-
sphere with buoyant asthenosphere, although flexure and
deformation of the plate also cause topographic variations
[Le Pourhiet et al., 2006]. The nature of delamination
means that hot asthenosphere comes into direct contact with
the crust. The presence of high potassium intrusives and
high crustal heat flow has been put forward as the thermal/
magmatic signature of delamination [Kay and Kay, 1993;
Ducea and Saleeby, 1998; Manley et al., 2000].
[5] An alternative lithospheric removal mechanism to
delamination is viscous convective removal of the mantle
lithosphere [e.g., Houseman et al., 1981; England and
Houseman, 1989]. In this case, some or all of the mantle
lithosphere may be removed as cold dense mantle litho-
sphere ‘‘drips’’ as a viscous Rayleigh-Taylor (RT) gravita-
tional instability (Figure 1B). The primary difference from
delamination is that the mantle lithosphere is not removed
as a coherent lithospheric slice, but deforms in a distinctly
‘‘un-platelike’’ manner as it descends/drips into the mantle.
Subsequent studies have demonstrated that the propensity of
the lithosphere to experience convective removal is con-
trolled by the viscous rheology of the mantle lithosphere
[e.g., Buck and Toksoz, 1983; Lenardic and Kaula, 1995;
Houseman and Molnar, 1997; Molnar et al., 1998]. In
addition, the timescale and character of these viscous pertur-
bations can be influenced by horizontal shortening of the
lithosphere [e.g., Conrad and Molnar, 1997; Molnar et al.,
1998], and the presence of an overlying crust [e.g., Neil and
Houseman, 1999; Pysklywec and Cruden, 2004]. The ex-
plicit assumption of these models is that there is sufficient
perturbation (and at a suitable wavelength) to the mantle
lithosphere to initiate Rayleigh-Taylor instability. Further-
more, the growth rate of the instability must outpace thermal
diffusion of the cold mantle lithosphere root into the hot
mantle.
[6] It is worthwhile to clarify that we use the term
delamination following its definition by the process of Bird
[1979]. We differentiate this from the viscous process of
Rayleigh-Taylor instability (or ‘‘convective removal’’ or
‘‘dripping’’) of the mantle lithosphere. Often the term
delamination is used to denote any type of mantle litho-
sphere removal event. This introduces ambiguity relating to
what are quite different processes with different surface
expressions, as we will demonstrate.
[7] As with delamination, the replacement of the dense
mantle lithosphere by more buoyant mantle can cause
isostatic surface uplift. This type of mechanism has been
used to interpret the Tibetan plateau uplift [England and
Houseman, 1989] and the anomalous regional topography
across the southern Sierra Nevada [Saleeby and Foster,
2004]. Neil and Houseman [1999] demonstrate that in
certain situations viscous dripping can also induce thicken-
ing of the overlying crust and hence further surface uplift.
These isostatic responses are complemented by mantle
flow-induced topography as the viscous dripping progresses
[e.g., Pysklywec and Shahnas, 2003; Pysklywec and Cruden,
2004]. Saleeby and Foster [2004] suggest that the subsi-
dence of the Tulare Lake basin, in the southern Great Valley
is driven by active mantle dripping. The adjacent uplift and
tilting of the Sierra Nevada range may be related to thinning
of the mantle lithosphere peripheral to the drip [Zandt et al.,
2004].
[8] Thus, as mantle lithosphere removal mechanisms, it
has been shown or postulated that both delamination and
Rayleigh-Taylor instability will produce a variety of thermal
and deformational responses of the crust. Consequently, in
regions where removal of the mantle lithosphere seems to
have taken place, such as the Sierra Nevada, as discussed
above, initial interpretation of the surface constraints may
lead to ambiguity about which mechanism is active.
[9] The purpose of this paper is to investigate in more
detail the crustal and surface observables that may be used
as diagnostic elements to differentiate between the two of
mantle lithosphere removal processes: delamination or
Rayleigh-Taylor-type convective removal/dripping. We
designed a series of forward numerical experiments repre-
senting both types of removal mechanisms. We focus on
four primary properties during evolution of the model:
(1) surface topographic evolution, (2) distribution and style
of crustal deformation, (3) thermal evolution of various
levels within the crust, and (4) the metamorphic (P-T-t)
evolution of lower, middle, and upper crust. These represent
surface or near-surface observables that may generally
characterize the thermal-mechanical evolution of the litho-
sphere during mantle lithosphere removal. Our intent is that
by doing a direct comparison using generic models, the
results will provide clearer quantitative information for
Figure 1. Schematic illustration of geodynamic models
for mantle lithosphere removal. (A) Delamination of the
mantle lithosphere [Bird, 1979]. (B) Convective removal of
the mantle lithosphere [Houseman et al., 1981].
B11404 GO¨G˘U¨S¸ AND PYSKLYWEC: DRIPPING OR DELAMINATING LITHOSPHERE
2 of 11
B11404
helping to interpret the deep lithospheric dynamics from
surface geology.
2. Experimental Results
2.1. Model Description
[10] For our experiments, we used SOPALE, a plane
strain, incompressible numerical code to study the thermo-
mechanical behavior of the coupled crust and mantle.
SOPALE is based on the arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian
finite element technique and as such is useful for treating
finite deformations, and for tracking boundaries (surface
topography) and internal particles (P-T paths) [Fullsack,
1995; Pysklywec et al., 2002].
[11] Figures 2A and 2B shows the initial configuration of
our experiments. In the models, the 160 km thick litho-
sphere is made up of 42.6 km thick buoyant crust (r0 =
2840 kg/m3, pink) and 117.4 km thick dense mantle
lithosphere (r0 = 3300 kg/m
3, dark blue) overlying an upper
mantle region (r0 = 3260 kg/m
3, gray). Density is also a
function of temperature: r(T) = r0(1  a(T  T0)), where
a = 2  105 1/K is the coefficient of thermal expansion
and T0 = 25C is the reference temperature [Tackley et al.,
1994]. The assumed density variations are responsible for all
motions in the box (gravitational acceleration g = 9.8 m/s2);
there are no imposed (internal or boundary) velocities in
the models. The viscous response of the crust is based on a
wet quartzite flow law [Gleason and Tullis, 1995] whereas
the sub-crustal (mantle) material is governed by a dry
olivine rheology [Hirth and Kohlstedt, 1996]. The crustal
layer also yields according to a Coulomb failure law
(Figure 2), so that the upper crust behaves in a brittle manner.
[12] The numerical (width)  (depth) resolution is 201 
101 Eularian nodes and 601  301 Lagrangian nodes. Half
of the Eulerian and Lagrangian elements are concentrated in
the top 160 km in order to enhance resolution in the
lithosphere.
[13] The initial temperature profile is the same in both
experiments (Figure 2). Thermal properties (thermal con-
ductivity k = 2.25 W/m/K, heat capacity cp = 1250 J/kg/K)
are the same for all materials and we ignore radioactive heat
production and shear heating in the model. The top bound-
ary of the box is held at 25C and the bottom boundary is
held at 1523C; heat flux across the side boundaries is zero.
The 350C Moho is based on estimates for the southern
Sierra Nevada of California [Lachenbruch and Sass, 1977],
as a region where both dripping and delamination have been
postulated.
[14] The model has a free top surface, allowing topogra-
phy to develop as the model evolves. The mechanical
boundary conditions at the other three sides are defined
by zero tangential stress and normal velocity (‘‘free slip’’).
We have extended the depth of the solution space into the
lower mantle so that the sinking mantle lithosphere material
moves away from the lithosphere. Although the depth of the
box is 1000 km, the effects of the endothermic olivine phase
(g-spinel structure to perovskite) change at 660 km depth
[e.g., Christensen and Yuen, 1984] are not implemented
because we wanted to allow downgoing mantle lithosphere
to move away from the surface to the deeper levels of the
mantle.
[15] Each of the experiments has several modifications to
initiate either delamination or viscous dripping. In order to
start the delamination, we inserted a low-viscosity weak
zone, with a viscosity of 5  1019 Pa s, between a section of
the crust and mantle lithosphere (Figure 2A). A series of
numerical experiments indicated that this viscosity is suffi-
ciently low to decouple the crust from mantle lithosphere,
whereas an increase to 5  1020 Pa s appreciably retards the
development of the delamination process.
Figure 2. Illustration of the model geometry and setup for
(A) mantle lithosphere delamination and (B) RT-type mantle
instability experiments. A viscous flow law of _e = Asn
exp
Q
RT

is used for mantle material (mantle lithosphere
and sub-lithospheric mantle) where _e is the strain rate, T is
temperature, and s is differential stress. Variables A, n, Q,
and R are the viscosity parameter, power exponent,
activation energy, and ideal gas constant, respectively. On
the basis of a strain rate of 1015 1/s and temperature of
1350C, the viscous flow law results in an effective
viscosity of the sub-lithospheric mantle of 1020 Pa s. For
continental crust A = 1.1  1028 Pa4/s, n = 4, and Q =
223 kJ/mol are used, based on wet quartzite [Gleason and
Tullis, 1995]. For the crust an internal angle of friction f =
150 is used for a Coulomb yield criterion. A = 4.89 
1017 Pa3.5/s, n = 3.5, and Q = 535 kJ/mol are used for
mantle material (mantle lithosphere and sub-lithospheric
mantle) based on dry olivine [Hirth and Kohlstedt, 1996].
B11404 GO¨G˘U¨S¸ AND PYSKLYWEC: DRIPPING OR DELAMINATING LITHOSPHERE
3 of 11
B11404
[16] The inclusion of a low-viscosity weak zone to initiate
delamination is an approach followed by other studies of the
process [Morency and Doin, 2004; Le Pourhiet et al.,
2006]. The density of the mantle lithosphere over a 180 km
wide, 80 km thick zone was increased to ro = 3400 kg/m
3 in
order to further facilitate the delamination. Jull and Kelemen
[2001] and Elkins-Tanton [2005] suggest that the lower
lithosphere can become significantly denser and gravita-
tionally unstable because of transformations such as from
granulite to eclogite. According to Jull and Kelemen [2001],
the density of the lower crust may become 50–250 kg/m3
denser at minimum pressures of less than 1.5 GPa and
eventually the anomalously denser lower crust may de-
scend/sink as a ‘‘blob’’ depending on the nature of the
instability.
[17] For the viscous dripping models we introduce a
perturbation to the base of the dense mantle lithosphere to
initiate the descent. It has been suggested that such pertur-
bations may arise as a result of lithospheric contraction and
thickening [Houseman and Molnar, 1997] or eclogitic
metamorphism of lower crust [Kay and Kay, 1993; Ducea
and Saleeby, 1998; Jull and Kelemen, 2001].
[18] We emphasize that the intent of this work is not to
consider the conditions that control the initiation and
development of the dripping or delamination of the mantle
lithosphere; this has been studied elsewhere [Conrad and
Molnar, 1997; Jull and Kelemen, 2001; Morency and Doin,
2004]. Rather, we set up conditions that will start these
removal events and focus on various facets of the resulting
near-surface dynamics.
[19] We present our results in dimensionless time. This is
motivated by variations in effective viscosity between the
three models that give rise to variations in the dimensional
times of events in the models. As a characteristic timescale,
we chose the time that it takes the descending mantle
lithosphere to traverse the upper mantle and reach the
bottom of the solution space. (The characteristic timescales
for DEL, DRIP-1, and DRIP-2 are 4.5 Myrs, 21 Myrs, and
5.7 Myrs, respectively.) The non-dimensional times based
on (variable) material deformation are more comparable and
less influenced by variations in viscosity between models.
[20] The scaling of time by a deformational process
(descent) is particularly suitable for the early and interme-
diate stages of the model evolution. The removal of mantle
lithosphere is sufficiently rapid in all the models that
thermal diffusion is not a significant factor during descent.
It may be more appropriate, though, to scale time based on
thermal diffusion during a longer timescale (t > 5) when
removal of mantle lithosphere is largely finished and
thermal relaxation becomes dominant [e.g., Conrad,
2000]. However, the cooling and re-establishment of litho-
sphere occurs on similar timescales for all of our models
and for this contribution the late-stage evolution is of
secondary importance to the dynamics during removal.
2.2. Dripping and Delaminating Mantle Lithosphere
[21] Figure 3A shows the evolution of a delamination
model. By t = 0.26 the mantle lithosphere is peeling away
from the crust. As the lithosphere delaminates, the lower-
viscosity sub-lithospheric mantle flows into the area vacated
by mantle lithosphere. This results in appreciable advection
of mantle heat upward (Figure 3A, inset). The hot sub-
lithospheric isotherms are deflected toward the crust as the
material progressively intrudes into the mantle lithosphere
gap. The delamination progresses rapidly and by t = 0.84 a
800 km wide section of mantle lithosphere has been
removed, exposing the crust to sub-lithospheric mantle.
The width of the breach is dependent on the width of the
weak decoupling layer. Rather than peeling away as a single
slice, the delaminated fragment of mantle lithosphere even-
tually detaches into separate fragments as it falls into the
mantle. The sub-lithospheric mantle flow becomes more
subdued as the delamination comes to an end and over the
longer course of the experiment the material in the mantle
lithosphere gap cools down to produce new lithosphere.
[22] To compare to the delamination model, two different
RT-instability models are shown: DRIP- 1 and DRIP-2.
They are physically and geometrically similar models,
except that DRIP 2 has temperature-independent behavior
for mantle lithosphere, whereas DRIP-1 has temperature-
dependent mantle lithosphere viscosity. Both models use
non-Newtonian (n = 3.5) viscosities. In comparison to
Newtonian (n = 1) fluids, the non-linear rheology will tend
to localize deformation since viscosity is reduced as strain
rates increase. This tends to limit the amount of material that
is involved in the mantle lithosphere drip [Houseman and
Molnar, 1997]. In terms of controlling parameters, For the
DRIP-1, we use the flow law and controlling parameters
described in Figure 2, whereas the DRIP-2 uses on both
sides the same flow law but with parameters Q = 0 and A =
1038 Pan/s. On the basis of strain rates of 1013 1/s to
1017 1/s that are characteristic of flow in the models, this
results in a mantle lithosphere viscosity ranging from 2.5 
1020 Pa s to 1  1023 Pa s.
[23] In both models, the lithospheric perturbation induces
a drip-style downwelling of the mantle lithosphere (Figures
3B and 3C). However, in the temperature-dependent experi-
ment (Figure 3B) only the lowermost portion of the mantle
lithosphere is dripping, as the warmer/weaker region of the
lithosphere. Also, this deformation is spread over a rather
broad lateral extent. In the temperature-independent case
(Figure 3C), most of the mantle lithosphere layer is being
deformed, but over a localized lateral extent. Clearly, DRIP-
2 is descending more quickly than DRIP-1 since there is
greater mass of unstable mantle lithosphere with DRIP-2
than DRIP-1. The amount of material participating in the
instability has been explained as an ‘‘available buoyancy’’
that controls the growth rate of the drip [Conrad and
Molnar, 1999].
2.3. Surface Topography
[24] As the mantle lithosphere starts to delaminate (t =
0.13), it causes subsidence of the crust with an amplitude of
approximately 1100 m (Figure 4A). This subsidence is a
result of the loading on the surface of the peeling/descend-
ing mantle lithosphere. Adjacent topography highs at x =
1300 km and x = 800 km arise from surrounding
upwelling return flow of sub-lithospheric mantle.
[25] By t = 0.26, the negative surface deflection reaching
a maximum amplitude of 3.5 km. A significant length of
delaminating slab is pulling down on the crust at the
location where the mantle lithosphere is still attached to
the surface (Figure 3A). Enhanced uplift occurs on the right
side of the depression as hot mantle material is flowing into
B11404 GO¨G˘U¨S¸ AND PYSKLYWEC: DRIPPING OR DELAMINATING LITHOSPHERE
4 of 11
B11404
the lithosphere breach vacated by the delaminating litho-
sphere both sides of this negative topography, again due to
return mantle flow. The signal of topography is becoming
more asymmetrical as the delamination progresses in these
very early stages. The amplitude of the negative deflection
is very high; we ascribe this to the extra forcing by the
anomalously high-density lithospheric block that was used
to initiate delamination.
[26] By t = 1.26 most of the mantle lithosphere has been
removed and the surface topography is characterized by a
broad uplift (t = 1.26; Figure 4A). Now, most of this uplift is
associated with the replacement of the lithospheric mantle
by buoyant sub-lithospheric mantle, as there is relatively
little mantle flow across the vacated lithospheric zone. The
exception to this is at x = 400 km where there is still some
active delamination that induces enhanced local subsidence/
uplift. It is important to note that through the delamination
process the locus of the main topography anomaly migrates
to the left. That is, the topography is spatially transient, as it
responds to the peeling lithosphere.
[27] In the DRIP-1 experiment a negative topography
initially develops above the descending RT instability reach-
ing a maximum depression of 600 m (t = 0.30; Figure 4B).
This symmetric topography is supported by the actively
descending/dripping mantle lithosphere (Figure 3B). Even-
tually, the subsidence inverts to uplift (t = 0.60  0.90).
This is a result of the decrease in the downwelling forces as
the descending mantle lithosphere is necking and narrow-
ing, and reaches the bottom of the box. The topography is
now dominated by isostatic uplift associated with the flow-
induced crustal contraction and thickening [e.g., Pysklywec
and Shahnas, 2003; Pysklywec and Cruden, 2004]. The
physical development and the progression of these events of
DRIP-2 is similar with DRIP-1: There is initial surface
subsidence, followed by uplift as a result of the interplay
between the dynamic effects of the mantle flow and crustal
Figure 3. Evolution of the models: (A) DEL delamination, (B) DRIP-1 viscous dripping with non-linear
temperature-dependent rheology, and (C) DRIP-2 viscous dripping with non-linear, temperature-
independent rheology. Each frame shows material colors (see Figure 2) and deformed Lagrangian mesh.
The latter is plotted at one-half actual resolution; mesh is initially even rectangular. Inset in Figure 3B shows
isotherms of zoomed region. S1 and S2 indicate locations of sections for P-T-t analyses. Extremely deformed
Lagrangian elements are not plotted in the figures. Although there is high distortion of this mesh, it does not
affect the numerical accuracy of the models since computations are performed on the relatively undistorted
Eulerian mesh in the arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian finite element technique.
B11404 GO¨G˘U¨S¸ AND PYSKLYWEC: DRIPPING OR DELAMINATING LITHOSPHERE
5 of 11
B11404
thickening. However, with DRIP-2, the more localized
removal of mantle lithosphere material is responsible for a
more focused band of crustal contraction/thickening and
isostatic compensation by the asthenospheric mantle.
[28] As in the delamination model, both drip experiments
show an initial phase of subsidence, followed by uplift.
However, the drip models show clearly symmetrical topog-
raphy signals that remain fixed in location above the
downwelling mantle lithosphere. This assumes the mantle
lithosphere instability does not migrate with respect to the
overlying plate.
2.4. Moho Temperatures
[29] The Moho temperatures were tracked in all experi-
ments to consider the thermal expression of the crust to the
mantle lithosphere removal style. In the numerical model,
we used two different methods to illustrate the varying
Moho temperatures. Firstly, a time series plot of zonal
average and maximum Moho temperatures for each of the
experiments was tracked (Figures 5–7A). This is done by
calculating maximum and average temperatures at a depth
between 38.4 and 41.6 km and width between 500 km and
1500 km. The time series demonstrates how temperature
changes in a Moho ‘‘zone’’ in a Eulerian reference frame.
The lateral limits (x = 500 and 1500 km) to the Moho zone
were chosen to focus on the location of delamination and
drip at the center of the computational box. Secondly, we
plotted the temperature of specific numerical particles
along the entire base of the crust (x = 0–2000 km) at
discrete time periods (Figures 5 and 7B). The particles
started at the initial Moho depth of 42.6 km, notably couple
of kilometers deeper than Eulerian depths, and subsequently
track the evolving temperature of these particles in a
Lagrangian framework.
[30] Until t = 1.00, there is a rapid increase of the
maximum Moho temperatures reaching more than 600C
(Figure 5A). This is a consequence of the upwelling of the
asthenospheric material into the lithospheric gap. Subse-
quently, there is more gradual increase of the maximum and
average temperature in this zone as more of the lithosphere
delaminates away and the hot mantle temperatures conduct
heat into the crust. It reaches a maximum of 1200C by
about t = 5.00. In Figure 5B the temperatures of the ‘‘Moho
particles’’ are plotted at three discrete intervals: t = 0.26, t =
0.64 and t = 1.00 At t = 0.26, the base of the crust is heated
to 400C. As most mantle lithosphere is removed and a
broader zone of Moho is heated by t = 0.64, a wider swath
of these particles has increased temperature up to 500C
in average. By t = 1.00, after the main delamination event,
the full range of particles above the lithospheric gap
experience elevated temperatures.
[31] Calculated Moho temperatures for DRIP-1 and
DRIP-2 show significant differences. While the maximum
Moho temperature values for DRIP-1 show very slight
changes (Figure 6A), temperatures obtained from DRIP-2
are close to that of the delamination model (Figure 7A). For
DRIP-1, the maximum temperatures at the base of the crust
do not even reach 400C and the average temperature of the
Moho actually decreases slightly. There is only subtle
warming of the Moho particles over time as they are
pulled/pushed to greater depths (see below). Clearly, the
crust is quite insulated from the thermal effects associated
with the DRIP-1 downwelling, which occurs mostly in the
lower portion of the mantle lithosphere (Figure 3B).
[32] The initial stages of the Moho temperatures of the
DRIP-2 are similar with DRIP-1: As the mantle lithosphere
instability grows until t = 1.25 the crust experiences
relatively little thermal perturbation (Figure 7A). During
this phase, the advection of temperatures downward with
descending mantle lithosphere helps to keep the Moho
region relatively cool (Figure 7C). Eventually, the dripping
mantle lithosphere detaches and hot sub-lithospheric mantle
material flows into the void, resulting in a rapid increase in
lower-crust zonal temperatures (Figure 7A). By t = 2.19,
Figure 4. Plots of surface topography at three time
intervals for models: (A) delamination, (B) DRIP-1, and
(C) DRIP-2.
B11404 GO¨G˘U¨S¸ AND PYSKLYWEC: DRIPPING OR DELAMINATING LITHOSPHERE
6 of 11
B11404
discrete particles in the lower crust show heating to about
600C across a 1000 km wide band corresponding to the
removal area (Figure 7B). Clearly, the rheology of the
mantle lithosphere, which governs the portion of mantle
lithosphere that is removed (i.e., DRIP-1 versus DRIP-2),
has a first-order effect on the thermal expression of dripping
lithosphere in the crust. With almost complete removal the
thermal signature is similar to that of delamination.
[33] The high temperatures decrease quite rapidly from
their peak at t = 2.5 (Figure 7A). We ascribe this to
continual flow of surrounding mantle lithosphere into the
lithospheric gap which causes cooling in this zone. The
delamination model does not experience this rapid drop in
temperature as the stronger (more plate-like) mantle litho-
sphere does not have the same predilection for lateral flow.
2.5. P-T Histories
[34] We constructed pressure-temperature-time paths
(P-T-t) by tracking individual groups of Lagrangian particles
within the deforming crustal material domain. We focused
on two vertical profiles locations: At S1 (x = 1000 km) and
S2 (x = 750 km) which correspond to the middle of the box
and an intermediate distance across the removal zone
(Figure 3). For these two locations, we track the pressure
and temperature at positions in the upper (z = 7 km), middle
(z = 19 km), and lower (z = 39 km) crust. The pressure
tracked is actually the lithostatic pressure associated with
the burial or uplift of material. That is, it is derived as
pressure p = r* g * h, where h is the thickness of
overburden material above the point, g is gravitational
acceleration, and r is the density of the overburden material.
The additional ‘‘dynamic’’ pressure is negligible compared
to the lithostatic pressures for these types of non-convergent
plate models. Surface erosion is not implemented in the
models.
[35] Figure 8A shows the P-T-t path of the mantle
lithosphere delamination (DEL) model. S1 (x = 1000 km)
of 39 km depth reaches its maximum burial depths rapidly
at t = 0.38 with a maximum pressure of 11 kbar. This
corresponds to modest extra burial of approximately three
kilometers as that portion of lower crust is pulled down by
the delaminating mantle lithosphere. Subsequently, the P-T
history is dominated by heating of 350C until t = 2.8.
This is accompanied by decompression of 2.3 kbar, or about
9 km of tectonic exhumation. The P-T-t trends of the
shallower particles at z = 16 km and z = 7 km depths for
same section (S1) are similar in that they are characterized
by decompression heating. However, the temperature
increases are slower and smaller at these depths, as the
mantle heat has to conduct through the crust.
[36] The progression of the P-T change is essentially
mirrored in the lithospheric section at S2 (x = 750 km),
except that the events are delayed by several million years
as the mantle lithosphere delaminates in that direction. For
example, the maximum burial of the deep crust point to
12 km is reached at t = 0.6 and maximum heating is reached
at t = 4.2. This suggests that the metamorphic signal in the
Figure 5. For the delamination model. (A) Plots of zonal
maximum and average temperatures at 42.6-km depth as a
function of time (see text for explanation). (B) Particle tem-
perature of ‘‘Moho particles’’ at t = 0.26, t = 0.64, and t = 1.00.
Figure 6. For the DRIP-1 model. (A) Plots of zonal
maximum and average temperatures at 42.6-km depth as a
function of time (see text for explanation). (B) Particle
temperature of ‘‘Moho particles’’ at t = 0.54, t = 1.22, and t =
1.72.
B11404 GO¨G˘U¨S¸ AND PYSKLYWEC: DRIPPING OR DELAMINATING LITHOSPHERE
7 of 11
B11404
crust of delamination would be increased in temperatures
and modest decompression between t = 0.6 and t = 4.2;
essentially clockwise P-T paths dominated by temperature
increase. This metamorphic signal would migrate as a type
of ‘‘a single metamorphic wave’’ with the delaminating
mantle lithosphere.
[37] The P-T evolution of DRIP-1 is very different. It is
dominated by slow pressure increase and very modest
changes in temperature (Figure 8B). For example, the lower
crust at section S1 shows an increase in pressure of12 kbar
over t = 2.0, which represents a burial of 86 km. This is
clearly a portion of the crust that is being entrained
downward within the mantle lithosphere drip [e.g.,
Pysklywec and Cruden, 2004]. The package is relatively
better thermally insulated as it warms only 50C over this
time. In comparison, at section S2 the lower crust is buried
to a depth of only 59 km. The effects of crustal thickening
and burial are most extreme directly above the mantle
lithosphere downwelling. Indeed at distances sufficiently
far from the drip, the crust can undergo extension and uplift
during these stages instead [Pysklywec and Cruden, 2004].
The shallower points, again, demonstrate a similar behavior,
but with more modest pressure increases.
[38] Interestingly, the P-T-t paths associated with exper-
iment DRIP-2 show patterns more akin to the delamination
model. Lower crust at S1 increases to a pressure of 12.1 kbar
at t = 1.1 (Figure 8C), corresponding to the time of vigorous
mantle lithosphere dripping (Figure 3C). After this time,
there is a pressure decrease to 8 kbar and heating to 600C
until t = 3.3. At section S2 the P-T-t path is different: It does
not experience the initial burial and most heating occurs
prior to the modest final uplift. This occurs also in the
shallower crustal points.
Figure 7. For the DRIP-2 model. (A) Plots of zonal maxi-
mum and average temperatures at 42.6-km depth as a function
of time (see text for explanation). (B) Particle temperature
of ‘‘Moho particles’’ at t = 0.78, t = 1.66, and t = 2.19.
Figure 8. Pressure-temperature paths for particles in the
upper (z = 7 km), middle (z = 19 km), and lower (z = 39 km)
crust at sections S1 (x = 1000 km) and S2 (x = 750 km). Paths
for model: (A) delamination, (B) DRIP-1, and (C) DRIP-2.
B11404 GO¨G˘U¨S¸ AND PYSKLYWEC: DRIPPING OR DELAMINATING LITHOSPHERE
8 of 11
B11404
[39] The variation in behavior between sections differ-
entiates the metamorphic signature of crustal material be-
tween the delamination model and DRIP-2. The
delamination P-T-t paths at the different sections were
essentially the same, but with a temporal shift associated
with the peeling lithosphere. For DRIP-2, the sections show
varying behavior depending on their lateral position since
the mantle lithosphere drip is not moving laterally with
respect to the surface crust.
2.6. Crustal Deformation
[40] Lastly, we investigate styles of finite crustal defor-
mation and structure that may be characteristic of the
mantle lithosphere removal mechanisms. Differences are
highlighted by: (1) plotting the variation of the Moho
position and surface topography to illustrate variations in
crustal thickness and (2) displaying the Lagrangian cells in
the lithosphere, which are initially even rectangular, and so
show accumulated deformation in their contorted state.
[41] For the delamination experiment at t = 1.0, the
deformed Lagrangian cells demonstrate that above the
delaminating lithosphere (at x = 500 km) there is con-
traction (Figure 9A). The downgoing plate is pulling crustal
material into the zone above the delaminating hinge. This
correlates with thickened crust as the Moho is deflected
downward by approximately 7.5 km. It is worthwhile to
note that the surface topography is negative in this region
despite the thickened crust. Apparently, the sub-crustal
loading of the delaminating mantle lithosphere is over-
whelming isostatic (uplift) effects associated with thicken-
ing crust. On the other side of the lithospheric gap (at x =
1250 km), there is extension of the crustal elements. The
crust here has been thinned by up to 7.5 km. We attribute
the extension/thinning to several factors. Firstly, the sub-
lithospheric mantle flow into the gap and laterally may be
helping pull apart the crust. Secondly, previously con-
tracted/thickened crust may be in gravitational collapse as
the delaminating mantle has moved away. Note again, that
although the crust is thin, the surface topography is not
anomalously low. This suggests that surface topography is
dynamically supported by underlying mantle flow.
[42] Figure 9B shows the variation in the crustal thickness
and surface topography at t = 1.0 for DRIP-1. At this stage,
it is observed that dripping mantle lithosphere causes lateral
crustal flow toward the center, which results in contraction
and crustal thickening, while the distal regions experience
broad bilateral or symmetrical type extension with contrac-
tion/thickening. The deflection of the Moho directly above
the drip is consistent with interpretations of crustal structure
for the southern Sierra Nevada from receiver function
studies [Zandt et al., 2004]. This work suggests that the
Moho is characterized by a ‘‘V’’-shaped profile by the
entrainment of the viscous crust into the mantle lithosphere,
much like that shown in Figure 9B.
[43] DRIP-2 at t = 1.0 shows a confined zone of contrac-
tional deformation, with shortened Lagrangian cells within
100 km of each side of the center of the downgoing
mantle lithosphere (at x = 1000 km; Figure 9C). Just outside
this zone, on both flanks, the crust has been extended. This
contraction is accompanied by a thin region of crustal
thickening as crust is entrained downward into the mantle
lithosphere drip. The localized thickening occurs within a
broader (800 km) zone of thinned crust. The crustal
extension and thinning may be due to collapse of previously
developed topography (e.g., Figure 4C) and small-scale
mantle flow in the mantle lithosphere gap as material is
pulled from the flanks toward the center of the downwel-
ling. The symmetric and highly localized nature of defor-
mation of the crust in DRIP-2 clearly distinguish it from
both the delamination and alternate drip model.
3. Conclusions and Discussion
[44] In conclusion, there are similarities in the surface
crustal response to dripping or delaminating mantle litho-
Figure 9. Plots of Moho position and surface topography
across a portion of each model at t = 1.0: (A) delamination,
(B) DRIP-1, and (C) DRIP-2. Included for each is a frame
displaying material colors and Lagrangian mesh (plotted at
one-half actual resolution). ‘‘Ext’’ refers to extension.
B11404 GO¨G˘U¨S¸ AND PYSKLYWEC: DRIPPING OR DELAMINATING LITHOSPHERE
9 of 11
B11404
sphere, but the models demonstrate that there may be
several surface (or near-surface) diagnostic expressions of
delaminating or dripping mantle lithosphere. The numerical
experiments demonstrate the following:
[45] 1. Surface topography for both drip models shows
initial subsidence with a subsequent phase of uplift, the
locus of which stays fixed above the downwelling. Geo-
metrically, the surface topography associated with both drip
events is symmetric. In the delamination model, there is
paired subsidence and uplift that migrates as the mantle
lithosphere peels away from the crust. The surface topo-
graphic expression is distinctly asymmetric.
[46] 2. The thermal expression of delamination is char-
acterized by a rapid increase in Moho temperature soon
after the lithosphere begins to peel away. The thermal spike
(up to near mantle temperature) migrates along the litho-
spheric gap, and the crustal temperature in this zone con-
tinues to increase while sub-lithospheric flow is active.
Depending on the style of dripping (i.e., how much mantle
lithosphere is removed), there can be appreciable thermal
perturbation of the crust (DRIP-2), or very little (DRIP-1).
Delamination seems to be more efficient as a crustal heating
mechanism since the mantle lithosphere gap is maintained
for a longer time because of the inherent characteristics of
the process. That is, with viscous dripping, surrounding cool
mantle lithosphere will flow into the lithospheric gap,
causing a more rapid decrease of the elevated crustal
temperatures. The thermal perturbations associated with
dripping mantle lithosphere are centered and fixed above
the downwelling, whereas with delamination the locus of
peak temperature migrates as the peeling lithosphere does.
[47] 3. The P-T evolution of the crust above delaminating
mantle lithosphere shows a clockwise path dominated by
temperature increase and a modest initial pressure increase
and gradual decompression. This P-T signature migrates
across the crust as the mantle lithosphere delaminates,
almost as a type of ‘‘single metamorphic wave’’. With
partial dripping of the mantle lithosphere (DRIP-1), the
overlying crust will show very little thermal variation, but
pressure increases associated with burial/thickening can
occur. With wholesale dripping of the mantle lithosphere,
the crust directly above the drip may experience (slower)
temperature increase and some pressure increase then
decrease as in the delamination model. However, unlike
with delamination, where P-T path is essentially repeated
(migrated) from one location to another, e.g., from points S1
(x = 1000 km) to S2, (x = 750 km). The crust at the
periphery of the drip will experience a different P-T
evolution at S1 (x = 1000 km) and S2 (x = 750 km) such
as, varying burial and exhumation degrees.
[48] 4. Mantle lithosphere delamination induces a zone of
contraction and crustal thickening just above the hinge of
the peeling mantle lithosphere. A region of extension occurs
at the distal end of the lithospheric gap as sub-lithospheric
mantle flows up and laterally to replace delaminating
lithosphere. The contraction zone sweeps across the crust
as the mantle lithosphere peels away. The drip models
also drive contraction and crustal thickening centered on
the downgoing mantle lithosphere. However, in these
models there is symmetric crustal extension on both sides.
Depending on mantle lithosphere rheology, the deformation
may be very localized to the central axis of the downwelling
(DRIP-2) or broadly distributed about it (DRIP-1). Deep
entrainment of crust into the descending mantle lithosphere
represents an extreme mode of crustal thickening.
[49] It is important to emphasize that our derived P-T-t
paths represent the pressure-temperature history of the
crustal packages to only the delamination/drip event. There
may be pre-/syn-/post-tectonic events in addition to the
mantle lithosphere removal event that modifies the P-T-t
path. For example, with simultaneous plate convergence,
burial and enhanced pressure increase could occur. The
results demonstrate that the crust, follows a similar P-T
pattern at three (upper, mid, and lower) levels, but with
different amplitudes. Not surprisingly, though, the most
apparent signature is in the lower crust. Platt et al. [1998]
have used P-T paths from rocks extracted from the Alboran
seafloor and in the Betics, beneath which mantle lithosphere
removal is proposed. The authors suggest that mantle drip/
convective removal is more plausible to the region, since P-
T paths indicate the exhumation in the metamorphic rocks
for last 30 Myrs due to the crustal extension that is
responsible for the exhumation of these rocks.
[50] Here we show one delamination and two of the drip
models from a range of numerical experiments that were
run. On the basis of the convention of delamination that we
are considering, namely that the whole mantle lithosphere
must be removed as a coherent slice, the type of model is
fairly tightly confined. Models with alternate rheologies and
densities (but still delaminating) modified the amplitude and
timing of the surface response, but not the general character.
On the other hand, the drip models had an unconstrained
aspect that was particularly important for altering the effect
on the crust: the amount of mantle lithosphere that was
viscously removed. We chose DRIP-1 and DRIP-2 as
representative models of partial removal and full removal,
respectively. Indeed, the results show that care must be
taken in interpreting large-scale lithospheric dynamics from
surface observables as one geodynamic mechanism can
affect the crust in different ways depending on a specific
aspect of the removal event. Again, we emphasize that the
purpose of this work was not to examine the parameters
controlling the removal mechanisms. Rather, we have
identified and shown these three experiments as represen-
tative models of the fundamental modes of removal and
surface response.
[51] One of the assumptions we have made in the models
is that the dripping mantle lithosphere does not migrate
laterally with respect to the overlying crust. We recognize
that it is possible that a viscous mantle lithosphere instabil-
ity could migrate, possibly within the presence of a larger
background mantle flow field or as a result of other
unbalances. This migration may arise as a result of lateral
variations in lithospheric (mantle or crust) rheology or
thickness. Houseman et al. [2000] suggest that the nature
and the proximity of the drip to the convergence zone may
change, depending on the rate of the convergence from a
multiple sheets like to single downwelling. Three-dimen-
sional physical scaled analogue models of dripping mantle
lithosphere showed, for example, lateral movement of
the instability, probably as a consequence of interaction
with adjacent unstable mantle lithosphere [Pysklywec and
Cruden, 2004]. The attendant surface deformation followed
this drip migration. The surface topography in these three-
B11404 GO¨G˘U¨S¸ AND PYSKLYWEC: DRIPPING OR DELAMINATING LITHOSPHERE
10 of 11
B11404
dimensional models took on a generally radial geometry to
reflect the cylindrical (rather than sheet-like) mantle litho-
sphere downwelling. Distal zones of extension were sepa-
rated by radial spoke-like bands of downwelling and crustal
contraction [Pysklywec and Cruden, 2004]. It has been
suggested that a drip structure beneath the southern Sierra
Nevada has shifted over the last 4–5 Myrs [Zandt, 2003].
They interpret this from a migrating locus of surface
volcanism that they attribute to return flow of hot mantle
associated with the downgoing mantle lithosphere. We note
that our results suggest that such an observation may be
more consistent with delaminating mantle lithosphere and a
further investigation taking into account all the factors
described above (in conjunction with other geophysical
evidence) may help differentiate the mechanism. Neverthe-
less, lateral motion of the drip would alter some of the
conclusions we make, above, and should be taken into
account when interpreting the results.
[52] Acknowledgments. This work was supported by the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada. The numerical
code, SOPALE, was originally developed by Philippe Fullsack. We
appreciate careful and thoughtful reviews by Clint Conrad and an anony-
mous referee.
References
Beck, S. L., and G. Zandt (2002), The nature of orogenic crust in the central
Andes, J. Geophys. Res., 107(B10), 2230, doi:10.1029/2000JB000124.
Bird, P. (1978), Initiation of intracontinental subduction in the Himalayas,
J. Geophys. Res., 83, 4975–4987.
Bird, P. (1979), Continental delamination and the Colorado Plateau,
J. Geophys. Res., 84, 7561–7571.
Buck, W. R., and M. N. Toksoz (1983), Thermal effects of continental
collisions: Thickening a variable viscosity lithosphere, Tectonophysics,
100, 53–69.
Conrad, C. P., and P. Molnar (1997), The growth of Rayleigh-Taylor-type
instabilities in the lithosphere for various rheological and density struc-
tures, Geophys. J. Int., 129, 95–112.
Conrad, C. P., and P. Molnar (1999), Convective instability of a boundary
layer with temperature and strain-rate-dependent viscosity in terms of
‘‘available buoyancy’’, Geophys. J. Int., 139, 51–68.
Conrad, C. P. (2000), Convective instability of thickening mantle litho-
sphere, Geophys. J. Int., 143, 52–70.
Christensen, U. R., and D. A. Yuen (1984), The interaction of a subducting
slab with a chemical or phase boundary, J. Geophys. Res., 89, 4389–
4402.
Cloos, M., B. Sappie, A. Quarles van Ufford, R.J. Weiland, P. Q. Warren,
and T. P. Mc Mahon (2005), Collisional delamination in New-Guinea:
The geotectonics of subducting slab breakoff, Geol. Soc. Am. Spec., 400,
48 pp.
Ducea, M. N., and J. B. Saleeby (1998), A case for delamination of the deep
batholithic crust beneath the Sierra Nevada, California, Int. Geol. Rev.,
40, 78–93.
Elkins-Tanton, L. T. (2005), Continental magmatism caused by lithospheric
delamination, in Plates, Plumes and Paradigms, edited by G. Foulger et al.
Geol. Soc. Am. Spec. pap., 388, 449–461, doi: 10.1130/2005.2388(27).
England, P., and G. A. Houseman (1989), Extension during continental
convergence, with application to the Tibetan Plateau, J. Geophys. Res.,
94, 17,561–17,579.
Fullsack, P. (1995), An arbitrary Lagrangian-Eularian formulation for
creeping flows and applications in tectonic models, Geophys. J. Int.,
120, 1–23.
Gleason, G. C., and J. Tullis (1995), A flow law for dislocation creep of
quartz aggregates determined with the molten salt cell, Tectonophysics,
247, 1–23.
Hirth, G., and D. L. Kohlstedt (1996), Water in the oceanic upper mantle:
Implications for rheology, melt extraction and the evolution of the litho-
sphere, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 144, 93–108.
Houseman, G. A., D. P. McKenzie, and P. Molnar (1981), Convective
instability of a thickened boundary layer and its relevance for the thermal
evolution of continental convergent belts, J. Geophys. Res., 86, 6115–
6132.
Houseman, G. A., and P. Molnar (1997), Gravitational (Rayleigh-Taylor)
instability of a layer with non-linear viscosity and convective thinning of
continental lithosphere, Geophys. J. Int., 128, 125–150.
Houseman, G. A., E. A. Neil, and M. D. Kohler (2000), Lithospheric
instability beneath the Transverse Ranges of California, J. Geophys.
Res., 105, 16,237–16,250.
Jones, C. H., G. L. Farmer, and J. Unruh (2004), Tectonics of Pliocene
removal of lithosphere of the Sierra Nevada, California, Geol. Soc. Am.
Bull., 116, 1408–1422.
Jull, M., and P. B. Kelemen (2001), On the conditions for lower crustal
convective instability, J. Geophys. Res., 106, 6423–6446.
Kay, R. W., and S. M. Kay (1993), Delamination and delamination mag-
matism, Tectonophysics, 219, 177–189.
Keskin, M. (2003), Magma generation by slab steepening and break off
beneath a subduction accretion complex: An alternative model for colli-
sion-related volcanism in Eastern Anatolia, Turkey, Geophys. Res. Lett.,
30(24), 8046, doi:10.1029/2003GL018019.
Lachenbruch, A. H., and J. H. Sass (1977), Heat flow in the United states
and the thermal regime of the crust, in The Earth’s Crust, Its Nature and
Physical Properties, Geophys. Monogr. Ser., vol. 20, edited by J. G.
Heacock, pp. 626–675, AGU, Washington, D. C.
Le Pourhiet, L., M. Gurnis, and J. B. Saleeby (2006), Mantle instability
beneath the Sierra Nevada Mountains in California and Death Valley
extension, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 25, 104–119.
Lenardic, A., and W. M. Kaula (1995), More thoughts on convergent crustal
plateau formation and mantle dynamics with regard to Tibet, J. Geophys.
Res., 100, 15,193–15,203.
Manley, C. R., A. F. Glazner, and G. L. Farmer (2000), Timing of volcan-
ism in the Sierra Nevada of California: Evidence for Pliocene delamina-
tion of the batholithic root?, Geology, 28, 811–814.
Molnar, P., G. A. Houseman, and C. P. Conrad (1998), Rayleigh-Taylor-
type instability and convective thinning of mechanically thickened litho-
sphere: Effects of non-linear viscosity decreasing exponentially with
depth and of horizontal shortening of the layer, J. Geophys. Res., 133,
568–584.
Morency, C., and M.-P. Doin (2004), Numerical simulations of mantle litho-
spheric delamination, J. Geophys. Res., 109, B03410, doi:10.1029/
2003JB002414.
Neil, E. A., and G. A. Houseman (1999), Rayleigh-Taylor instability of the
upper mantle and its role in intraplate orogeny, Geophys. J. Int., 138, 89–
107.
Pysklywec, R. N., C. Beaumont, and P. Fullsack (2002), Lithospheric
deformation during the early stages of continental collision: Numerical
experiments and comparison with South Island, New Zealand, J. Geo-
phys. Res., 107(B7), 2133, doi:10.1029/2001JB000252.
Pysklywec, R. N., and M. H. Shahnas (2003), Time-dependent surface
topography in a coupled crust-mantle convection model, Geophys. J.
Int., 154, 268–278.
Pysklywec, R. N., and A. R. Cruden (2004), Coupled-crust mantle
dynamics and intraplate tectonics: Two dimensional numerical and three
dimensional analogue modeling, Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 5,
Q10003, doi:10.1029/2004GC000748.
Platt, J. P., J.-I. Soto, M. J. Whitehouse, A. J. Hurford, and S. P. Kelley
(1998), Thermal evolution, rate of exhumation, and tectonic significance
of metamorphic rocks from the floor of Alboran extensional basin, wes-
tern Mediterranean, Tectonics, 17, 671–689.
Saleeby, J., and Z. Foster (2004), Topographic response to mantle lithosphere
removal in the southern Sierra Nevada region, California, Geology, 32,
245–248.
Tackley, P. J., D. J. Stevenson, G. A. Glatzmier, and G. Schubert (1994),
Effects of multiple phase transitions in a 3-D spherical model of convec-
tion in the Earth’s mantle, J. Geophys. Res., 99, 15,877–15,901.
Zandt, G. (2003), The southern Sierra Nevada drip and the mantle wind
direction beneath the southwestern United States, Int. Geol. Rev., 45,
213–224.
Zandt, G., H. Gilbert, T. J. Owens, M. Ducea, J. Saleeby, and C. H. Jones
(2004), Active foundering of a continental arc root beneath the southern
Sierra Nevada in California, Nature, 432, 41–46.

O. H. Go¨g˘u¨s¸ and R. N. Pysklywec, Department of Geology, University
of Toronto, 22 Russell Street, Toronto, ON, Canada M5S 3B1. (gogus@
geology.utoronto.ca; russ@geology.utoronto.ca)
B11404 GO¨G˘U¨S¸ AND PYSKLYWEC: DRIPPING OR DELAMINATING LITHOSPHERE
11 of 11
B11404
