Application of single molecule technology to
rapidly map long DNA and study the conformation
of stretched DNA
Kevin M. Phillips, Jonathan W. Larson, Gregory R. Yantz, Christina M. D’Antoni,
Michael V. Gallo, Kimberly A. Gillis, Nuno M. Goncalves, Lori A. Neely,
Steven R. Gullans and Rudolf Gilmanshin*
U. S. Genomics, Inc., 12 Gill Street, Suite 4700, Woburn, MA 01801, USA
Received March 29, 2005; Revised June 10, 2005; Accepted September 27, 2005
ABSTRACT
Herein we describe the first application of direct
linear analysis (DLA) to the mapping of a bacterial
artificial chromosome (BAC), specifically the
185.1 kb-long BAC 12M9. DLA is a single molecule
mapping technology, based on microfluidic elonga-
tion and interrogation of individual DNA molecules,
sequence-specifically tagged with bisPNAs. A DNA
map with S/N ratio sufficiently high to detect all
major binding sites was obtained using only 200
molecule traces. A new method was developed to
extract an oriented map from an averaged map
that included a mixture of head-first and tail-first
DNA traces. In addition, we applied DLA to study
the conformation and tagging of highly stretched
DNA. Optimal conditions for promoting sequence-
specific binding of bisPNA to an 8 bp target site
were elucidated using DLA, which proved superior
to electromobility shift assays. DLA was highly repro-
ducible with a hybridized tag position localized with
an accuracy of 60.7 mm or 62.1 kb demonstrating its
utility for rapid mapping of large DNA at the single
molecule level. Within this accuracy, DNA molecules,
stretched to at least 85% of their contour length,
were stretched uniformly, so that the map expressed
in relative coordinates, was the same regardless of
the molecule extension.
INTRODUCTION
Growing interest in comparative genomics has spurred
interest in technologies that provide affordable genomic
scale analysis. DNA mapping, though lower resolution
than single base sequencing, can offer rapidity and efficiency
and, in many cases, still allow discernment of genomic
differences among species or among individuals within a
given species (1). The techniques that have single molecule
sensitivity and are capable of analyzing long DNA frag-
ments deserve special attention. Single-molecule sensitivity
eliminates the need for DNA amplification and could be
particularly valuable for discerning haplotypes (2,3). The abil-
ity to analyze long DNA molecules comprised of hundreds
of kilobases preserves the higher-order information in the
genome such as the sequence of linkage disequilibrium
blocks (4,5).
Optical mapping developed by Schwartz and colleagues
(6) is an example of how very long strands of DNA can be
physically mapped by imaging individual stretched DNA
molecules attached to a surface and digested with a restric-
tion enzyme. Contrary to DNA fixation on a surface, single
molecule mapping of DNA stretched in microfluidic devices
and continuously flowing through a reader (7) promised higher
throughput. Recently, we utilized a model system of 48.5 kb l
phage DNA to provide a proof-of-concept for a new mapping
technology analyzing DNA molecules ‘on the fly’ and known
as direct linear analysis (DLA). Compared to optical mapping,
DLA has similar resolution, sensitivity and higher throughput
(8). The two key components of DLA are: (i) a microfluidic
system for flowing and stretching single DNA molecules so
that they can be read rapidly in a linear fashion and (ii)
fluorescence-based detection that allows the reading of fluor-
escent tags on single molecules of long DNA. Its combination
of features, namely single molecule sensitivity, analysis of
very long DNA molecules, and high throughput, makes
DLA an attractive approach for many genomic applications.
To date, however, DLA has not been shown suitable for
practical applications.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +781 939 6404; Fax: +781 938 0060; Email: rgilmanshin@usgenomics.com
Present address:
Kimberly A. Gillis, Baxter Healthcare Corporation, 220 Norwood Park South, Norwood, MA 02062, USA
 The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 18 5829–5837
doi:10.1093/nar/gki895
The purpose of the present study was to develop and
characterize DLA as a technology suitable for practical
applications such as mapping very long DNA isolated from
cells. In so doing we also demonstrated its utility as a tool for
characterizing DNA conformation and tagging. Using bisPNA
tags, we demonstrated that DLA provides high precision of
determining the hybridized tag positions on a bacterial artifi-
cial chromosome (BAC) and uncovered the ability of bisPNA
tags to hybridize to both perfectly matching target sequences
and to a pair of adjacent mismatching sites, the extended
P-loops. Finally, a new method for orienting molecular maps
was developed further enhancing the applicability of DLA
technology.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
DNA sample
As a long DNA sample, we used 185.1 kb BAC 12M9 (acces-
sion no. AL080243) (9). This BAC contains a 177 kb region of
human chromosome 22 cloned into the EcoRI sites of the
pBACe3.6 vector (10). We obtained Escherichia coli 12M9
clone from P. J. de Jong at CHORI, Oakland CA. Supercoiled
BAC was isolated by a slight modification of alkaline lysis
protocol (11), linearized with homing endonuclease PI-SceI
(NEB, Beverly MA), and evaluated for admixtures of circular
and degraded DNA. See Supplemenatry Data for the protocols.
Tagging procedure
For sequence-specific tagging, we used fluorescent bisPNA,
which is capable of invading double-stranded DNA under mild
non-denaturing conditions by displacing one of the strands
(12). The tag complementary to 50-GAG AAG AA-30 DNA
sequence was synthesized by Applied Biosystems (Bedford,
MA): (N)TMR-OO-Lys-Lys-TTC-TTC-TC-OOO-JTJ-TTJ-
TT-Lys-Lys(C)
The tag includes tetramethylrhodamine fluorophore (TMR),
which is conjugated to N-terminal amino group. The fluoro-
phore, the Watson–Crick (T + C) strand, and the Hoogsteen
(T + J) strand are connected with –O– linkers (8-amino-3,6-
dioxaoctanoic acid), which form flexible hydrophilic tethers.
T, C, and J are thymine, cytosine, and pseudoisocytosine,
respectively. The tagging and controls were performed as
described in (8) with some modifications. See Supplementary
Data for details including tagging mechanism.
Staining of DNA backbone
For DLA, DNA samples were stained with TOTO-3 intercal-
ating dye (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) at a concentration
of 500 pg/ml, corresponding to 0.76 mM of base pairs. The dye
was added to produce base pair to dye molar ratios between
10:1 and 2.5:1. Solutions were incubated for >2 h at room
temperature or for >1 h at 37C. DNA was stained as close to
saturation as possible to have the dye evenly spaced along the
DNA backbone to ensure accurate determination of the appar-
ent center of molecule (CM) (8). However, the final DNA
sample was not saturated with TOTO-3, in part as a con-
sequence of a competition between TOTO-3 and residual
EtdBr, that remains bound to DNA even after multiple iso-
propanol extractions (data not shown), and also in part due to
possible adsorption of the intercalator onto chip surfaces
during measurement.
DLA technology
BAC 12M9 was mapped by DLA technology (8). In short,
DNA was tagged with fluorescent bisPNA tags and inter-
calated with TOTO-3, then stretched in a microfluidic chip,
and finally ‘read’ by multiple-color epi-illumination confocal
microscopy. Intercalator fluorescence revealed both the con-
formation of individual DNA molecules and also the velocity
using the two-spot velocimetry system. Typical velocities
were 10–20 mm/ms, and these values were used on an indi-
vidual molecule basis to convert measurements taken in time
into distances. Fluorescence bursts from the DNA-bound tags
revealed the underlying sequence motif map.
We used a published analysis (13) and our study of DNA
stretching in elongational flow (J. W. Larson et al., manuscript
submitted) to design and create a microchip configuration and
operating conditions that are adequate for stretching 200 kb-
long DNA. The chip design was similar to that presented in
Figure 1A of Chan et al (8) and included a 1 mm-deep cavity
with a funnel with a 83:1 taper reduction ratio, a taper shape
providing W(x) 1/x2 profile (W is the channel width, and x is
the coordinate along the flow direction), and a 0.6 mm-wide
interrogation channel. In some experiments, chips included a
post field before the taper (8) that increased the proportion of
stretched molecules by 5–10%.
Detection channels were synchronized for alignment of dif-
ferent color signals. Every data bin captured the number of
photons detected during a 0.1 ms interval (10 kHz frequency).
For data processing, we used our own software which selects
signals whose fluorescence exceeds a threshold. The presence
Figure 1. Characterization of DNA stretching. A two-dimensional histogram of
burst size (B is the total number of photons per molecule) and length (X is the
DNA extension in the direction of flow) for individual DNA molecules is shown
as a heat map: 500 photons by 2 mm binning, respectively, and histogram
occupancy as indicated in the inset legend. The adjacent histograms show
distributions of DNA lengths (maroon at the top) and burst sizes (red at the
right) with an interpolated Gaussian curve (black line) corresponding to full
size BAC DNA. N is number of events. Data include 15 283 molecules.
5830 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 18
of a DNA molecule in the detection zone was operationally
defined as 5 or more contiguous bins with over-threshold
signals. Shorter events (i.e. <5 bins) were discarded; as
these spurious flickers are generally from dust particles,
very short DNA and other detectable detritus. The apparent
CM was determined using the backbone emission profile and
used as the main geometrical reference point along each DNA
(the origin of coordinates). To compare the theoretical and
experimental maps, their origins were aligned and theoretical
intensity per single tag was adjusted to match single-target
peaks of experimental map. Then the theoretical map was
shifted and stretched to obtain the best fit. This procedure
accounted for the offset between green and red excitation
spots and for the uncertainty of DNA length determination
due to thresholding.
RESULTS
Characterization of DNA stretching
Only intact and adequately stretched DNA molecules were
selected for analysis. For every DNA molecule, we determined
its extension in the direction of flow (X, or ‘length’ for sim-
plicity) and burst size [B is the total number of photons emitted
by the stained DNA (8)] and a typical scatter plot of these two
parameters is presented in Figure 1. The individual histograms
are adjacent to the top and right sides of the scatter plot,
respectively (Figure 1). Burst size is proportional to DNA
size (14), and the burst size distribution (right histogram in
Figure 1) exhibited a single sharp peak centered at 6800
photons consistent with a pure homogenous DNA sample.
The width of this peak was the result of two effects. First,
different DNA molecules flowed through different sections of
the focused light spot and therefore were excited at different
intensities. Second, the number of dye molecules varied for
different DNA molecules of the same length. We used the area
of a Gaussian fit of the peak (black line in the histogram) to
estimate the proportion of intact BACs to be 60 ± 2%. The
proportion of intact BACs in the sample before injection into
a chip was determined independently using pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis (PFGE) to be 75 ± 8%. The small difference
of 15 ± 10% most likely reflects DNA losses inside the micro-
fluidic chip such as adsorption to walls and possibly some
DNA fragmentation.
The distribution of measured DNA lengths (top histogram in
Figure 1) had an asymmetric peak centered at 60 mm, showing
that the BAC molecules were considerably extended from
their relaxed random coil conformations of 2.5 mm [average
end-to-end distance, (15)]. This peak asymmetry, with an
abrupt border at larger sizes, would be expected for a popu-
lation of stretched molecules, in which a large portion
approached complete stretching. In this case, the position of
the abrupt border corresponds to the known DNA contour
length. The full size DNA molecules were readily evident
in the two-dimensional histogram (Figure 1) as the large clus-
ter centered broadly about the dominant peak in the burst size
histogram and ranging in length from 20 to 65 mm, indicating
variable stretching efficiency. In most cases, at least 16% of
the molecules were stretched to lengths exceeding 54 mm.
The contour length of non-intercalated BAC 12M9 is expec-
ted to be 62.9 mm [185.1 kb at 0.34 mm/kb (16)]. However,
intercalation can increase the contour length (17). Therefore,
our data include molecules as long as 70 mm in some experi-
ments, even though the DNA molecules were not intercalated
to saturation. Total numbers of molecules longer than 54 and
64 mm in Figure 1 are 1427 and 124, respectively. This cor-
responds to 16 and 1.4% of the intact BAC molecules.
It is possible to overstretch DNA beyond its contour length if
the applied force exceeds 70 pN (18,19). We avoided over-
stretching through proper choice of channel geometry and
flow velocity (J. W. Larson et al., manuscript submitted). In
Figure 1, there is infrequent evidence of DNA molecules longer
than 70 mm which also tend to have larger burst sizes outside of
the Gaussian distribution (>12 000 photons), but were other-
wise relatively scattered in the two-dimensional histogram
(hence not visible with the heat map in Figure 1). Most likely,
these events were artifacts of two overlapping molecules that
were not distinguished by our analysis algorithm.
Obtaining unoriented maps
To obtain a bisPNA binding site map (Figure 2), we selected
DNA molecules that were stretched within a narrow size range
(the selection interval varied between 1 and 5 mm depending
on the number of detected molecules and is stated in every
Figure legend), aligned them along their CMs as determined
from backbone emission profiles, and calculated the average
bisPNA tag fluorescence signal. After averaging, multiple
Gaussian peak fitting was used to map tag positions along
the DNA. Based on peak width (full width at half maximum
height), map resolution was estimated at 1.7 mm or 5 kb. DNA
molecules traveled through our chip in both head-first and tail-
first orientations, and consequently signal averaging superim-
posed the two mirror image maps into a single ‘unoriented’
symmetrical map. Maps obtained at different tagging spe-
cificities are presented in Figure 2; their analysis is discussed
step by step below.
Both the width of the selection interval and the extent of
stretching of the selected molecules influenced the quality of
the maps, i.e. their S/N ratio and resolution. These effects are
discussed further.
The accuracy of the observed map was assessed by com-
parison to a theoretical model (black curve in Figure 2B)
consisting of six Gaussian peaks centered on the target site
locations (0.7, 10.2, 73.5, 152.0, 154.5 and 181.6 kb as shown
in Figure 2A) and sized 5 kb wide (FWHM). An unoriented
model was created superimposing the head-first theoretical
map with its mirror image (red curve in Figure 2B).
Tagging specificity
bisPNA tags can bind to perfect match target sites as well as
single end mismatch (SEMM) sites, whereas other types of
mismatch sites do not significantly hybridize and thus were
disregarded in our analysis (see Supplementary Data for
more discussion). There are 84 SEMM sites in BAC 12M9,
many of which hybridized with tags during the incubation.
We devised a protocol to enhance tagging specificity. To
remove incorrectly bound tags, we incubated the sample at
elevated temperature (8,20). Temperature and incubation
time were adjusted carefully to preserve maximal binding
to perfect target sites, while minimizing incorrect binding.
Optimization using both electrophoresis band shift assay
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 18 5831
(see Supplementary Data for details) and DLA showed 2 h
incubation at 68C to be ideal. The DLA approach to optimize
the incubation conditions relied on a cluster of 13 closely
positioned SEMM sites between 92.8 and 108.0 kb in BAC
12M9 that does not overlap with any target site. If a sample
included residual SEMM-bound tags, they formed an easily
detectable peak in the unoriented map between 5.4 and
5.4 mm. As seen in Figure 2C, 1 h incubation at 58C was
not sufficient to remove SEMM-bound tags whereas a 2 h
incubation at 68C showed no trace of the central peak in
an unoriented map (Figure 2D and E) signaling that all
SEMM-bound tags were gone. Examination of Figure 2D
reveals that, overall, there was excellent agreement between
the theoretical map and the observed map with the exception
of peaks III and III0 (Figure 2C). The origin of these peaks are
discussed below. After the inclusion of corresponding binding
sites, the theoretical map shows all peaks observed in the
actual map (Figure 2E). See more on the construction of
theoretical maps in the last section of Results.
Generating an oriented map
Oriented maps can be more informative, so we developed an
informatics approach to extract oriented maps using peaks that
are uniquely formed by DNA molecules oriented in the same
direction. For example, peaks IV and II0 are formed by the sites
at 73.5 and 152.0/154.5 kb, respectively, that belong to DNA
molecules moving head-first (see similar directed arrows in
Figure 2B). Therefore, if we selected only DNA molecules
containing peak IV (interval 8 to 5 mm) and peak II0 (inter-
val 17–21 mm) and averaged their maps, we obtained an ori-
ented map (Figure 2F).
Although in this example the oriented map was extracted
using a priori knowledge of the tag binding pattern, the
approach can be generalized to obtain oriented maps of
unknown molecules (see Discussion).
Number of molecules needed to create a map
To evaluate how many individual DNA molecules were
needed to obtain a map with a good S/N ratio, we compared
a typical map obtained by averaging 2627 molecules with
maps using a subset of those molecules (Figure 3). Although
noise was increased, using only 200–208 molecules was suf-
ficient to observe all peaks.
Inclusion of more molecules in averaging, generally speak-
ing, should produce maps with better signal-to-noise ratios.
However, selection of wider range of lengths of DNA
molecules results in widening of the peaks because their posi-
tions depend on the degree of DNA stretching (see below);
therefore, even at smaller noise these maps have worse res-
olution. This trade-off between S/N ratio and resolution is
especially visible for the outermost bands I/I0; compare the
black map wider selection with others in Figure 3. The rule
of thumb is to select the molecules from the narrowest size
interval that includes a sufficiently big number of molecules
to detect the lowest peak over the noise.
Accuracy of defining tagged sites
To evaluate the reproducibility of DNA mapping by DLA, we
compared unoriented maps obtained from different experi-
ments and generated by averaging the tag signals from
DNA that stretched to similar lengths, allowing meaningful
comparison when the DNA stretching varied. The positions of
the major peaks in maps from nine different experiments,
different samples and microchips were determined by multiple
Figure 2. Comparison of theoretical and experimental maps. (A) Positions of
6 GAG AAG AA target sites on BAC 12M9. Circle indicates position of the site
responsible for peak III. (B) Theoretical maps for equal mixture of unoriented
molecules (red) and for head-first, oriented molecules (black). Sites represented
by 5 kb-wide Gaussian. Arrows, one for every target site, show peak positions
for head-first or reverse orientations. (C) Unoriented map (blue) observed under
low specificity conditions. (D and E) The same unoriented map (blue) observed
under high stringency conditions. (F) Oriented map (blue) obtained by selecting
head-first DNA molecules having tags at sites IV and/or II0. Each experimental
map shows average intensity of the bound fluorescent tags as a function of
distance from CM, at 0.5 mm steps. Maps include molecules 62–65 mm long,
aligned at their CMs, which are denoted as the zero coordinate. Maps C, D, and
F include 1035, 1993 and 87 molecules, respectively. Theoretical oriented
(black) and unoriented (red) maps include only target sites (D), plus extended
P-loops (E and F), plus SEMM sites (C). See text for details.
5832 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 18
Gaussian peak fitting. Figure 4A shows the cumulative results
for different DNA length selections; Roman numerals refer to
the peak notation in Figure 2D. The bound tag positions were
located precisely to within ±0.7 mm, based on the standard
deviation, for molecules stretched beyond 59 mm, (Figure 4A),
demonstrating the high reproducibility of the procedure. The
accuracy was limited by the 0.5 mm step used to calculate the
maps and by a crude selection of the peaks that was needed to
cover a wide range of DNA elongations. For example, a single
Gaussian approximation was adequate for peaks I/I0 and II/II0
for DNA molecules stretched to 60 mm or less. However, the
mapping resolution increased at higher degrees of stretching
where each of these peaks exhibits two resolved components
(see Figure 2D). Similarly, peaks IV or IV0 were difficult to
resolve from peaks III or III0, respectively, for DNA maps
shorter than 57 mm.
Conformation of stretched DNA
Previous work in single DNA molecule dynamics has relied
heavily on end-to-end measurements of DNA conformations
resulting in relatively little knowledge about stretching
dynamics along a molecule. Perkins et al. (17) resolved
large internal morphological changes in tethered DNA by
fluorescence imaging, but otherwise the tagging strategy
employed in the present study for mapping revealed stretching
dynamics across the entire molecule with unprecedented spa-
tial resolution (Figure 4). Detailed analysis of the DNA
stretching behavior exceeds the scope of this article, but of
greatest note, we observed that the tag positions scaled linearly
with increasing DNA length, indicative of uniform stretching
at all points along the molecule.
Measurements in the current study were performed after
a sudden elongational flow, and consequently the highly
extended DNA conformations were transient and possibly
somewhat relaxed at the time of measurement. For instance,
the tension profile along the polymer might have redistributed
in the few milliseconds while the polymer emerged from
elongational flow. The nature of polymer relaxation from high
extension under non-uniform and time varying strain such as
in our system is relatively poorly understood. In previous
Figure 4. Analysis of DNA conformation under different degrees of stretching. (A) Measured positions of major peaks in unoriented maps. Roman numbers
defined in Figure 2D. (B) Relative distances between peaks calculated as the ratio of distances between symmetric peaks and the outermost peaks LI–I0. Symbols II/II
0,
III/III0 and IV/IV0 denote the relative distances LII–II0/LI–I0, LIII–III0/LI–I0 and LIV–IV0/LI-I0, respectively. Traces of DNA molecules at 5 mm intervals were averaged, with
the ordinate centered on the selection interval. Lines in panel A are drawn by eye; straight vertical lines in panel B are drawn at the positions corresponding to the
averages of II/II0, III/III0 and IV/IV0 datasets at 0.68, 0.36 and 0.24, respectively.
Figure 3. Unoriented maps obtained with different numbers of molecules.
Upper black map includes 2627 DNA molecules with sizes of 62–66 mm. Blue
map includes a subset of 729 DNA molecules within narrower size interval
of 63.5–64.5 mm. Three lower maps red, green and brown are obtained with
different subsets of the narrow size selection (63.5–64.5 mm), which include
203, 208 and 200 DNA molecules, respectively. Maps were obtained with 1 mm
step and displaced along the ordinate to simplify comparison. See Figure 2
legend for other details.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 18 5833
work, it was shown that DNA adopts a steady-state ‘dumbbell’
orientation in elongational flow at lower strain rates above the
critical value for the onset of stretching (13), a phenomenon
arising from the variation in polymer tension from a maximum
in the molecule center to zero at the ends, and also from the
propensity of polymers to relax from the ends inwards (21).
Therefore, direct extrapolation of DNA stretching behavior
to the higher strain rates used in this study suggests that the
central tag positions should be relatively insensitive to the
overall DNA extension, and that improved stretching should
affect the tag positions on the ends most significantly.
To uncover the conformational differences between the
central and terminal portions of DNA molecules stretched
to varying extents, the peak positions were expressed in rel-
ative distances (Figure 4B), normalized against the distance
LI–I0 between the outmost peaks I and I
0, which are formed by
the tags bound very close to the termini. Normalization against
the outer peaks was preferred over normalization against
the measured DNA length as a more accurate measure of
the distance between DNA ends. We also used the distances
between symmetric peaks instead of the positions of individual
peaks relative to CM to exclude any systematic error due to
misalignment of the red and green detection channels. The
distances between the peaks II and II0 (LII–II0), III and III0
(LIII–III0), and IV and IV
0 (LIV–IV0) were divided by LI–I0 to
calculate the relative interpeak distances, which are plotted
in Figure 4B as curves II/II0, III/III0, and IV/IV0, respectively,
to evaluate uniformity of DNA stretching. Clearly, the
maps were identical within experimental uncertainty after
the linear transformation despite significant differences in
the observed DNA length. Average relative distances between
peaks II and II0, III and III0, and IV and IV0 were 0.68 ± 0.02,
0.36 ± 0.01 and 0.24 ± 0.01, respectively. Therefore, BAC
molecules longer than 54 mm were stretched uniformly
in DLA.
Although the relative distances between the peaks or their
positions expressed in relative coordinates did not depend on
the extent of DNA stretching, the maps measured for more
fully stretched molecules provided better genomic resolution.
In other words, our geometric resolution between tags was
1.7 mm which represented 5.0 kb for completely stretched
DNA [at 0.34 kb/mm for B-form DNA (16)] or 5.9 kb for
DNA stretched to 54 mm.
Characterization of peaks III and III0
As mentioned above, based on the knowledge of the BAC
sequence in GenBank, we observed an unexpected tag bind-
ing site, visible as peaks III and III0 in the unoriented map
(Figure 2C) or peak g in the oriented map (Figure 2E). Using
the position of the unexpected peak in the unoriented map and
a conversion factor for mm into kb, determined from the posi-
tions of known matching targets, the location of the unknown
tag-hybridization site(s) was determined to be at 61.6 ± 2.3 kb.
By using electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) to
examine binding of radioactive bisPNA tags to restriction
fragments of BAC 12M9 (see Supplementary Data), two tag
binding sites were observed: at 59.2–60.6 kb and 63.5–65.9 kb,
independently confirming that these were indeed true bind-
ing sites. We resequenced BAC 12M9 in these regions and
found that it matched the GenBank deposited sequence and
contained no additional perfect match tag sites. Close
examination of the DNA sequence revealed the presence of
two loci at 59.7 (P1) and 64.4 (P2) kb with potential to form
extended P-loops when bound to bisPNA tags. Independent
experiments (see Supplementary Data for details) demon-
strated that the tags in fact bound to these extended P-loops
with stability comparable to that seen for hybridization to
perfect match sites, although they included mismatching
bases.
Inclusion of extended P-loops in the analysis
Because two extended P-loops clearly produced detectable
peaks in unoriented maps under our high stringency hybrid-
ization conditions, we also included other similar sites in the
analysis. We selected the sequences that included at least two
sites with single mismatches that were separated by 1–6 bp and
of the two mismatching sites at least one was a SEMM site.
These tentative selection rules are in good agreement with our
data (see Supplementary Data for details) but by no means
are explicit and need further investigation. Sites satisfying
these demands were found at 7.4, 147.1 and 172.7 kb and
were added to the theoretical map together with P1 and P2.
Intensities of the extended P-loop peaks were determined
using the measured intensity of III/III0 peak and the inde-
pendently determined ratio of bisPNA bound to the P1 and
P2 sites, which was 1.2:3.0 (see Supplementary Data). The
latter site includes three binding sites in proximity and there-
fore has anomalously high intensity. For all other extended
P-loops we used the same intensity as determined for P1 site.
The resulting unoriented and oriented theoretical maps are
presented in Figure 2E and F, respectively. Clearly, every
peak in the theoretical maps now has a matching experimental
counterpart and there are no peaks in the experimental maps
that are not present in theoretical maps. The peak positions in
the experimental and theoretical maps (see Table 1 for the
peak positions in Figure 2F) coincide with ±0.5 mm accuracy;
the intensities do not always match perfectly because our
approximation did not account for the structure variations
and, hence, differing binding stabilities in the different exten-
ded P-loop sites. Also, unlike the unoriented map, intensities
of the peaks in the oriented experimental map (Figure 2F) are
distorted because of the way the map was generated with a
biased selection of traces that contained a peak d and/or e but
not necessarily other peaks.
Table 1. The peak positions in the experimental and theoretical oriented maps
presented in Figure 2F
Peak identifiersa Peak position (mm) Error (mm)b
Experimental Theoretical
a 30.25 30.91 0.66
b 27.75 28.40 0.65
g 9.75 9.66 0.09
d 6.50 6.46 0.04
e1 18.75 18.50 0.25
e2 19.75 20.40 0.65
x1 27.75 27.00 0.75
x2 29.50 29.90 0.40
aThe peak notation is the same as in Figure 2F.
bThe error is positive when the experimental peak is to the right from the
theoretical one.
5834 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 18
DISCUSSION
Genomic mapping is a well-establish and powerful strategy
for species identification, for identification of overlapping
genomic fragments in sequencing projects, and for other
large scale genomic analyses. However, traditional mapping
methods are relatively slow, tedious, expensive and require
significant amounts of DNA. This study demonstrated that
a single molecule mapping technology, namely DLA, is an
alternative method for mapping large genomic DNA. Once
isolated from bacteria and tagged, 185 kb BAC 12M9 DNA
was mapped using DLA in minutes. Multiple sequence-
specific tags could be localized along the DNA molecule by
observing as few as 200 molecules. The map was highly repro-
ducible and allowed us to discern tag positions with a mapping
precision of ±0.7 mm or about ±1.2% of the molecule length.
In addition, DLA was found to be very powerful for charac-
terization of the conformation of stretched DNA, and
evaluation of binding of sequence-specific tags to DNA.
DNA stretching and sizing
Multiple tag sites could be resolved within the 185 kb BAC
12M9 making it possible to gain insight into stretching
behavior along the DNA molecule. Highly extended DNA
was stretched uniformly in DLA and hence the relative
coordinates of hybridized tags were the same for all elongated
DNA molecules (Figure 4). For certain applications such as
genome or species identification, the pattern of tag distribu-
tion, which can be expressed in relative coordinates, is suffi-
cient; therefore, all the BAC molecules longer than 54 mm
could be used for analysis. This relaxed selection rule allows
inclusion of a significant portion (>16%) of all the detected
BAC molecules for identification. The length of 54 mm
constitutes only 85% of the contour length of unintercalated
BAC and an even smaller extension of intercalated molecules.
However, the maps obtained at longer extensions were more
informative because of better resolution.
For some applications, determining DNA contour length
between tag sites and between termini (i.e. the size of DNA
fragment) is important. Only in this case can geometric length
in micrometers be transformed into genetic length in base pairs
using a scaling factor that can be determined independently
(8). The contour length of a DNA fragment can be evaluated
from its burst size. To select completely stretched DNA
molecules for analysis and therefore ensure that the measured
distance is the contour length, a chart, similar to Figure 1, can
be used. Burst size B is proportional to contour length X0
for uniform intercalation (14,22) and therefore the function
B/X0 ¼ constant is a straight line going through the coordin-
ates origin; the constant can be determined through measure-
ment of a known DNA sample. The lengths and burst sizes of
the traces found in the vicinity of this line belong to completely
stretched molecules. This selection approach can be used for
analysis of unknown DNA.
DNA tagging
Mapping with DLA requires highly specific tagging. To
achieve satisfactory specificity with bisPNA fluorescent
tags, the temperature and time of the final incubation were
carefully adjusted. Of note, DLA technology itself proved to
be a better method than the more traditional EMSA approach
for characterizing DNA binding properties of bisPNA. DLA
was more rapid, highly sensitive and amenable for analysis of
large DNA.
bisPNA tags, in addition to hybridizing with perfect match-
ing target sequences, could form equally stable complexes
with a pair of mismatching sites if they were in close proximity
i.e. extended P-loops. Extended P-loops were formed previ-
ously using a pair of carefully designed bisPNAs (23). In our
case, they were formed by pairs of sites in close proximity that
had imperfect target sequences. Five extended P-loops were
identified in BAC 12M9 for the tag we used. Whereas bisPNAs
can discriminate individual perfect match from single mis-
match sites, we found that bisPNA tags did not dissociate
from extended P-loops sites containing mismatched bases,
even after high temperature treatment. If either temperature
or incubation time were increased, tags from both target sites
and extended P-loops dissociated simultaneously. Therefore,
target and extended P-loop sites tagged with bisPNA are indis-
tinguishable; both types should be taken into account when
mapping DNA.
Producing oriented maps
In addition to provide a symmetric unoriented map of tag
sites along the DNA, DLA was shown capable of generating
an oriented map when an asymmetric tagging pattern exists.
Although we used a priori knowledge of the tagging pattern to
extract an oriented map, this approach can be generalized to
orient unknown molecules and analyze mixtures of molecules.
The basic principle is to choose any peak in an unoriented
map, select all molecules with this particular peak, average
their traces and compare this new average sub-map with the
original unoriented map. If the new map resembles the original
one, includes all the same peaks, then the chosen peak of an
unoriented map resulted from both orientations of DNA
molecules. In this case, you proceed to another peak of an
unoriented map and repeat the process. Once the new sub-map
is (i) different from the unoriented map and (ii) reconstructs
the unoriented map being superimposed with its own mirror
image, then the extracted sub-map is the oriented map. This
process does not work if the oriented map is completely sym-
metric; however, in this case it does not differ from unoriented
map anyway. An actual algorithm is more complicated and
would involve an iterative analysis of the generated sub-maps
and their mirror images to identify asymmetric peaks for
obtaining oriented maps. This algorithm would work not only
with the peaks that are formed by single DNA orientation, but
also with the peaks that are formed by both orientations if one
of the orientations inputs more tags than the other. A similar
approach, peeling away one after another sub-maps from an
averaged unoriented map, can also be used for analysis of
mixtures of different DNA fragments. The development of
appropriate analytical algorithms is currently in progress.
Specifics of DLA mapping
Some features of DLA distinguish it from other mapping
techniques. First, DLA requires a small amount of DNA, a
general advantage of single molecule approaches, potentially
eliminating the need to create a BAC library to map a genome.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 18 5835
This advantage, however, can only be exploited when a tech-
nology is available to isolate long DNA fragments directly
from genomic DNA. In this regard, we are currently develop-
ing an automated sample preparation technology based on
concept of digesting a genome with rare-cutting restriction
enzyme and then isolating the resulting long DNA fragments
for subsequent mapping with DLA.
A second advantage of DLA is its ability to map long
fragments, i.e. hundreds of kilobases, which preserves some
higher-order information in the genome such as the sequence
of linkage disequilibrium blocks (4,5). Assembly of large scale
or whole genome maps is also simpler from longer size
mapped fragments (24). While about a hundred of 50 kb-
long mapped fragments are typically needed to assemble
the map of a 0.5 Mb segment (25), the same segment can
be covered with only 3–6 overlapping fragments, if they
are 100–200 kb-long, using DLA, or the segment can even
be mapped as a whole by optical mapping (26). The ability to
measure long DNA is especially helpful in analysis of DNA
fragments with repeats. The accuracy of map reconstruction
depends on the precision of determining the positions of the
specific-sequences, which are restriction endonuclease recog-
nition sites in classic and optical mapping and tag-
hybridization sites in DLA mapping. The classic restriction
mapping precision is limited by PFGE and varies with the
fragment length ranging from ±0.5 kb for 10 kb fragments
up to ±3.0 kb for 100 kb fragments (27). In comparison, the
precision is ±2.06 kb for optical mapping (6) and ±2.1 kb for
DLA [±0.7 mm at 0.34 kb/mm for B-form DNA (16)].
A third advantage of DLA is the ability to measure con-
tiguous maps. It allows analysis of a mixture of different DNA
fragments in the same experiment. The map of a sufficiently
long genome fragment permits identification of a microorgan-
ism (28). Therefore, the ability of DLA to measure contiguous
maps of long fragments provides the potential for identifying
different microorganisms in a mixture of DNA.
DLA shares all the above-mentioned advantages with
optical mapping (29,30). However, it has some unique features
as well. For example, different tags that hybridize to different
target sequences and fluoresce in different spectral regions
can be used simultaneously with the same DNA fragment.
This way several different maps of the fragment are obtained
at once using DLA. Optical mapping also has intrinsic diffi-
culties hampering its implementation: a need to optimize
surface treatment in correspondence with the length of
analyzed fragments, poor reproducibility of the surface
treatment procedure, short shelf life of the derivatized glass,
non-specific DNA photolysis catalyzed by DNA-bound inter-
calators and potentially incomplete cleavage of immobilized
DNA by restriction endonucleases (29–31). Contrary to optical
mapping, DLA uses microfluidic chips for DNA stretching
that can be produced in bulk and have an unlimited shelf
life. Fluidic stretching of DNA enables high throughput
of molecules and samples because it occurs on the fly and
does not involve manual manipulations. Photodamage of DNA
does not influence DLA measurements because DNA relaxa-
tion time (32) exceeds the measurement time and the DNA
backbone trace is uninterrupted regardless of photo-induced
nicks. Finally, we perform tagging in solution and, differently
from immobilized DNA, in optical mapping all target sites are
equally accessible in our case.
Potential applications
In looking ahead, we foresee practical application of DLA
for identification of species such as pathogens and other
microbes. In fact, microbial identification through genotyping
is now the preferred approach (28). In this context, DLA has a
number of advantages. It is very sensitive requiring detection
and analysis of just hundreds of molecules. In addition, DNA
fragments measured by DLA are so long that they provide
unique maps sufficient to identify the organism source by
comparison to a database of known or informatically deduced
patterns. This ability facilitates analysis of mixtures of
genomic samples.
SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Supplementary Data are available at NAR Online.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge P. J. de Jong (CHORI, Oakland
CA) for providing the E.coli clone with BAC 12M9. We thank
Robert S. Langer and Alexander Rich for their comments on
the manuscript. This research was partially funded by NSF
grants DMI-0213876 and DMI-0320449. Funding to pay the
Open Access publication charges for this article was provided
by U.S. Genomics, Inc.
Conflict of interest statement. Most authors hold stock and/or
stock options in US Genomics, Inc., the makers of the Trilogy
2020 single molecule analyzer. R. Gilmanshin is currently
employed by U.S. Genomics and is involved in research on
its behalf.
REFERENCES
1. Norwood,D.A. and Sands,J.A. (1997) Physical map of the Clostridium
difficile chromosome. Gene, 201, 159–168.
2. Ding,C. and Cantor,C.R. (2003) Direct molecular haplotyping of
long-range genomic DNA with M1-PCR. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA.,
100, 7449–7453.
3. Mitra,R.D., Butty,V.L., Shendure,J., Williams,B.R., Housman,D.E. and
Church,G.M. (2003) Digital genotypingand haplotyping with polymerase
colonies. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA., 100, 5926–5931.
4. Gabriel,S.B., Schaffner,S.F., Nguyen,H., Moore,J.M., Roy,J.,
Blumenstiel,B., Higgins,J., DeFelice,M., Lochner,A., Faggart,M. et al.
(2002) The structure of haplotype blocks in the human genome.
Science, 296, 2225–2229.
5. Weiss,K.M. and Clark,A.G. (2002) Linkage disequilibrium and the
mapping of complex human traits. Trends Genet., 18, 19–24.
6. Lim,A., Dimalanta,E.T., Potamousis,K.D., Yen,G., Apodoca,J., Tao,C.,
Lin,J., Qi,R., Skiadas,J., Ramanathan,A. et al. (2001) Shotgun optical
maps of the whole Escherichia coli O157:H7 genome. Genome Res.,
11, 1584–1593.
7. Tegenfeldt,J.O., Bakajin,O., Chou,C.-F., Chan,S.S., Austin,R., Fann,W.,
Liou,L., Chan,E., Duke,T. and Cox,E.C. (2001) Near-field scanner for
moving molecules. Phys. Rev. Lett., 86, 1378–1381.
8. Chan,E.Y., Goncalves,N.M., Haeusler,R.A., Hatch,A.J., Larson,J.W.,
Maletta,A.M., Yantz,G.R., Carstea,E.D., Fuchs,M., Wong,G.W. et al.
(2004) DNA mapping using microfluidic stretching and single-molecule
detection of fluorescent site-specific tags. Genome Res., 14,
1137–1146.
9. Osoegawa,K., Mamoser,A., Wu,C., Frengen,E., Seng,C., Catanese,J. and
de Jong,P.J. (2001) A bacterial artificial chromosome library for
sequencing the complete human genome. Genome Res., 11,
483–496.
5836 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 18
10. Frengen,E., Weichenhan,D., Zhao,B., Osoegawa,K., van Geel,M. and
de Jong,P.J. (1999) A modular, positive selection bacterial artificial
chromosome vector with multiple cloning sites. Genomics, 58,
250–253.
11. Sambrook,J. and Russell,D.W. (2001) Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory
Manual. 3rd edn. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring
Harbor, NY.
12. Nielsen,P.E. and Egholm,M. (1999) An introduction to PNA.
In Nielsen,P.E. and Egholm,M. (eds), Peptide Nucleic Acids. Protocols
and Applications. Horizon Scientific Press, Norfolk, pp. 1–19.
13. Perkins,T.T., Smith,D.E. and Chu,S. (1997) Single polymer dynamics
in an elongational flow. Science, 276, 2016–2021.
14. Chou,H.-P., Spence,C., Scherer,A. and Quake,S.R. (1999)
A microfabricated device for sizing and sorting DNA molecules.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA., 96, 11–13.
15. Strobl,G. (1997) The Physics of Polymers, 2nd edn. Springer, Berlin.
16. Sinden,R.R. (1994) DNA Structure and Function. Academic Press,
San Diego.
17. Perkins,T.T., Smith,D.E., Larson,R.G. and Chu,S. (1995) Stretching
of a single tethered polymer in a uniform flow. Science, 268,
83–87.
18. Bustamante,C., Smith,S.B., Liphardt,J. and Smith,D. (2000)
Single-molecule studies of DNA mechanics. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.,
10, 279–285.
19. Smith,S.B.,Cui,Y. and Bustamante,C. (1996) Overstretching B-DNA: the
elastic response of individual double-stranded and single-stranded DNA
molecules. Science, 271, 795–799.
20. Demidov,V.V. and Frank-Kamenetskii,M.D. (2001) Sequence-specific
targeting of duplex DNA by peptide nucleic acids via triplex strand
invasion. Methods, 23, 108–122.
21. Manneville,S., Cluzel,P., Viovy,J.-L., Chatenay,D. and Caron,F. (1996)
Evidence for the universal scaling behaviour of a freely relaxing DNA
molecule. Europhys. Lett., 36, 413–418.
22. Foquet,M., Korlach,J., Zipfel,W., Webb,W.W. and Craighead,H.G.
(2002) DNA fragment sizing by single molecule detection in
submicrometer-sized closed fluidic channels. Anal. Chem., 74,
1415–1422.
23. Demidov,V.V., Kuhn,H., Lavrentieva-Smolina,I.V. and
Frank-Kamenetskii,M.D. (2001) Peptide nucleic acid-assisted
topological labeling of duplex DNA. Methods, 23, 123–131.
24. Shizuya,H., Birren,B., Kim,U.-J., Mancino,V., Slepak,T., Tachiiri,Y. and
Simon,M. (1992) Cloning and stable maintenance of 300 kb fragments of
humanDNAin Escherichiacoliusingan F-factor-basedvector.Proc.Natl
Acad. Sci. USA, 89, 8794–8797.
25. Thayer,E.C., Olson,M.V. and Karp,R.M. (1999) Error checking and
graphical representation of multiple-complete-digest (MCD)
restriction-fragment maps. Genome Res., 9, 79–90.
26. Dimalanta,E.T., Lim,A., Runnheim,R., Lamers,C., Churas,C.,
Forrest,D.K., De Pablo,J.J., Graham,M.D., Coppersmith,S.N.,
Goldstein,S. et al. (2004) A microfluidic system for large DNA molecule
arrays. Anal. Chem., 76, 5293–5301.
27. Birren,B. and Lai,E. (1993) Pulsed-Field Gel Electrophoresis:
A Practical Guide. Academic Press, Inc., San Diego.
28. Olive,D.M. and Bean,P. (1999) Principles and applications of methods
for DNA-based typing of microbial organisms. J. Clin. Microbiol.,
37, 1661–1669.
29. Aston,C., Hiort,C. and Schwartz,D.C. (1999) Optical mapping:
an approach for fine mapping. Methods Enzymol., 303, 55–73.
30. Aston,C., Mishra,B. and Schwartz,D.C. (1999) Optical mapping and its
potential for large-scale sequencing projects. Trends Biotechnol.,
17, 297–302.
31. Taylor,J.R., Fang,M.M. and Nie,S. (2000) Probing specific sequences on
single DNA molecules with bioconjugated fluorescent nanoparticles.
Anal. Chem., 72, 1979–1986.
32. Ladoux,B. and Doyle,P.S. (2000) Stretching tethered DNA chains in
shear flow. Europhys. Lett., 52, 511–517.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 18 5837
