BIND: the Biomolecular Interaction Network
Database
Gary D. Bader, Doron Betel and Christopher W. V. Hogue*
Department of Biochemistry, Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, University of Toronto,
Toronto M5G 1X5, Canada
Received September 14, 2002; Revised and Accepted October 2, 2002
ABSTRACT
The Biomolecular Interaction Network Database
(BIND: http://bind.ca) archives biomolecular interac-
tion, complex and pathway information. A web-
based system is available to query, view and submit
records. BIND continues to grow with the addition of
individual submissions as well as interaction data
from the PDB and a number of large-scale inter-
action and complex mapping experiments using
yeast two hybrid, mass spectrometry, genetic inter-
actions and phage display. We have developed a
new graphical analysis tool that provides users with
a view of the domain composition of proteins in
interaction and complex records to help relate
functional domains to protein interactions. An inter-
action network clustering tool has also been devel-
oped to help focus on regions of interest. Continued
input from users has helped further mature the BIND
data speciﬁcation, which now includes the ability to
store detailed information about genetic inter-
actions. The BIND data speciﬁcation is available as
ASN.1 and XML DTD.
INTRODUCTION
The Biomolecular Interaction Network Database (BIND) is
designed to capture protein function, defined at the molecular
level as the set of other molecules with which a protein
interacts or reacts along with the molecular outcome. The
inimitable growth of the known cell map continues unabated
with new data on the structure of cell signaling and metabolic
networks generated by constantly improving techniques such
as mass spectrometry and two-hybrid screens (1). Interaction
databases such as BIND (2,3) must keep pace so that such data
is manageable. In cohort, visualization and analysis tools for
this data must be made available to assist in understanding this
complex data.
BIND
BIND stores information about interactions, molecular
complexes and pathways. Interactions occur between
two biological ‘objects’, A and B, which could be protein,
RNA, DNA, molecular complex, small molecule, photon
(light) or gene. Molecular complexes and pathways are
collections of these pairwise interactions, with some addi-
tional data. The minimum amount of information required to
define an interaction is a description of A and B and a
publication reference to PubMed. BIND is based on an
extensive ASN.1 data specification [as previously published
(4,5)] that can describe much of the detail underlying
biochemical and genetic networks. XML versions of all
data with accompanying DTDs are supported through the use
of the NCBI programming toolkit (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/IEB/).
The BIND specification has remained stable since version
2.0 in 2001. Initially, BIND was designed only to support
physical/biochemical interactions. Stemming from collabora-
tion with a yeast genetic mapping project (6), our current 3.0
version has a wide range of support for genetic interactions
(valid when A and B are genes), where both the genetic
experiment and its result can be described in detail. This
demonstrates the flexibility and extensibility of our data
specification approach. Apart from cumulative minor changes,
the current specification version has many general external
references to enable integration with private database systems
that may be similar to BIND. For instance, an external
reference in the BIND-Interaction object can point to an in-
house interaction database. Logical collections of records are
now called divisions, similar to those in GenBank (see below).
Up to date UML diagrams of the 3.0 BIND specification are
present in the Supplementary Material.
BIND has progressed through multiple implementation
cycles, each benefiting from collaborator and community
constructive feedback. As part of our continuing effort to
populate BIND, we have imported data from large-scale cell
mapping studies, including ones we have been a part of
(6–8). Recently, all molecular interactions in PDB (9) were
imported into BIND, via the validated MMDB database
(10), using MMDBBIND (11). Because of currently limited
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: þ1 6472225781; Fax: þ1 4165868869; Email: hogue@mshri.on.ca
The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors
248–250 Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 1 # 2003 Oxford University Press
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkg056
server space, these 64 956 records are not available for
querying through the web interface, but are freely available
on our FTP site. MMDBBIND records are currently being
enriched in information using a human curation process to
create high-quality records that will be part of RefBIND, a
curated division of BIND.
As the data in BIND expands, so too must the underlying
infrastructure. The public BIND site has been currently
running on a shared mid-size web server. A transition to
larger, redundant servers is currently being planned in
conjunction with the launch of our SeqHound service,
upon which BIND depends. SeqHound is our in-house
integrated database (18), similar in scope to the Entrez
system (12), which contains extensive C, Cþþ and Perl
programming APIs.
New infrastructure for data analysis and visualization tools
are also being built. One such tool is Pajek (13) (see
Supplementary Material), for visualizing and analyzing large
networks, although it has no support for analyzing networks
in the context of sequence, structure and associated
annotation. We are presently developing tools to address
these issues.
An interaction network clustering tool, called Molecular
Complex Detection (MCODE), has been developed to help
focus on regions of biological interest. MCODE detects
densely interconnected regions of a molecular interaction
network, which may represent molecular complexes (Bader
and Hogue, submitted).
FUNCTIONAL ALIGNMENT SEARCH TOOL (FAST)
Many proteins contain a number of structural and functional
modules such as SH3, SH2, kinase and DNA binding
domains (14). Most of these domains mediate protein interac-
tions with other biomolecules. A collection of interaction
information, such as BIND, enables the study of the relation-
ships between protein domain architecture and protein–protein
interactions. Specifically, it is possible to classify the interactors
of a protein into distinct groups based on domain composition.
As part of our research and using BIND and SeqHound as
platforms, we implemented FAST as an application that
displays the domain annotation for a group of functionally
related proteins. In BIND, these groups of related proteins can
be proteins that interact with a common partner or are found
together in molecular complexes. The domain annotation is
from SeqHound which contains a complete RPS-BLAST
analysis of the GenBank or dataset, using the Conserved
Domain Database (15) performed on our 216 Beowulf cluster.
FAST has a web-based graphical interface, based on
Macromedia Flash vector graphics, that displays a set of
proteins and their domains. Vector graphics format was chosen
as it provides improved resolution and zooming ability over
bitmap images. FAST is accessible from BIND via interaction
and molecular complex records. When accessed from an
interaction record, the protein and its protein interactors in
BIND are displayed. When accessed from a complex record,
the protein subunits are displayed. Domain composition is
Figure 1. Functional Alignment Search Tool (FAST). Domain composition for a set of proteins that interact with mouse Fyn is shown as uniquely coloured horizontal
bars above a line representing the sequence. Expanded view of Vav, linked tovia right-pointing red arrows, where domains are shown correctly situated on the amino acid
sequence of each protein. For brevity, this figure does not show all Fyn-interacting proteins in BIND or, in the expanded view, all of the domains in Vav.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 1 249
shown as unique coloured horizontal bars above a line
representing the sequence (Fig. 1). Clicking on the arrow
beside each protein links a user to an expanded display where
domains are shown with respect to the amino acid sequence of
the protein. Users can zoom in and out to examine the
boundaries of a domain of interest in more detail using the
Flash control tool. A domain summary table for the protein set,
containing links to information on each protein and domain,
can be accessed from the FAST image page.
Visualization of a list of related proteins and their domains is
a powerful approach to help direct future interaction studies.
For example, the human and mouse variants of the protein
tyrosine kinase Fyn each have nine recorded interactions in
BIND (Fig. 1). The human and mouse forms of Fyn share six
similar interactions, however, the mouse variant is known to
interact with a second protein tyrosine kinase Vav, whereas the
human Fyn currently has no recorded interaction with the
human Vav homologue. Using FAST, it is easy to see that many
Fyn-interacting proteins, including Vav, contain common
cell-signaling modules such SH2 and SH3 domains. In
combination with other tools and databases such as NCBI’s
CDART (17), human homologues with similar domain
architectures to mouse Fyn interactors can be identified (e.g.
VAV-3 and TIM). These proteins potentially interact with
human Fyn.
FAST can also be used to study the topology and function of
molecular complexes. A number of protein complexes were
recently identified in large-scale mass-spectrometry studies
(7,16). FAST can help decipher the interaction topology of
these complexes by grouping proteins according to their
domain composition. For example, part of the proteasome
complex was identified using the protein Ygl004c as bait
(BIND complex ID 11939). The domain architecture of the
identified proteins reveals three distinct subgroups correspond-
ing to three functional elements that control proteasome
activity: ATPase (Rpt5, Rpt4, Rpt3, Rpt2, Rpt1), proteasome
(Rpn9, Rpn7, Rpn6, Rpn5, Rpn3) and proteasome regulatory
subunits (Rpn8, Rpn11).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Material is available at NAR Online.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Tony Pawson for putting forth the idea of an
interaction database pre-1998, Cheryl Wolting and Ian
Donaldson for past contributions, Adrian Heilbut for helping
to import recent molecular complex records and colleagues in
the Hogue lab and at the SLRI for helpful discussions. D.B.
wrote the FAST software. This work is funded by a consortium
including Genome Canada, the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (CIHR), the Ontario Research and Development
Challenge Fund, IBM and MDS Proteomics.
REFERENCES
1. Fields,S. (2001) Proteomics. Proteomics in genomeland. Science, 291,
1221–1224.
2. Xenarios,I., Salwinski,L., Duan,X.J., Higney,P., Kim,S.M. and Eisenberg,D.
(2002) DIP, the Database of Interacting Proteins: a research tool for studying
cellular networks of protein interactions. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 303–305.
3. Zanzoni,A., Montecchi-Palazzi,L., Quondam,M., Ausiello,G.,
Helmer-Citterich,M. and Cesareni,G. (2002) MINT: a Molecular
INTeraction database. FEBS Lett., 513, 135–140.
4. Bader,G.D., Donaldson,I., Wolting,C., Ouellette,B.F., Pawson,T. and
Hogue,C.W. (2001) BIND—the biomolecular interaction network data-
base. Nucleic Acids Res., 29, 242–245.
5. Bader,G.D. and Hogue,C.W. (2000) BIND—a data specification for storing
and describing biomolecular interactions, molecular complexes and
pathways. Bioinformatics, 16, 465–477.
6. Tong,A.H., Evangelista,M., Parsons,A.B., Xu,H., Bader,G.D., Page,N.,
Robinson,M., Raghibizadeh,S., Hogue,C.W., Bussey,H. et al. (2001)
Systematic genetic analysis with ordered arrays of yeast deletion mutants.
Science, 294, 2364–2368.
7. Ho,Y., Gruhler,A., Heilbut,A., Bader,G.D., Moore,L., Adams,S.L.,
Millar,A., Taylor,P., Bennett,K., Boutilier,K. et al. (2002) Systematic
identification of protein complexes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by mass
spectrometry. Nature, 415, 180–183.
8. Tong,A.H., Drees,B., Nardelli,G., Bader,G.D., Brannetti,B., Castagnoli,L.,
Evangelista,M., Ferracuti,S., Nelson,B., Paoluzi,S. et al. (2002) A
combined experimental and computational strategy to define protein
interaction networks for peptide recognition modules. Science, 295,
321–324.
9. Westbrook,J., Feng,Z., Jain,S., Bhat,T.N., Thanki,N., Ravichandran,V.,
Gilliland,G.L., Bluhm,W., Weissig,H., Greer,D.S. et al. (2002) The Protein
Data Bank: unifying the archive. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 245–248.
10. Wang,Y., Anderson,J.B., Chen,J., Geer,L.Y., He,S., Hurwitz,D.I.,
Liebert,C.A., Madej,T., Marchler,G.H., Marchler-Bauer,A. et al. (2002)
MMDB: Entrez’s 3D-structure database. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 249–252.
11. Salama,J.J., Donaldson,I. and Hogue,C.W. (2002) Automatic annotation of
BIND molecular interactions from three-dimensional structures.
Biopolymers, 61, 111–120.
12. Schuler,G.D., Epstein,J.A., Ohkawa,H. and Kans,J.A. (1996) Entrez:
molecular biology database and retrieval system. Methods Enzymol., 266,
141–162.
13. Batagelj,V. and Mrvar,A. (1998) Pajek–Program for large network analysis.
Connections, 2, 47–57.
14. Pawson,T. (1995) Protein modules and signalling networks. Nature, 373,
573–580.
15. Marchler-Bauer,A., Panchenko,A.R., Shoemaker,B.A., Thiessen,P.A.,
Geer,L.Y. and Bryant,S.H. (2002) CDD: a database of conserved domain
alignments with links to domain three-dimensional structure. Nucleic Acids
Res., 30, 281–283.
16. Gavin,A.C., Bosche,M., Krause,R., Grandi,P., Marzioch,M., Bauer,A.,
Schultz,J., Rick,J.M., Michon,A.M., Cruciat,C.M. et al. (2002) Functional
organization of the yeast proteome by systematic analysis of protein
complexes. Nature, 415, 141–147.
17. Geor,L.Y., Domrachov,M., Lipman,D.J. and Bryant,S.H. (2002) CDART:
Protein Homology by Domain Architecture. Genome Res., 12,
1619–1623.
18. Michalickova,K., Bader,G.D., Dumontier,M., Lieu,H.C., Betel,D.,
Issorlin,R. and Hogue,C.W. (2002) SeqHound: biological sequence and
structure database as a platform for bioinformatics research. BMC
Bioinformatics, in press.
250 Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 1
