Automated ortholog inference from phylogenetic trees and 
calculation of orthology reliability 
 
 
Christian E. V. Storm and Erik L. L. Sonnhammer 
 
 
 
 
Center for Genomics and Bioinformatics,  
Karolinska Institutet,  
S-171 77 Stockholm 
Sweden 
 
Tel.     +46-8-7286395 
Fax:    +46-8-337983   
Erik.Sonnhammer@cgb.ki.se  
 
 
 
 
 
Running head: Ortholog bootstrap values 
 
 
Keywords: orthology, bootstrapping, phylogenetic tree, simulated evolution
 Abstract 
 
Motivation: Orthologous proteins in different species are likely to have similar biochemical 
function and biological role. When annotating a newly sequenced genome by sequence 
homology, the most precise and reliable functional information can thus be derived from 
orthologs in other species. A standard method of finding orthologs is to compare the sequence 
tree with the species tree. However, since the topology of phylogenetic trees is not always 
reliable one might get incorrect assignments. 
Results: Here we present a novel method that resolves this problem by analyzing a set of 
bootstrap trees instead of the optimal tree. The frequency of orthology assignments in the 
bootstrap trees can be interpreted as a support value for the possible orthology of the 
sequences. Our method is efficient enough to analyze data in the scale of whole genomes. It is 
implemented in Java and calculates orthology support levels for all pairwise combinations of 
homologous sequences of two species. The method was tested on simulated datasets and on 
real data of homologous proteins. 
Availability: Downloadable free of charge from ftp://ftp.cgb.ki.se/pub/prog/orthostrapper/ or 
on request from the authors. 
Contact: christian.storm@cgb.ki.se 
 
Introduction 
 
Orthologs are proteins in different species that go back to a single protein in the last common 
ancestor of these species. This definition was given by (Fitch, 1970) and it implies that 
because of their phylogenetically close relationships, orthologous proteins are likely to have 
identical or very similar functions, although function is not part of the definition. With the 
vast amount of sequence data produced by the genome projects, automated methods for 
assigning orthology are needed.  
 
Orthology is not necessarily a one-to-one relationship. In case of one or multiple duplication 
events subsequent to the speciation event, it can be a one-to-many or a many-to-many 
relationship (see fig. 1a). When assigning orthology to proteins of more than two species, the 
relationships can become complex. This is due to the fact that orthology is non-transitive 
(Fitch, 2000), meaning that two proteins in different species that are both orthologous to a 
protein in a third species are not necessarily orthologous to each other (see fig. 1b). 
Orthologous relationships may be further complicated because of horizontal gene transfer or 
gene conversion (Gogarten and Olendzenski, 1999). 
 
Standard methods for finding orthologs are based on the analysis of phylogenetic trees. 
Reconciled trees(Goodman et al., 1979); (Page, 1994) are an effective method to find 
orthologous relationships (Yuan et al., 1998): A new tree is constructed that reconciles the 
sequence tree with the species tree by postulating missing sequences, e.g. due to gene loss. 
Orthologous and paralogous relationships can directly be read from the reconciled tree. 
 
A general problem is that the tree analyzed may not reflect all phylogenetic relationships 
correctly, since all tree calculation is based on somewhat arbitrary parameters. To get a 
confidence estimate for a given tree topology, the bootstrap method was applied to 
phylogenetic trees (Felsenstein, 1985). This technique is frequently used to estimate the 
confidence level for a given phylogenetic hypothesis, but has been criticized for a 
systematically bias towards lower values (Zharkikh and Li, 1995; Newton, 1996). However, 
Efron (Efron et al., 1996) showed that the bootstrap method can be seen as a first order 
approximation of the accuracy of the tree’s topology. Different methods have been proposed 
to get a more precise estimate, for instance the complete-and-partial bootstrap (Zharkikh and 
Li, 1995) or the second level bootstrap (Efron et al., 1996). 
 
We developed and implemented an approach to calculate orthology support levels. This 
method browses a sequence tree for orthologous relationships between two species. By 
applying it to a large number of bootstrap trees it is possible to assign a support value to all 
orthologous pairings in the tree. The bootstrap trees are calculated from pseudosamples that 
are created by sampling with replacement from the original alignment. 
 
Algorithm 
 
Assigning orthology from a phylogenetic tree 
 
The algorithm that detects orthologous relationships in a tree was designed to assign 
orthology between two (groups of) species. It is possible to combine clades, e.g. all mammals, 
into one group, and analyze them for orthologs in the group of all yeast species. Applying the 
algorithm to a series of species pairs and combining the results can detect orthologous 
relationships between multiple species. 
 
All sequences of the tree must be classified into one of four different groups. The sequences 
of the two (groups of) species that one wants to find orthologous relationships between must 
be assigned to the two primary groups. Remaining sequences that come from species distant 
to these groups should be assigned to the outgroup. Other remaining sequences should either 
be added to one of the primary groups if they are closely related to only one of them, or to the 
“blank” group of sequences that are ignored in the analysis.  For instance, when analyzing 
worm and human orthologs, it is a good idea to ignore all fly sequences, since it is not clear 
which species they are closer to (Mushegian et al., 1998). Sequences that are not assigned to 
any group are by default added to the blank group. Using this information, orthologous 
assignments are made as follows: 
 
1. for each sequence m of species-group 1 do: 
2. start at the leaf that is the current sequence 
3. go up one node and analyze the new branch: 
4. if the leaves of the new branch are all proteins of species-group 1 repeat step 3 
5. if the leaves of the new branch are all proteins of species-group 2 report orthology between 
m and all sequences on this branch and go to step 1 
6. if the new branch contains at least one sequence of the outgroup OR at least one sequence 
of species group 1 AND at least one sequence of species-group 2 go to step 1 
 
We estimate the runtime behavior of this algorithm to be: 
 
Average CPU usage: )log*( nmO  
Worst-case CPU usage: )*( nmO  
m: number of sequences in the group of species 
n:  total number of sequences in the tree 
 
Since the execution time of this algorithm is low compared to most tree building algorithms 
the number of trees that can be analyzed is really limited by the tree building method used. 
Therefore analyzing a large number of trees (~1000) of reasonable size (~100 sequences) is 
quick on a normal desktop computer using common Neighbor-joining programs. This makes 
this approach suitable for sampling with a bootstrapping method. 
 
 
Calculating ortholog bootstrap values 
 
The bootstrap method is typically applied to assign the accuracy of a statistical estimation. 
When applying it to phylogenetic trees, the multiple alignment is used as a data sample. In 
bootstrapping, the phylogenetic tree inferred from the original multiple alignment is the null 
hypothesis to test against. Here the null hypothesis becomes multiple subhypotheses: the 
ensemble of all possible pairwise orthologous relationships in the tree. The orthologous 
assignments are inferred with the approach described above. To calculate the support levels 
for these subhypotheses, a series of pseudo samples is generated from the data sample. These 
pseudo samples are trees generated with the same method as in classical tree bootstrapping: 
 
The bootstrap trees are generated from the original multiple alignment by sampling with 
replacement. Columns are picked randomly, and a column can be picked more than once. The 
same number of columns as in the original alignment is picked. From each bootstrap 
alignment a tree is constructed that is immediately analyzed for orthologs. If an orthology 
assignment is found, the corresponding subhypothesis is given a score of one. The scores for 
each subhypothesis are added up for all trees calculated from the bootstrap alignments. This 
way one gets a total bootstrap support value for each subhypothesis. To distinguish these from 
‘classical’ bootstrap values of phylogenetic trees, we propose to denote them “ortholog 
bootstrap”, or short “orthostrap” values. (Phylogenetic bootstrap values could also be denoted 
“phylostrap” values to distinguish them from all other applications of bootstrapping.) 
 
An advantage of this method is that all possible pairwise orthology assignments are given a 
score, thus allowing orthologous relationships not represented in the original tree to be 
assessed.  
 
Implementation 
 
The ortholog bootstrapping is implemented as a Java 1.2 program, named Orthostrapper. For 
sampling the pseudo alignments and calculation of the trees it utilizes Belvu (Sonnhammer, 
unpublished). Belvu calculates neighbor-joining trees (Saitou and Nei, 1987; Studier and 
Keppler, 1988) based on uncorrected distances and assigns a root to a tree by using the 
“center of tree” approach (Thompson et al., 1994). Orthostrapper analyses the bootstrap trees 
and prints out a matrix of the calculated ortholog bootstrap values for all possible combination 
between the sequences of the two species groups. 
Methods and Data 
 
Simulated Data 
To test the performance of any orthology finding method one would need a testset of true 
orthologs. Ideally this would consist of proteins experimentally determined to have the same 
biochemical function and biological role in different species. Unfortunately no such dataset 
exists. Therefore we decided to test Orthostrapper on simulated data to get a first impression 
of its behavior. The simulations also allow assessing the error introduced by the “center of 
tree” rooting method. 
 
The simulations were calculated with the program Rose (Stoye et al., 1998), using the rates 
given in the PAM-matrix for amino acid substitution and the default parameters for the 
insertion / deletion function. Rose simulates evolution by evolving a sequence following a 
guidance tree. The guidance trees were randomly created, each with 5-50 sequences of length 
100-300 from 3 different “species”. 
 
Two different models were used for calculating the trees: 
 
a) Molecular clock / balanced tree 
The evolution guidance tree is calculated so that all leaves have the same distance from 
the root. This distance varies slightly between trees, but is on average 40 PAM. All 
sequences in a tree created with this model are mutated at the same rate. With this model, 
28057 sequences grouped in 1000 families were created. The guidance trees contained 
3093 orthologous sequence pairs in total. 
 
b) Independent evolutionary rates / unbalanced trees: 
The distances between the nodes in the evolution guidance tree is chosen randomly from 
an interval so that the expected maximum distance of two sequences is 80 PAM. This 
means that the evolutionary rate of each sequence is independent. With this model, 27263 
sequences grouped in 1000 families were created. The guidance trees contained 2881 
orthologous sequence pairs in this dataset. 
 
Real data 
To test Orthostrapper on real data, a set of 114 families containing worm-mammalian 
orthologs (Remm and Sonnhammer, 2000) was used. Orthostrapper was run on 1000 
bootstrap trees per group. It turned out to be difficult to compare the Orthostrapper results 
directly to the orthologs assigned manually for these families, because the approaches are 
rather different. If a branching pattern is unclear, the manual orthology assignment typically 
includes all sequences of the branch, while Orthostrapper resolves the fine branching pattern 
by sampling. A comparison of two such different approaches did not seem meaningful. 
 
Instead, we took the 114 families and generated a new set of orthologs by building neighbor-
joining trees and feeding them to GeneTree (Page, 1998). GeneTree reconciles a sequence 
tree with a species tree, and one can easily read a list of orthologs from the reconciled tree. In 
our dataset, GeneTree assigned 352 worm proteins to at least one orthologous counterpart in 
mammalia, and 1083 mammalian proteins to have at least one orthologous counterpart in 
worm. These assignments gave a total of 2105 pairwise orthologous relationships. 
 
Results 
 
Simulated data 
 
The simulated trees, for which the true tree topology is known, can be used to assess the 
performance of the ortholog bootstrapping method. Although the trees are artificial, they 
allow us to assess the accuracy of ortholog detection by comparing the orthologs calculated 
from reconstructed trees to the true orthologs in the dataset. We also took advantage of the 
possibility to generate trees with equal or unequal rates of mutation, in order to study the 
robustness of the ortholog bootstrapping method to such factors.  Fig. 2 shows a plot of false 
negative and false positive assignments for all ortholog bootstrap values. 
 
Equal rates of evolution (or “molecular clock”) produces a well-balanced tree, while unequal 
rates for different branches will make tree reconstruction more difficult due to problems with 
placing the root correctly and “long branch attraction”. Correct rooting is particularly 
important for correct ortholog assignment. As shown in fig. 2, the probability for a false 
negative assignment is increased by ~ 4-10% in unequal rate trees, and for false positive 
assignment by ~ 4.5– 6%, depending on the cutoff chosen for assigning orthology. Because 
the unequal rates were chosen to be rather extreme, we do not expect trees from real data to 
suffer more than a few percent inaccuracy due to incorrect rooting or long branch attraction. 
 
How much confidence should one have in a given ortholog bootstrap value? Simulated data 
can be of some help here. For instance when doing a first scan of large datasets one might 
apply a cutoff of 0.5. Then a sequence pair would be considered orthologous if orthology is 
supported by more than 50% of the bootstrap trees. Fig. 2 shows that by applying a cutoff of 
0.5 in the simulation one would find over 95% of the true orthologous relationships, but at the 
cost of up to 10% false assignments. For other applications, for instance functional inferences, 
one might apply a cutoff of 0.95 for assigning orthology. In the simulated data the number of 
false positives drops close to zero at this value. But on the other hand one might miss up to 
30% of the true orthologs. 
 
Analysis of the worm-mammalian homologs 
 
To make sure the tree-parsing algorithm was implemented correctly in Orthostrapper, we used 
it to analyze the optimal trees of the 114 families for orthologous relationships. This gave 
exactly the same orthology assignments as with GeneTree. 
 
We then calculated ortholog bootstrap levels for all 9968 worm-mammalian sequence pairs in 
the complete set of 114 families. 2105 of these pairs were predicted as orthologs by tree 
reconciliation in the original tree. The distribution of ortholog bootstrap values for 
orthologous pairs found with the reconciliation in the optimal tree is shown in fig. 3 as black 
bars. The distribution of the 7963 ortholog bootstrap values of pairs not found by tree 
reconciliation are shown in fig. 3 as white bars. A table of all results is available at 
ftp://ftp.cgb.ki.se/pub/prog/Orthostrapper/results/orthostrapping.xls. We note that of the pairs 
predicted as orthologs by tree reconciliation in the original tree, 25% (523) have an ortholog 
bootstrap support less than 0.5, suggesting that they may well be false ortholog assignments. 
 
An illustration of the difference between ortholog bootstrapping and phylogenetic 
bootstrapping is shown in fig 4. From the reconciled tree in fig. 4b one can read that 
BAA91192.1 / K07H8.2 is the only ortholog pair present in the tree shown in fig. 4a. Notable 
is the difference of the ortholog bootstrap value from the phylogenetic bootstrap value for this 
orthologous pairing. This can be explained by the different possible tree topologies. The node 
one level up has a bootstrap support of .999, meaning that the 3 sequences group together in 
99.9 % of all bootstrap trees. The grouping can happen with three possible different 
topologies: 
 
1. As observed in the optimal tree. 
2. ZK185.2 together with BAA91192.1 on a branch. 
3. ZK185.2 with K07H8.2 on a branch - then both are reported as orthologous to 
BAA91192.1 by the tree parser. 
 
The fact that the ortholog bootstrap value for BAA91192.1 and K07H8.2 is ~10% higher than 
the phylogenetic bootstrap value indicates that topology 3 occurs in ~10% of the bootstrap 
trees. Hence even in this simple example of a one-to-one relationship the ortholog bootstrap 
value gives a more realistic picture for confidence of orthologous relationships than the 
phylogenetic bootstrap value. 
 
Figure 5 shows an example where the orthologous relationships are unclear. Only looking at 
the optimal tree would lead to the result, that the 3 worm proteins are orthologous to the 2 
human ones. But the phylogenetic bootstrap values shown in the tree already indicate that this 
branching pattern only has a low support. The ortholog bootstrap values show a high support 
orthology for the pairing O15431 / Y58A7A.1, whereas all other possible pairings in this 
branch have significantly lower values. This indicates that O15431 / Y58A7A.1 are the only 
orthologs on this branch. 
 
Of the pairings that were not assigned as orthologs in the original tree, 41 have an ortholog 
bootstrap support higher than 0.5. 14 of these cases come from two trees with orthology-
assignments that are close to the root-node, making them vulnerable to slight changes in the 
position of the root. The other 27 cases indicate orthologous relationships that are not present 
in the optimal tree. An example is shown in fig. 5, in which four additional potential 
orthologous relationships are found.  
 
Discussion 
 
We have presented a new algorithm for finding orthologs in combination with the bootstrap 
method. The main advantage of this approach is that ortholog bootstrap values are assigned to 
all possible orthologous pairings. This makes it possible to resolve complicated many-to-
many orthologous relationships. Orthology assignments in the optimal tree that might be 
incorrect can be identified by their low ortholog bootstrap value. 
 
Our implementation is efficient enough to allow ortholog bootstrapping on large amounts of 
data. The complete analysis of the 114 groups / 2624 sequences with 1000 pseudosamples 
took less than 10 h on a 500 MHz UNIX workstation.  
 
The results of the analysis show that the tree-parsing algorithm, when used to parse only the 
optimal trees, assigns the same orthologous relationships as one finds by reconciling trees. 
This indicates that the algorithm works correctly when looking for orthologs. 
  
In case of one-to-one orthologous relationships the calculated ortholog bootstrap value gives a 
more realistic view of the possible orthology of two sequences than one would get using the 
phylogenetic bootstrap value as is done frequently. This is because the ortholog bootstrap 
value reflects all possible branching that support orthology for the given pair. 
 
For potential one-to-many or many-to-many orthologous relationships Orthostrapper makes it 
possible to assign support values to pairs within these multiple relationships. Additionally, as 
demonstrated in fig. 5, it is possible to make a statement about orthologous relationships that 
can not be resolved by phylogenetic bootstrap values in combination with tree reconciliation. 
 
The results of the simulation show that the calculated ortholog bootstrap levels have a non-
linear relation to confidence intervals. For instance a 95% confidence level is given at an 
ortholog bootstrap value of 58 % in the case of equal mutation rates (See figure 2). There are 
improvements to the bootstrap method that allow a better estimate of the confidence, namely 
the second-level bootstrap. But this would mean to calculate at least 200 additional bootstrap 
trees for each orthologous pairing. The CPU time needed for this would contradict the goal of 
large-scale analysis. For a more precise look at a small set of sequences, a Monte Carlo 
Markov Chain (MCMC) approach (Yang and Rannala, 1997) might be better suited, however 
also here computation times become prohibitively long for trees with over 50 sequences. 
Furthermore, these approaches are unlikely to lead to significantly improved rooting, which is 
one of the major problems in correct ortholog assignment. 
 
Rooting with an outgroup is often not possible when looking for orthologs: In order to get the 
correct position of the root the phylogenetic relationships of outgroup sequences to the rest of 
the tree have to reflect the species tree. They either have to be paralogous to all or orthologous 
to all other sequences in the tree – but the phylogenetic relationships of the sequences in the 
tree are often unknown. The rather ad-hoc method used here by finding the center of the tree 
assumes similar divergent rates of the sequences. This is not true for some protein families. 
Thus in case of very unbalanced trees the root will be placed at the wrong position. The 
simulations indicate that the probability for a wrong assignment is increased by approximately 
5-10% in case of a very unbalanced tree. A way to decrease this error is to add distant 
sequences to the trees. By doing this the phylogenetic relationships one is interested in will be 
more distant from the center of the tree and therefore less affected by a slightly wrong 
position of the root. 
 
Some general pitfalls that are not directly connected to the ortholog bootstrapping method are 
still present. As shown in fig 1b, incomplete genomes / partial gene loss will increase the risk 
of assigning orthology incorrectly. This can be prevented by including orthologous sequences 
from an outgroup species, but often none are available. Another way is to enlarge the species 
groups. For instance when looking for orthologs between H. sapiens and C. elegans: Instead 
of only comparing sequences from those two species one should include sequences from other 
vertebrates and nematodes. Assume a gene that was lost in H. sapiens is present in another 
vertebrate. Orthology would then be assigned correctly between the C. elegans sequence and 
this gene. With only human sequences in the analysis, an ancient paralog of this gene in 
human might be incorrectly assigned as an ortholog to the C. elegans gene. 
 
It is also a good idea to use several different methods for tree construction and compare the 
results when assigning orthology, since different methods often produce trees of different 
topology. Orthostrapper can read trees from any program that produces output in the Newick 
format (Felsenstein et al., 2000). 
Acknowledgements 
We thank Maido Remm for providing the testset and helpful discussions. 
 
References 
 
Efron, B., E. Halloran and S. Holmes (1996) Bootstrap confidence levels for phylogenetic 
trees. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93, 13429-13434. 
Felsenstein, J. (1985) Confidence limits on phylogenies: An approach using the bootstrap. 
Evolution 39, 783-791. 
Felsenstein,J., Archie,J., Day,W.H.E., Maddinson,W., Meacham,C., Rohlf,F.J. and 
Swofford,D. (2000) The Newick tree format. WWW URL: 
http://www.evolution.genetics.washington.edu/phylip/newicktree.html 
Fitch, W. M. (1970) Distinguishing homologous from analogous proteins. Syst Zool 19, 99-
113. 
Fitch, W. M. (2000) Homology a personal view on some of the problems. Trends Genet 16, 
227-231. 
Gogarten, J. P. and L. Olendzenski (1999) Orthologs, paralogs and genome comparisons. Curr 
Opin Genet Dev 9, 630-636. 
Goodman, M., J. Czelusniak, G. W. Moore, A. E. Romero-Herrera and G. Matsuda (1979) 
Fitting the gene lineage into its species lineage: a parsimony strategy illustrated by 
cladograms constructed from globin sequences. Systematic Zoology 28, 132-168. 
Mushegian, A. R., J. R. Garey, J. Martin and L. X. Liu (1998) Large-scale taxonomic 
profiling of eukaryotic model organisms: a comparison of orthologous proteins encoded by 
the human, fly, nematode, and yeast genomes. Genome Res 8, 590-598. 
Newton, M. A. (1996) Bootstrapping phylogenies: Large deviations and dispersion effects. 
Biometrika 82, 315-328. 
Page, R. D. (1998) GeneTree: comparing gene and species phylogenies using reconciled trees. 
Bioinformatics 14, 819-820. 
Page, R. D. M. (1994) Maps between trees and cladistic analysis of historical associations 
among genes, organisms, and areas. Systematic Biology 43, 58-77. 
Remm, M. and E. Sonnhammer (2000) Classification of transmembrane protein families in 
the Caenorhabditis elegans genome and identification of human orthologs. Genome Res 
10, 1679-1689. 
Saitou, N. and M. Nei (1987) The neighbor-joining method: a new method for reconstructing 
phylogenetic trees. Mol Biol Evol 4, 406-425. 
Stoye, J., D. Evers and F. Meyer (1998) Rose: generating sequence families. Bioinformatics 
14, 157-163. 
Studier, J. A. and K. J. Keppler (1988) A note on the neighbor-joining algorithm of Saitou and 
Nei. Mol Biol Evol 5, 729-731. 
Thompson, J. D., D. G. Higgins and T. J. Gibson (1994) Improved sensitivity of profile 
searches through the use of sequence weights and gap excision. Comput Appl Biosci 10, 
19-29. 
Yang, Z. and B. Rannala (1997) Bayesian phylogenetic inference using DNA sequences: a 
Markov Chain Monte Carlo Method. Mol Biol Evol 14, 717-724. 
Yuan, Y. P., O. Eulenstein, M. Vingron and P. Bork (1998) Towards detection of orthologues 
in sequence databases. Bioinformatics 14, 285-289. 
Zharkikh, A. and W. H. Li (1995) Estimation of confidence in phylogeny: the complete-and-
partial bootstrap technique. Mol Phylogenet Evol 4, 44-63. 
  
 
Figure 1. Hypothetical examples for illustrating different levels of orthology assignments that involve paralogs. 
Duplication events are marked with a square at the node. a) Many-to-many orthologous relationships. The group 
A1 / A2 in H. sapiens is orthologous to the group B1 / B2 in C. elegans. They go back to a single sequence in the 
last common ancestor. The paralogs A1 and A2 were separated by a duplication, and so were B1 / B2. The two 
duplication events occurred independently after the speciation. b) Orthology between more than two species. In 
this tree, the duplication event that led to A3 / A4 and B3 / B4 occurred before the speciation. Therefore A3 is 
orthologous only to B3 but not to B4, and A4 only to B4 but not to B3. However, the four sequences A3, A4, B3 
and B4 are orthologous to C2. But although A3 and B4 are orthologs of C2, they are not orthologous to each 
other! That means orthology is not transitive. Note that if A3 and B4 had been lost or were not sequenced yet, 
methods based on relative sequence distance would assign orthology incorrectly to B3/A4. The trees were 
constructed with GeneTree. 
 
  
Figure 2 The fraction of false orthologous assignments (false positives) and undetected orthologs (false 
negatives), dependent on the orthology support level cutoff chosen for assigning orthology. Shown are the results 
for the two different models used in the simulations: a) molecular clock, b) independent evolutionary rates. The 
true/false assignments were made by comparing the Orthostrapper orthologs to the true orthologs in simulated 
data. 
b) Molecular clock
a) Independent rates
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
50 60 70 80 90 100
orthology support level cutoff
fr
ac
tio
n
 a) false negatives  b) false negatives
 a) false postives  b) false positives
Figure 3. Distribution of the ortholog bootstrap values for intervals bxa ≤< . Shown are the results from the 
analysis of all possible 9968 worm-mammalian pairings of proteins in the dataset that have a value higher 10%. 
The height of the bars reflect the fraction of sequence pairs in the given ortholog bootstrap value interval.  The 
black parts of the bars show the fraction of pairs in the analyzed dataset that were assigned orthologs by tree 
reconciliation of the optimal tree. The white part stands for the fraction of worm-mammalian sequence pairs that 
was not reported orthologous by reconciled trees. The ortholog bootstrap values were calculated with 1000 
pseudosamples. 69% of the possible pairs have a value below 10% (not shown). Only 4 of these were assigned 
orthologs by tree reconciliation of the optimal trees. 
 
 
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
0.1<x≤0.2 0.2<x≤0.3 0.3<x≤0.4 0.4<x≤0.5 0.5<x≤0.6 0.6<x≤0.7 0.7<x≤0.8 0.8<x≤0.9 0.9<x≤1.0
Ortholog bootstrap value
Fr
ac
tio
n
  
 
 
 
c) Ortholog bootstrap confidence values 
 
  K07H8.2 ZK185.2 ZK1053.6 
BAA91192 .953 .127 0 
 
Figure 4. Ortholog bootstrapping provides information on all possible pairwise orthology assignments. a) Tree 
calculated with neighbor joining, using uncorrected distance and 1000 bootstrap samples, root is set at the center 
of the tree. From this tree one would assign BAA91192.1 to be orthologous to K07H8.2 and might use the 
bootstrap value at the connecting node of .87 as a confidence value. b) A reconciled tree constructed with 
GeneTree from the tree shown in a. Duplication events are marked with small boxes at the nodes, orthologous 
relationships can be easily assigned. c) Results from the Orthostrapper program. An ortholog bootstrap value is 
calculated for each possible sequence pairing in the tree between the two (groups of) species the analysis is done 
for.  The values were calculated from 1000 pseudosamples. 
  
 
Ortholog bootstrap values 
 Y58A7A.1 F27C1.2 F31E8.4 
O15431 .766 .467 .407 
O15432 .375 .475 .373 
 
Figure 5. Because of the low bootstrap support for the branching pattern of the subtrees, it is not possible in this 
case to confidently assign orthologs based on the original tree. However, the ortholog bootstrap values indicate 
that only O15431 and Y58A7A.1 are frequently (76.6% of all bootstrap trees) found in an orthologous 
relationship, whereas the other sequences are found in ortholog assignments with a significantly lower 
frequency.  Shown is a subtree of a larger tree, calculated by neighbor joining, using uncorrected distances and 
1000 bootstrap samples, root is set at the center of the tree. The ortholog bootstrap values were calculated from 
1000 pseudosamples. 
 
 
Figure 6. Potential orthologous relationships found with ortholog bootstrapping that are not present in the 
optimal tree. Ortholog bootstrap values between the C. elegans gene ZC21.2 and mammalian homologs are 
shown on the right. ZC21.2 is assigned a high value of  .77 to the mammalian genes it clusters with in the 
optimal tree. However, the values indicate that the optimal tree does not reflect all potential orthologous 
relationships. In 52.7 % of the analyzed bootstrap trees orthology is reported between ZC21.2 and Q61143 / 
CAA06943 / AAD42069 / Q13507, suggesting that ZK21.2 is orthologous to these sequences as well. All 
ortholog bootstrap values between K01A11.4 and the mammalian sequences were 0.0. The tree was calculated 
with neighbor joining, using uncorrected distance and 1000 bootstrap samples; the root was set at the center of 
the tree. Calculation of ortholog bootstrap values was done with 1000 samples. All mammalian sequences in the 
tree were put in one group and analyzed for orthologs in C. elegans. Orthologous relationships within the 
mammalian group were not analyzed.  
 
 
