Experimental approaches to identify
non-coding RNAs
Alexander Hu¨ttenhofer* and Jo¨rg Vogel1
Innsbruck Biocenter, Division of Genomics and RNomics, Innsbruck Medical University,
Fritz-Pregl-Str. 3, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria and 1Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology,
Schumannstrasse 21-22, 10117 Berlin, Germany
Received December 21, 2005; Revised and Accepted January 10, 2006
ABSTRACT
Cellular RNAs that do not function as messenger
RNAs (mRNAs), transfer RNAs (tRNAs) or ribosomal
RNAs (rRNAs) comprise a diverse class of molecules
that are commonly referred to as non-protein-coding
RNAs (ncRNAs). These molecules have been known
for quite a while, but their importance was not fully
appreciated until recent genome-wide searches
discovered thousands of these molecules and their
genes in a variety of model organisms. Some of
these screens were based on biocomputational pre-
diction of ncRNA candidates within entire genomes of
model organisms. Alternatively, direct biochemical
isolation of expressed ncRNAs from cells, tissues
or entire organisms has been shown to be a power-
ful approach to identify ncRNAs both at the level of
individual molecules and at a global scale. In this
review, we will survey several such wet-lab strategies,
i.e. direct sequencing of ncRNAs, shotgun cloning
of small-sized ncRNAs (cDNA libraries), microarray
analysis and genomic SELEX to identify novel
ncRNAs, and discuss the advantages and limits of
these approaches.
INTRODUCTION
Non-protein-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) do not encode proteins
but function directly at the level of the RNA in the cell. Over
the last few years, the importance of this surprisingly diverse
class of molecules has been widely recognized (1–5). NcRNAs
have been identified in unexpectedly large numbers, with
present estimates—based on bioinformatical approaches—in
the range of thousands per eukaryal and hundreds per
bacterial genome (6–9). They play key roles in a variety of
fundamental processes in all three domains of life, i.e.
Eukarya, Bacteria and Archaea. Their functions include
DNA replication and chromosome maintenance, regulation
of transcription, RNA processing (not only RNA cleavage
and religation, but also RNA modification and editing),
translation and stability of mRNAs, and even regulation of
stability and translocation of proteins (4,5,10–13). Many of
them have been discovered fortuitously, suggesting they
merely represent the tip of the iceberg. Many known ncRNAs
are small, i.e. typically <500 nt, and thus much shorter than
the majority of mRNAs. However, eukaryotes also express a
number of large ncRNAs, e.g. Xist or Air RNAs, which are
several 1000 nt long (14–16). The highly specific roles of
ncRNAs reflect in most cases their ability to selectively
bind a small set of proteins as well as their potential to
specifically recognize definite RNA targets via regions of
sequence-complementarity.
In recent years, new bioinformatical and experimental
strategies have been taken to identify a great number of
novel ncRNA candidates in various model organisms from
Escherichia coli to Homo sapiens (5–7,17–31). These findings
demonstrated that the number of ncRNAs in genomes of
model organisms is much higher than it had been anticipated.
In the following, we will review various experimental
strategies that were employed to identify novel ncRNAs in
genomes of model organisms. For these approaches, the term
‘Experimental RNomics’ has been coined (3). Four different
methods will be presented and their advantages as well as their
obstacles in the identification of novel ncRNA molecules will
be discussed: (i) RNA sequencing (enzymatically or chemic-
ally) as the most traditional method to reveal novel ncRNA
species; (ii) the parallel cloning of many ncRNA by generating
specialized cDNA libraries; (iii) the use of microarrays to
predict ncRNAs that are expressed under a given experimental
condition; (iv) ‘genomic SELEX’ and its potential application
to select ncRNA candidates from the sequence space repres-
ented by the genome of an organism of interest.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +43 (0) 512 507 3630; Fax: +43 (0) 512 507 9880; Email: alexander.huettenhofer@i-med.ac.at
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 2 635–646
doi:10.1093/nar/gkj469
Alternatively to biochemical methods, genetic and bioin-
formatical tools may also be employed to identify ncRNAs in
model organisms. In fact, some of the first chromosomally
encoded regulatory ncRNAs, e.g. MicF, DsrA and RprA
of E.coli, were discovered in the course of a genetic screen
(32–34). Similarly, genetics also discovered the founding
member, lin-4 RNA, of the ever-growing class of eukaryotic
miRNAs (35). Due to space constraints, however, we would
like to refer the reader to (6,36,37) for a more detailed review
of genetic and biocomputational routes to ncRNA discovery.
Identification of ncRNAs by chemical or
enzymatic sequencing
In the very early days of ncRNA research, e.g. some 35–
40 years ago, single ncRNA species (at the time ribosomal
RNAs, tRNAs or viral RNAs) were selected by size-separation
of total RNA on denaturing gels, followed by visualization
and excision of specific bands, ideally representing single
ncRNA species. Thus, for its identification, the ncRNA of
interest must be present in high amounts, e.g. visible as a
distinct band in an ethidium bromide-stained polyacrylamide
gel, exposed to ultraviolet (UV) light (Figure 1A).
Subsequently (and prior to their identification by sequence
analysis), ncRNAs are labelled either at their 50 end or at their
30 end: (i) for labelling of RNAs at their 50 end, the mono- or
triphosphate group usually found at the 50 end of ncRNAs
is removed first. This is achieved by the addition of calf
intestinal alkaline phosphatase at an elevated temperature;
inactivation of the enzyme is performed by repeated extraction
with phenol/chloroform or by gel purification (38). Labelling
of the RNA is then performed by the addition of polynuc-
leotide kinase in the presence of [g-32P]ATP (38). (ii) For
labelling at their 30 end, ncRNAs can be labelled by the
procedure described by Bruce and Uhlenbeck using
50-32PpCp as a donor molecule in the presence of T4 RNA
ligase (39). Subsequently, ncRNAs are gel-purified on
denaturing polyacrylamide gels.
RNAs may also be labelled in vivo prior to extraction
from an organism. In some early studies, E.coli total
RNA was metabolically labelled with orthophosphate,
32PO4
3 (40–43). Orthophosphate is readily taken up by
Figure 1. Four experimental approaches (A–D) to identify candidates for ncRNAs are shown. (A) Identification of ncRNAs by chemical or enzymatic sequencing of
extracted abundant RNAs. (B) Identification of ncRNAs by cDNA cloning and sequencing; three different methods are indicated to reverse transcribe ncRNAs,
usually lacking poly(A) tails, into cDNAs (e.g. by C-tailing, C-tailing and linker addition, or linker addition, only, followed by RT–RCR). (C) Identification of
ncRNAs by micro-array analysis. DNA oligonucleotide covering the sequence space of an entire genome are spotted onto glass slides, to which fluorescently labelled
samples, derived from cellular RNA, is hybridized. (D) Identification of ncRNAs by genomic SELEX. By random priming, the sequence of a genome is converted
into short PCR fragments containing a T7 promotor at their 50 ends. Subsequently, in vitro transcription by means of T7 RNA polymerase converts this genomic
sequence of an organism into RNA fragments, which can then be assayed for function, such as binding to a specific protein or small chemical ligand, by SELEX.
636 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 2
growing cells and incorporated into nucleic acids. Different
from the aforementioned 50 or 30 labelling procedures, the
extracted total RNA is randomly labelled at any nucleotide.
Such uniformly labelled RNAs are mainly used for ‘RNA
fingerprinting’ techniques (see below).
After extraction from a cell or organism, size separation
by PAGE and elution from the gel, ncRNAs are identified
by sequence analysis. This is either achieved by 2D RNA
fingerprinting or by enzymatic or chemical sequencing of
ncRNAs.
There are several versions of 2D RNA fingerprinting
techniques to sequence small RNAs (or oligonucleotides) or
prepare various RNase-digested oligonucleotide catalogs. The
differences are use of uniformly or end-labelled RNAs, partial
or complete digestion with various RNases, electrophoresis
on cellulose acetate strips or in acrylamide gels for the
first dimension, electrophoresis on DEAE-cellulose paper,
or homochromatography on DEAE-cellulose plates, or
gradient thin layer chromatography on DEAE-cellulose plates
(44–47).
For enzymatic sequence analysis, labelled ncRNAs (at 50 or
30 ends) are subjected to partial digestion with base-specific
ribonucleases at elevated temperatures (50–55C) and in the
presence of 7 M urea to avoid interference of the secondary/
tertiary structure of the RNA with enzymatic hydrolysis
steps. For base-specific cleavage, a plethora of RNases
(RNase T1, T2, U2, PHY1, PHY M, CL3, A or M1) can be
used which cleave preferentially 30 to either G, C, U or A
bases (48–50). To resolve obtained RNA fragments by size,
1D gel electrophoresis is carried out on denaturing poly-
acrylamide gels (see below).
For chemical sequence analysis of ncRNAs, four different
base-specific chemical reactions generate a means of directly
sequencing RNA that was terminally labelled with 32P (51).
After a partial specific modification of each kind of RNA base,
an amine-catalysed strand scission generates labelled frag-
ments whose length determine the positions of each nucleo-
tide in a sequence. Dimethyl sulfate modifies guanosine,
diethyl pyrocarbonate attacks primarily adenosine, hydrazine
attacks uridine and cytidine, but salt suppresses the reaction
with uridine. In all cases, aniline induces a subsequent strand
scission (51).
Subsequent to enzymatic or chemical sequencing, electro-
phoretic fractionation of the labelled fragments is achieved
on denaturing polyacrylamide gels, followed by autoradio-
graphy, which allows determination of the RNA sequence
of interest.
The earliest studies to identify RNA molecules by
direct sequencing were performed on tRNAs as well as on
ribosomal RNAs (48,52–54). In the case of 16S ribosomal
RNA, exhibiting a size of 1500 nt, smaller fragments
were first generated by RNase T1 cleavage and subsequently
analysed by RNase fingerprinting techniques (54). Direct
RNA sequencing for identification of novel RNA species is
far from being outdated, as was shown in more recent studies:
by labelling and direct RNA sequencing, a novel class of
ncRNAs, designated as small nucleolar RNAs, involved in
rRNA modification (55) could be identified in eukaryotes.
Lately, this technique was also used to visualize and sub-
sequently sequence abundant RNAs of gram-positive bacteria
(56,57).
Obstacles and advantages of the method
Identification of novel ncRNA species by RNA sequencing
encounters four main obstacles. First, for identification,
ncRNAs have to be highly abundant to be visible as single
bands in ethidium-bromide stained gels; to circumvent this
problem, labelling of total RNA, followed by size separation
on a gel system (e.g. vice versa as described above), allows
identification of less abundant ncRNA species.
Second, no other ncRNAs in the same size range should
be present in the total RNA population, since it would
hamper isolation of a single RNA species and thus would result
in ambiguous sequencing data. If a band or spot is found to
contain multiple RNA species, these can be resolved by 2D gel
electrophoresis, which allows separation of RNA species with
similar or identical sizes.
Third, chemical or enzymatic sequencing of ncRNAs some-
times results in sequencing data that are difficult to interpret.
The reason being that, for enzymatic sequencing, RNases are
not strictly specific for a distinct base but possess residual
cleavage activity for other bases; similarly, chemical seq-
uencing does not always result in unambiguous modification
and cleavage of nucleotides, thus obscuring the readout of
obtained sequence data.
Finally, due to the sequencing methods and resolution
capacity of polyacrylamide gels, sequencing is limited to
RNAs sized—at the most—a couple of hundred nucleotides.
Thus, ncRNA species, which exceed this size range, cannot be
directly analysed by this method, but have to be cleaved
into smaller pieces (e.g. by T1 nuclease digestion) prior to
further analysis.
The advantage of direct RNA sequencing, as compared
with sequencing cDNA clones generated from ncRNAs (see
below), is the fact that ncRNAs do not have to be reverse
transcribed for analysis. Thus, RNA secondary/tertiary struc-
tures that might impede reverse transcription into cDNA do
not interfere with RNA identification by using direct RNA
sequencing.
Identification of ncRNAs by specialized cDNA libraries
The second method for the identification of novel ncRNA
species involves the generation of cDNA libraries, in analogy
to expressed sequence tag libraries (EST libraries) for
identification of mRNAs (58,59). The original mRNA cloning
method is based on reverse transcription of mRNAs from an
organism by an oligo(dT) primer and second strand synthe-
sis, resulting in a cDNA library that ideally represents all
protein-coding transcripts of a genome. Compared with
these conventional EST libraries, the main difference for
ncRNA library approaches is the source and treatment of
the cloned RNA.
Since most mRNAs are >500 nt in length but many
ncRNAs considerably smaller, first RNAs in the size range
of 20–500 nt are isolated. This fraction is usually depleted in
EST libraries as it will not be present in poly(A)+ mRNA. The
isolation of small-sized RNAs is achieved by size separation of
total RNA (either from the entire organism at different devel-
opmental stages or from an individual organ) by denaturing
PAGE (Figure 1B).
Alternatively, by employing an antibody against an
RNA-binding protein of interest, entire groups of ncRNAs
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 2 637
can be isolated by immunoprecipitation. Thereby, RNAs are
not selected by their size but rather based on their function
since they bind to a common RNA binding protein, e.g. a
library generated by immunoprecipitation with an antibody
against a common small nucleolar RNA–protein will help
identify ncRNAs from the class of snoRNAs (26).
In many cases, these size- or antibody-selected RNAs will
lack poly-adenylated tails. In general, there are three different
methods to reverse transcribe ncRNAs into cDNA as a
prerequisite for cloning and sequencing (Figure 1B).
(i) First, to generate cDNA from this ncRNA fraction,
addition of an oligo(C) or oligo(A) tail to the RNA is
performed in the presence of poly(A) polymerase,
which uses ATP, but also—to a lesser extent CTP—as a
substrate (60). Subsequently, tailed RNAs are reverse
transcribed employing an oligo(dG) or oligo(dT) primer,
respectively. Following second strand synthesis by
employing DNA polymerase I and limited amounts of
RNase H and subsequent ligation of double-stranded
DNA linkers, the obtained double-stranded cDNAs are
cloned into a standard vector system (e.g. pSPORT1/
GibcoBRL), thus generating a cDNA library [for a
detailed method description see (61)].
(ii) As a second approach subsequent to C-tailing at the 30 end
(see above), an oligonucleotide linker is ligated to 50 end
of ncRNAs by T4 RNA ligase. The oligonucleotide can
be made from RNA or almost entirely from DNA [for a
more detailed method description see (62)]. To avoid mul-
timerization of linker sequences, the 50-oligonucleotide
carries a 50-hydroxyl group. Since T4 RNA ligase uses
RNA as a template, the last 3 nt at the 30 end of the oligo-
nucleotide should be ribonucleotides to increase effici-
ency of ligation. To add a linker to RNAs with modified
50 ends, such as a cap structure or a tri-phosphate group, the
RNA is first treated with tobacco acid pyrophosphatase
(TAP) which cleaves between the a and b phosphate
group, thus leaving 50-monophosphates (62). For RT–
PCR of RNAs, an oligo(dC) or d(T) primer is used in
combination with a 50-primer that is complementary to
the ligated 50 linker sequence.
(iii) In a third method, RNA oligonucleotide linkers are
sequentially ligated to both the 30 and the 50 end by T4
RNA ligase. To avoid mulitmerization of linker sequences,
the oligonucleotide at the 50 end of the RNA lacks a
phosphorylated 50 end, while the oligonucleotide ligated
to the 30 end of the RNA contains a blocked 30 end. Typi-
cally, the entire RNA pool is subjected to another round
of gel extraction after the first linker ligation step to
remove excessive linker that would otherwise form dimers
with the second adapter oligo. As described above, the
terminal 3 nt of the 50-oligonucleotide linker and the
first three of the 30-oligonucleotide linker might contain
RNA bases to increase efficiency of ligation by T4 RNA
ligase. RT–PCR of the ligated RNA fraction is achieved
by DNA primers complementary to the respective 50- or
30-linker oligonucleotide [for a more detailed method
description see (61)].
Subsequent to cDNA synthesis, cDNA fragments are cloned
into standard vector systems and sequenced by cycle sequen-
cing. Dependent on the expected complexity of the library, up
to 10 000 cDNA clones should be sequenced (for example in
the case of large eukaryal genomes). Sequencing is usually
followed by bioinformatical analyses, e.g. mapping of the
ncRNA gene to a certain locus on the genome and identifica-
tion of structure or sequence motifs, which might contribute to
the identification of the function of the ncRNA species of
interest.
In the recent past, numerous studies have been performed to
identify ncRNAs in genomes of model organisms by con-
structing specialized cDNA libraries. The first study was ini-
tiated in the mouse Mus musculus, where by a cDNA library
derived from size-selected RNAs (50–500 nt) 201 candidates
for ncRNAs were identified from 5000 cDNA clones ana-
lysed, about half of which belonging to the class of snoRNAs
(19). This study was followed by using a similar approach for
the plant Arabidopsis thaliana (20), the fruit fly, Drosophila
melanogaster (23), the two archaeal species Archaeoglobus
fulgidus and Sulfolobus solfataricus (21,22) and the eubacteria
E.coli (63,64) and Aquifex aeolicus (65).
Specialized cDNA library cloning was also applied to
identify certain subclasses of ncRNAs, e.g. miRNAs, in
different model organisms. Here, ncRNAs with a very narrow
size range of about 18–25 nt, i.e. centering around the known
sizes of miRNAs, were size-selected, cloned and sequenced
(10,66–72).
Identification of small ncRNAs by generation of specialized
cDNA libraries is now wide-spread and includes analysis of
amoebozoa such as the slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum
(62). For identification of specific classes of ncRNAs (such
as snoRNAs) the method of cDNA library generation by
immunoprecipitation with a snoRNA-binding protein like
fibrillarin followed by cloning of ncRNAs has been employed
successfully for C/D and H/ACA snoRNAs (26,73).
Obstacles and advantages of the method
The above method for cloning of ncRNAs has its downfalls
by the fact that it might not always be possible to reverse
transcribe an ncRNA into cDNA because of its structure or
modification (e.g. base or backbone modifications). Thus, a
cDNA library is neither likely to reflect all ncRNAs in a cell,
nor will it necessarily reflect—by number of indvidual cDNA
clones—the abundance of the respective ncRNA. The ration-
ale behind this is that less structured/modified ncRNAs are
more easily reverse transcribed than others and will be over-
represented within a cDNA library; similarly, smaller
ncRNAs will be more abundant than longer ones, since
they are more likely to be fully reverse transcribed.
For size-selected cDNA libraries, in general, it will not be
possible to identify all ncRNAs of a cell type or organism,
since the cut-off by size (e.g. 20–500 nt) will prohibit
identification of longer ncRNAs (such as ncRNAs like Xist
and Air RNA, which exhibit sizes in the range of many kb).
In addition, by the very nature of a cDNA expression library,
only those ncRNA species will be detected, which are
transcribed from a genome. This might depend, however,
on a specific developmental state of the organism or on expres-
sion in a certain tissue. Thus, to be able to clone all expressed
RNA sequences from an organism, ideally, all developmental
stages, in all tissues under all possible growth and nutrient
conditions would have to be analysed and total RNA extracted
638 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 2
from these different states. This might not always be possible
and hence some ncRNA species, which are expressed under
certain conditions, only, will not be cloned.
As for cloning strategies, employing method I for conver-
sion of ncRNAs into cDNAs, e.g. the method of reverse tran-
scription, second strand synthesis and addition of DNA linkers
(see above) will not result in full-length cDNA clones, accord-
ing to our experience, but in truncated 50-termini lacking about
10–15 nt of the full-length RNA.
Conversely, the disadvantage of methods II and III invol-
ving a linker oligonucleotide (see above) is the rather
inefficient ligation step of the linkers to the potential
ncRNA of interest, and the failure of linker attachment to
modified termini. The advantage of this method is, however,
that often full-length cDNA clones can be obtained, as com-
pared with method I.
In general, cDNA cloning will result in identification of
highly abundant known ncRNA species, such as tRNAs or
small ribosomal RNAs (e.g. 5S or 5.8S rRNAs). To circum-
vent repeated sequencing of these already known ncRNA
genes, one can try to excise these ncRNA species from the
gel after PAGE. However, this might result in the loss of
ncRNA species exhibiting the same or similar sizes as these
known RNA species. Alternatively, one can spot cDNAs on
filters (as a dot blot) and hybridize filters with radiolabelled
oligonucleotides directed against the most abundant
known ncRNAs species. Subsequently, only those cDNA
clones are sequenced, which show no hybridization signal
on autoradiograms of filters.
Microarray analysis
Microarrays have become the preferred method to monitor
the levels of many transcripts in parallel and often at the
whole-genome level (Figure 1C). Microarrays, also known
as DNA chips or expression arrays, are glass (or silicon) slides
onto whose surface DNA probes have been printed in a grid-
like arrangement. To date, single-stranded DNA oligo-
nucleotides of 25–70 in length are the predominant type of
DNA probe on commercial microarrays, though double-
stranded PCR products may also serve as probes.
To analyse the entire level of cellular transcripts, samples
are prepared from total RNA of an organism. The samples
used for microarray hybridization can be the extracted RNA,
the converted cDNA or cRNA; in any case, these probes will
generally be labelled with fluorescent dyes, such as Cy3 or
Cy5. For more details on the various labelling protocols that
are currently being used, see references in (74) and the work
cited below. The prepared sample is then mixed with hybrid-
ization buffer and applied to the glass slide so that they will
hybridize to a spot on the microarray.
The fluorescence of the spots to which the sample hybrid-
ized is read by a scanner and the results are displayed as a
pattern of coloured, e.g. red or green dots, with the colour
intensity reflecting the amount of transcripts that was present
in the cell. If two samples labelled with different dyes were
hybridized in parallel onto the same microarray, additional
colours such as yellow or orange would indicate relative
amounts of the individual transcripts in the two RNA pools.
Microarrays are mostly used for mRNA expression
profiling but they could also be a means for studying
ncRNA expression or even for ncRNA discovery
(Figure 2). The main caveat for their use with ncRNAs, how-
ever, was—and in may cases still is—the design of the com-
mercially available microarrays. Since tailored for mRNA
profiling, most of these arrays carry probes only for coding
regions, thus transcripts from non-coding genome regions will
not be detected. Nonetheless, the last few years have seen
considerable improvement of this situation.
In bacteria, most of the functional ncRNAs are encoded in
intergenic regions (IGRs). The first microarray to include
IGRs in addition to coding regions was introduced for the
model bacterium E.coli by (75). Their high-density array
(tiling array) carries 300 000 strand-specific 25mer oligo-
nucleotide probes for all mRNA, tRNA and rRNA regions
at a 30 bp resolution as well as for all IGRs of >40 bp with
6 bp resolution.
While this initial study primarily focused on technical
issues of mRNA level profiling, Wassarman et al. (2001)
subsequently used this microarray type to specifically analyse
the transcriptional output from IGRs. They found that array
hybridization with RNA extracted from three different growth
conditions yielded signals for at least a third of the ncRNAs
that were detected by parallel probing on northern blots.
These global analyses of the E.coli transcriptome were
subsequently extended by (76). By including a much broader
set of growth conditions, additional transcripts from IGRs that
may be novel ncRNA candidates were detected. Notably, the
extraordinarily high probe density here facilitated detection of
30- or 50- UTR RNA fragments that accumulate independently
after the processing of mRNA transcripts.
In a third study with this microarray type, cellular RNAs
that associate with E.coli Hfq protein were analysed (77). This
bacterial Sm-like protein, over the previous years, has
emerged as a key player in regulation by small regulatory
ncRNAs (78) and was known to bind a number of bacterial
ncRNAs (i.e. in addition to mRNAs). By the time of the
study of Zhang et al. (2003), 46 ncRNAs were known in
E.coli, of which 30% were detected by array hybridizations
of RNA that co-immunoprecipitated with Hfq. For bacteria
other than E.coli, microarrys have been applied to support
biocomputational prediction of ncRNAs of Staphylococcus
aureus (56). In contrast to the aforementioned E.coli oligo-
nucleotide tiling array, selected S.aureus IGRs were PCR
amplified to yield double-stranded DNA probes that were
then spotted on glass slides.
Similar to bacteria, microarrays have been increasingly
used to confirm global predictions of certain classes of
eukaryotic ncRNAs as well as to study their expression profile
in different tissues. One such class, the 22 nt microRNAs, is
matured from 60 to 110 nt pre-miRNA hairpin transcripts
thought to derive from longer pri-miRNA products. Micro-
arrays with 40 or 60mer oligonucleotides to detect known
microRNAs or their hairpin precursors were introduced
recently (79,80). Barad et al. (80) evaluated several aspects
of the methodology in order to standardize it and define the
parameters needed to achieve efficient hybridization and
reliable results, including mismatch analysis to determine
the specificity of microRNA probes. It was observed that
signal intensity correlates with the location of the microRNA
sequence within the 60mer probes, showing that location at
the 50 region yields the highest signals, whereas the 30 end
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 2 639
location results in poor signals. These results were
subsequently used to develop an integrative approach to the
discovery of new microRNAs, in which potential microRNA
precursor regions were predicted in the human genome and
5300 of these candidates tested in a high-throughput manner
on the aforementioned microarrays (81).
Several groups have recently used microarrays to study
ncRNAs of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Following
Figure 2. Microarray detection of cellular RNAs, including ncRNAs, that associate with the bacterial Sm-like protein, Hfq, and the La homologous protein (Lhp1p)
of yeast (S.cerevisiae), respectively (77,87). Left panel: RNAs are co-immunoprecipitated from E.coli cell extracts with anti-Hfq antibodies, purified and hybridized
to high-density microarrays that carry DNA oligonucleotides covering the entire E.coli genome. RNAs that hybridized to probes on the arrays are detected with an
antibody that specifically sees DNA:RNA hybrids. Subsequently, such signals are detected as indicated and subtracted from those obtained in a control experiment in
which cell extracts were incubated with pre-immune sera, that is no immunoprecipitation of Hfq. Right panel: cell extracts from either wild-type yeast or yeast cells
that express epitope (myc)-tagged Lhp1p are incubated with an anti-myc antibody, RNA is extracted from immunoprecipitates and reverse transcribed. The two
obtained cDNAs are labelled with different fluorescent dyes (Cy3, red; Cy5, green), mixed and hybridized to yeast whole-genome microarrays. Spots that yield red
signals indicate that the corresponding RNA was enriched in Lhp1p-myc immunoprecipitates.
640 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 2
earlier work with microarrays that carry individual probes for a
representative set of certain ncRNAs, e.g. snoRNAs (82), the
Hughes laboratory designed a tiling microarray to cover all
known and several predicted yeast ncRNAs (83). Here, each
ncRNA transcript is covered by oligonucleotide probes at
5 nt intervals including 100 nt of flanking sequence on
both the 50 and 30 ends. Thus far, however, these arrays
have mainly been used to monitor the synthesis, processing
and modification of known ncRNAs (84,85).
New yeast ncRNAs were identified by means of a truly
whole-genome microarray that contains 6700 PCR fragments
to cover all yeast open reading frames, annotated small RNAs
and all intergenic regions (86,87). Here, Inada and Guthrie
(87) sought to identify the RNA binding partners of the yeast
La protein (Lhp1) at a global scale. La is a ubiquitous, nuclear
RNA-binding protein that is conserved among eukaryotes.
Aside from binding mRNAs, it is known to associate with
the primary transcripts of RNA polymerase III, including
all tRNAs and other small RNAs. To selectively identify
La binding RNAs in yeast, a Myc-tagged Lhp1 protein was
immunoprecipitated with its associated RNAs and an untagged
strain was used as the reference sample in subsequent micro-
array hybridizations (Figure 2). The La targets identified in
this work included 20 annotated snoRNAs. Furthermore, at
least three novel H/ACA snoRNAs that were not before
annotated as such were newly discovered in intergenic regions.
Additional highly enriched signals from other intergenic
regions suggest that these also represent novel unannotated
transcripts which may be unknown ncRNAs.
Customized tiling arrays have now also been applied to
systematically search for functional ncRNAs in higher euka-
ryotes. For example, a biocomputational approach was taken
to extract 3478 intergenic and intronic sequences that are
conserved between the human, mouse and rat genomes,
and that showed characteristics of ncRNAs by a number of
other criteria (88). This information was then used to design
tiling arrays that contained probes for this candidate set, and
these arrays were probed with RNA isolated from 16 wild-
type mouse tissues. Subsequently, 55 candidates for highly
expressed novel ncRNAs were tested on northern blots,
thus confirming eight of these as small, highly and ubiquit-
ously expressed RNAs in mouse. Interestingly, only five of
these ncRNAs could also be detected in rat tissues, but none in
human tissues or cultured cells. The conserved expression of
these five ncRNAs in mouse and rat may indicate these
molecules to be functional in these two organisms albeit
not in human.
Obstacles and advantages of the method
The aforementioned studies provided valuable clues as to
the potential of this technique for ncRNA discovery as well
as the problems associated with microarrays when assaying
small and highly structured ncRNAs. Analyzing the hybrid-
ization signals from E.coli tiling arrays it was noted that often
only a subset of the oligonucleotide probes within the range of
a given ncRNA transcript region yielded a signal peak, even
though the same sRNA locus gave a strong and distinct band
on northern blots [cf. Figures 2 and 3 in (18)]. Tjaden et al.
(76) occasionally observed transcripts on the strand opposite
an experimentally validated ncRNA, which may account
either for unknown ncRNA antisense transcripts or simply
for experimental noise.
Although so far techniques for the reliable microarray
detection of bacterial small RNAs, which are usually highly
structured, have not been thoroughly evaluated, sample
preparation would seem a major issue. To date, most microar-
ray approaches involve fluorescent labelling of the RNA to be
used as sample. Frequently, the RNA is converted into cDNA
in the presence of modified nucleotides that carry fluorescent
dyes. Most bacterial ncRNAs cluster in a size range of
100–150 nt (8,9), and thus reverse transcription may not be
efficient and could further be hampered by tight secondary
structure.
Whether direct labelling approaches, e.g. chemical labell-
ing of fragmented RNA as alternatively used in (18), would
fully solve these problems is currently unknown. However,
Zhang et al. (2003) drastically improved detection sensitivity
by directly hybridizing RNA to oligonucleotide arrays without
labelling or cDNA synthesis (Figure 2). Instead, hybridization
was assayed using an antibody that sees RNA:DNA hybrids.
The highly improved sensitivity of this method is demon-
strated by the detection of the oxidative stress-induced
OxyS RNA, which is present in very low concentrations
under the growth conditions used in this study.
Hence, microarrays bear a great potential to not only
detect many RNAs in parallel but also to point to transcripts
that are present at low levels. As a note of caution, the fact that
the vast majority of the mouse ncRNA candidates suggested
by microarray analysis failed in downstream northern analysis
(88) clearly emphasizes the need for validation of microarray
hybridization results by independent methods.
These authors also point out that hybridizing covalently
labelled total RNA as applied in their study, as opposed to
reverse transcribed RNA derived from poly-adenylated RNA,
would be important in tiling array analyses, since any ampli-
fication or enrichment steps are is likely to skew the repres-
entation of the large noncoding regions of eukaryotic genomes
and may thus make it difficult to distinguish such signals from
global ‘transcriptional noise’. The application of stringent
criteria when using microarrays for ncRNA discovery
seems to be imperative as more data from whole genome tiling
microarrays are becoming available (89–91) and this data will
increasingly serve as input for biocomputational ncRNA
predictions by others [e.g. (7)].
Genomic SELEX
Many ncRNAs form ribonucleo-protein particles (RNPs) at
various time points in their life cycle. Such RNA-binding
proteins may help an ncRNA fold into its active conforma-
tion, shield it from nucleases prior to exerting its function or
promote its annealing with target RNAs up to guiding a protein
to its proper target. Other ncRNAs interact with proteins to
directly regulate their activity.
The techniques discussed so far allow to identify ncRNAs
from the pool of expressed cellular RNAs after co-purification
with proteins, i.e. by cloning, direct sequencing or microarray
analysis. Given that many such proteins bind their RNA ligands
in a nanomolar range, it should also be possible to select RNA
ligands from the pool of ncRNAs that an organism can possibly
express even without isolating their in vivo transcripts.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 2 641
This approach, termed genomic SELEX (92), is based on
the in vitro generation of RNA species that are derived from a
library of an organism’s entire genomic DNA (Figure 1D). The
generated RNA pool will undergo successive rounds of
association with a given RNA-binding protein, partitioning
and re-amplification. As a result, RNA sequences that are
stringently bound by the protein partner will be enriched.
Once the sequence of the bound RNAs is determined, this
information can be used to search for matches in the genome,
and so predicted genomic regions could then be tested for
the expression of unknown ncRNAs. Genomic SELEX has
been successfully applied to select mRNA binding partners
of proteins [e.g. (93,94)], but to the best of our knowledge,
studies that focused on ncRNAs have not been published for
any organism, yet.
Currently, the Schroeder laboratory has taken this approach
to identify new Hfq-binding RNAs from E.coli (C. Lorenz
and R. Schroeder, personal communication). A representative
library of the E.coli genome was constructed from random
50–500 bp genomic DNA fragments to which defined linkers,
one of these containing a T7 RNA polymerase promoter, were
attached in the course of the initial library generation step (92).
These fragments were in vitro transcribed with T7 RNA poly-
merase, incubated with Hfq and selected for Hfq binding on
filters. Taking the standard SELEX route (95), the retained
RNA was converted to cDNA and subjected to additional
(eight) re-amplification and selection rounds, which finally
resulted in a pool of RNAs that bound Hfq with Kd values
of 5–50 nM. Subsequently, specific Hfq interaction of the
thus enriched RNAs was determined in vivo using a yeast
three-hybrid screen (96). Preliminary results suggest that
these experiments identified a number of novel Hfq-binding
RNAs, including antisense RNAs and candidate ncRNAs from
intergenic regions.
Obstacles and advantages of the method
Genomic SELEX would clearly have its strength in finding
ncRNAs that are overlooked by methods that require an
ncRNA gene to be expressed at a certain level. With their
small genome sizes, prokaryotes should be particularly
amenable to this type of approach. Since in bacteria functional
ncRNAs are mostly encoded by intergenic regions, the original
pool of DNA fragments could be loaded by specifically
amplifying this portion of the genome, which in bacteria typ-
ically constitute <10% of the entire genome. As a further
advantage of genomic SELEX, the tight association of an
ncRNA with a given protein that is a prerequisite for its
successful selection could also point to a biological role of
this ncRNA, e.g. its function as an antagonist or cofactor of
the protein’s activity.
At present, very few general RNA-binding proteins are
known that specifically form complexes with ncRNAs. Two
of the proteins discussed above, Hfq and La (Lhp1p), also
associate with mRNAs [references in (78,87)]. Thus, similar
to cDNA cloning and microarray analysis, a genomic SELEX
approach with such general RNA-binding proteins is expected
to yield many additional RNA candidates that one would not
readily consider as ncRNAs. What is more, this method only
indicates that a certain genomic locus could have a function
when transcribed into RNA. However, the exact condition
under which such an RNA is expressed—if it is at all—will
still have to be determined.
A major advantage of the genomic SELEX method,
compared with the cDNA cloning strategy (see above), is,
however, that the latter requires isolation of ncRNAs from
an organism or cell under all possible developmental and
growth conditions, which might not be always feasible. In
contrast, genomic SELEX generates RNA species from all
regions of a genome und thus is not dependent on isolating
RNAs from all these different states.
Functional RNomics approaches: techniques
following RNA identification
Identification of ncRNAs can be only regarded as a first
step towards the elucidation of their functions. The term
‘candidate’ should be used as a suffix to the ncRNA, as
long as the function of an ncRNA has not been elucidated.
Only then, the RNA species should be designated as a bona
fide ncRNA.
To obtain hints towards the function of an ncRNA
candidate, several approaches can be performed:
(i) Since most functional ncRNAs are part of an ribo-
nucleoprotein particle (RNP), the protein components of
ncRNAs can be searched for. This is achieved, for exam-
ple, by using the RNA as a ‘bait’ to fish for these RNA
binding proteins in cell extracts. RNAs can be synthesized
with an ‘affinity-tag’ such as biotin by T7 RNA polymerase
in vitro transcription in the presence of biotin-UTP. The
biotinylated RNAs are then coupled to a streptavidin
column. Alternatively, an RNA sequence binding to a
known protein can be cloned 50- or 30- to the ncRNA
gene. By attaching the known RNA binding protein to a
solid support, the ncRNP can be isolated by using the
known RNA tag as a bait (97). Elucidation of the
protein-components of an RNP can hint towards its
functions, since the proteins might exhibit domains with
known catalytic activity. For in vivo analysis, the yeast
two-hybrid system has been expanded to a three-hybrid
system, where the ncRNA is used as a bait in vivo to fish
for proteins which bind to it (98).
(ii) Many of the ncRNAs hitherto found exhibit specific RNA
targets, which they recognize by an antisense mechanism,
e.g. Watson–Crick base pairing (99). Target RNAs include
mRNAs or other ncRNAs such as ribosomal RNAs,
snRNAs or tRNAs. For elucidation of ncRNA targets,
either bioinformatical or experimental methods can be
employed. For bioinformatical methods, search for com-
plementarity can be performed. This was successfully
achieved, for example, in the case of miRNAs targets
(100,101). Experimental methods could include that by
fishing the ncRNA of interest through an RNA-binding
protein (see above), the target RNA, complementary to
the ncRNA, could be co-isolated as well. This might
require a cross-link prior to isolation of the RNA hetero-
duplex, depending on the stability of the RNA–RNA inter-
action. Alternatively, by expression/overexpression of an
ncRNA of interest and subsequent microarray analysis,
potential mRNA targets can be identified, if the ncRNAs
influences the abundance of its respective mRNA target(s)
in the cell (102).
642 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 2
(iii) Analysis of expression patterns from an ncRNA of interest:
for example, the cellular/subcellular localization of the
RNA/RNP particle might shed some additional light on
its function, e.g. localization in the nucleolus, nucleus or
cytoplasm might hint towards an ncRNA involvement in
functions exerted in these cellular compartments. To this
end, fluorescent in situ hybridization techniques can be
used to localize the RNA of interest (103). In addition
to sub-cellular localization of ncRNAs, the tissue-
specific or developmental expression of ncRNAs can be
analysed by northern blotting, using total RNA from dif-
ferent tissues or developmental states. Thus, if an ncRNA is
only expressed in the brain, at a certain developmental
stage, for example, the function of the ncRNA can be
searched for within this temporal and spatial expression
window of the respective organism.
(iv) Ultimately, to address the function of ncRNAs, their genes
have to be eliminated in the genomes of respective organ-
isms. In other cases, overexpression of ncRNA genes has
been useful to obtain a more prominent phenotype [see
discussion of multicopy plasmid approaches in (36)].
For certain model bacteria such as E.coli, gene deletions
are usually accomplished in a few days (104,105). For most
other organisms, only the conventional time-consuming
knock-out technology is available for this purpose. Very
recently, the more elegant knock-down strategies by RNA
interference, so far applied only to protein-coding mRNAs,
have been shown - in some cases - to be also suitable for rapid
ncRNA depletion (106,107); however, the mechanism by
which RNAi targets ncRNAs is completely unknown. In addi-
tion, a very elegant study has also very recently demonstrated
the potential of chemically modified antisense miRNAs (so
called ‘antagomirs’) for the knock-down of certain miRNA
species (108).
CONCLUSION
The methods presented above offer a rich tool-box to
search for and identify ncRNAs at both large and small
scale in virtually any genome. In humans, thousands of appar-
ently non-coding RNA transcripts were observed by micro-
array analyses and proposed to be involved in regulating gene
expression (109). That some of these transcripts could also
be verified by northern blot analysis or quantitative PCR
makes it difficult to write them all off as experimental arte-
facts, mRNA degradation fragments or other transcriptional
‘noise’ (30). Furthermore, several of the ncRNAs that were
discovered in genome-wide searches in E.coli only a couple of
years ago (17,18) have meanwhile been assigned regulatory
functions (110–116).
Nonetheless, without a clue as to their biological functions,
newly identified ncRNAs molecules should rather be con-
sidered as ‘candidates for ncRNAs’ (see above). So, the burn-
ing question is: what are the functions of all of these RNA
transcripts? Or, if they are not functional, why does the cell
devote its resources to producing them? Thus, next to novel
methods to identify them in model organisms, also novel
methods—preferentially as high-throughput approaches as
used in (106,108)— are needed to tackle the biological
roles of ncRNAs.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank R. Gupta for helpful suggestions and critical
reading of the manuscript. A.H. was supported by an Austrian
FWF grant FWF-171370 and a German DFG grant 467/5-1.
Support to J.V. was given by the Max Planck Society and by a
DFG grant VO 875/1-1. The Open Access publication charges
for this article were waived by Oxford University Press.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Mattick,J.S. (2001) Non-coding RNAs: the architects of eukaryotic
complexity. EMBO Rep., 2, 986–991.
2. Eddy,S.R. (2001) Non-coding RNA genes and the modern RNA world.
Nature Rev. Genet., 2, 919–929.
3. Huttenhofer,A., Brosius,J. and Bachellerie,J.P. (2002) RNomics:
identification and function of small, non-messenger RNAs.
Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 6, 835–843.
4. Huttenhofer,A., Schattner,P. and Polacek,N. (2005) Non-coding
RNAs: hope or hype? Trends Genet., 21, 289–297.
5. Storz,G. (2002) An expanding universe of noncoding RNAs. Science,
296, 1260–1263.
6. Washietl,S., Hofacker,I.L., Lukasser,M., Huttenhofer,A. and
Stadler,P.F. (2005) Mapping of conserved RNA secondary structures
predicts thousands of functional noncoding RNAs in the human
genome. Nat. Biotechnol., 23, 1383–1390.
7. Washietl,S., Hofacker,I.L. and Stadler,P.F. (2005) Fast and reliable
prediction of noncoding RNAs. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 102,
2454–2459.
8. Zhang,Y., Zhang,Z., Ling,L., Shi,B. and Chen,R. (2004) Conservation
analysis of small RNA genes in Escherichia coli. Bioinformatics, 20,
599–603.
9. Hershberg,R., Altuvia,S. and Margalit,H. (2003) A survey of small
RNA-encoding genes in Escherichia coli. Nucleic Acids Res., 31,
1813–1820.
10. Bartel,D.P. (2004) MicroRNAs: genomics, biogenesis, mechanism, and
function. Cell, 116, 281–297.
11. Tuschl,T. (2003) Functional genomics: RNA sets the standard. Nature,
421, 220–221.
12. Ambros,V. (2001) microRNAs: tiny regulators with great potential.
Cell, 107, 823–826.
13. Volpe,T.A., Kidner,C., Hall,I.M., Teng,G., Grewal,S.I. and
Martienssen,R.A. (2002) Regulation of heterochromatic silencing
and histone H3 lysine-9 methylation by RNAi. Science, 297,
1833–1837.
14. Avner,P. and Heard,E. (2001) X-chromosome inactivation: counting,
choice and initiation. Nature Rev. Genet., 2, 59–67.
15. Plath,K., Mlynarczyk-Evans,S., Nusinow,D.A. and Panning,B. (2002)
Xist RNA and the mechanism of X chromosome inactivation.
Annu. Rev. Genet., 36, 233–278.
16. Rougeulle,C. and Heard,E. (2002) Antisense RNA in imprinting:
spreading silence through Air. Trends Genet., 18, 434–437.
17. Argaman,L., Hershberg,R., Vogel,J., Bejerano,G., Wagner,E.G.,
Margalit,H. and Altuvia,S. (2001) Novel small RNA-encoding genes
in the intergenic regions of Escherichia coli. Curr. Biol., 11,
941–950.
18. Wassarman,K.M., Repoila,F., Rosenow,C., Storz,G. and Gottesman,S.
(2001) Identification of novel small RNAs using comparative genomics
and microarrays. Genes Dev., 15, 1637–1651.
19. Huttenhofer,A., Kiefmann,M., Meier-Ewert,S., O’Brien,J., Lehrach,H.,
Bachellerie,J.P. and Brosius,J. (2001) RNomics: an experimental
approach that identifies 201 candidates for novel, small, non-messenger
RNAs in mouse. EMBO J., 20, 2943–2953.
20. Marker,C., Zemann,A., Terhorst,T., Kiefmann,M., Kastenmayer,J.P.,
Green,P., Bachellerie,J.P., Brosius,J. and Huttenhofer,A. (2002)
Experimental RNomics: identification of 140 candidates for small
non-messenger RNAs in the plant Arabidopsis thaliana.
Curr. Biol., 12, 2002–2013.
21. Tang,T.H., Bachellerie,J.P., Rozhdestvensky,T., Bortolin,M.L.,
Huber,H., Drungowski,M., Elge,T., Brosius,J. and Huttenhofer,A.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 2 643
(2002) Identification of 86 candidates for small non-messenger RNAs
from the archaeon Archaeoglobus fulgidus. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA, 99, 7536–7541.
22. Tang,T.-H., Polacek,N., Zywicki,M., Huber,H., Brugger,K., Garrett,R.,
Bachellerie,J.P. and Hu¨ttenhofer,A. (2004) Identification of
novel non-coding RNAs as potential antisense regulators in the
archaeon Sulfolobus solfataricus. Mol. Microbiol., in press.
23. Yuan,G., Klambt,C., Bachellerie,J.P., Brosius,J. and Huttenhofer,A.
(2003) RNomics in Drosophila melanogaster: identification of 66
candidates for novel non-messenger RNAs. Nucleic Acids Res., 31,
2495–2507.
24. Klein,R.J., Misulovin,Z. and Eddy,S.R. (2002) Noncoding RNA genes
identified in AT-rich hyperthermophiles. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA, 99, 7542–7547.
25. Rivas,E., Klein,R.J., Jones,T.A. and Eddy,S.R. (2001) Computational
identification of noncoding RNAs in E.coli by comparative
genomics. Curr. Biol., 11, 1369–1373.
26. Vitali,P., Royo,H., Seitz,H., Bachellerie,J.P., Huttenhofer,A. and
Cavaille,J. (2003) Identification of 13 novel human modification guide
RNAs. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 6543–6551.
27. Okazaki,Y., Furuno,M., Kasukawa,T., Adachi,J., Bono,H., Kondo,S.,
Nikaido,I., Osato,N., Saito,R., Suzuki,H. et al. (2002) Analysis of the
mouse transcriptome based on functional annotation of 60,770
full-length cDNAs. Nature, 420, 563–573.
28. Ota,T., Suzuki,Y., Nishikawa,T., Otsuki,T., Sugiyama,T., Irie,R.,
Wakamatsu,A., Hayashi,K., Sato,H., Nagai,K. et al. (2004) Complete
sequencing and characterization of 21,243 full-length human cDNAs.
Nature Genet., 36, 40–45.
29. Cawley,S., Bekiranov,S., Ng,H.H., Kapranov,P., Sekinger,E.A.,
Kampa,D., Piccolboni,A., Sementchenko,V., Cheng,J., Williams,A.J.
et al. (2004) Unbiased mapping of transcription factor bindingsites along
human chromosomes 21 and 22 points to widespread regulation of
noncoding RNAs. Cell, 116, 499–509.
30. Kampa,D., Cheng,J., Kapranov,P., Yamanaka,M., Brubaker,S.,
Cawley,S., Drenkow,J., Piccolboni,A., Bekiranov,S., Helt,G. et al.
(2004) Novel RNAs identified from an in-depth analysis of the
transcriptome of human chromosomes 21 and 22. Genome Res., 14,
331–342.
31. Storz,G., Opdyke,J.A. and Zhang,A. (2004) Controlling mRNA stability
and translation with small, noncoding RNAs. Curr. Opin. Microbiol.,
7, 140–144.
32. Mizuno,T., Chou,M.Y. and Inouye,M. (1983) A unique mechanism
regulating gene expression: translational inhibition by a complementary
RNA transcript (micRNA). Proceedings of the Japan Academy Series
B-Physical and Biological Sciences, 59, 335–338.
33. Sledjeski,D. and Gottesman,S. (1995) A small RNA acts as an
antisilencer of the H-NS-silenced rcsA gene of Escherichia coli.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 92, 2003–2007.
34. Majdalani,N., Chen,S., Murrow,J., St John,K. and Gottesman,S. (2001)
Regulation of RpoS by a novel small RNA: the characterization of
RprA. Mol. Microbiol., 39, 1382–1394.
35. Lee,R.C., Feinbaum,R.L. and Ambros,V. (1993) The C.elegans
heterochronic gene lin-4 encodes small RNAs with antisense
complementarity to lin-14. Cell, 75, 843–854.
36. Vogel,J. and Sharma,C.S. (2005) How to find small non-coding RNAs in
bacteria. Biol. Chem., 386, 1219–1238.
37. Eddy,S.R. (2002) Computational genomics of noncoding RNA genes.
Cell, 109, 137–140.
38. Sambrook,J. and Russell,D.W. (2001) Molecular Cloning 3rd edn. Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, USA.
39. Bruce,A.G. and Uhlenbeck,O.C. (1978) Reactions at the termini of
tRNA with T4 RNA ligase. Nucleic Acids Res., 5,
3665–3677.
40. Ikemura,T. and Dahlberg,J.E. (1973) Small ribonucleic acids of
Escherichia coli. II. Noncoordinate accumulation during stringent
control. J. Biol. Chem., 248, 5033–5041.
41. Ikemura,T. and Dahlberg,J.E. (1973) Small ribonucleic acids of
Escherichia coli. I. Characterization by polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis and fingerprint analysis. J. Biol. Chem., 248,
5024–5032.
42. Griffin,B.E. (1971) Separation of 32P-labelled ribonucleic acid
components. The use of polyethylenimine-cellulose (TLC) as a second
dimension in separating oligoribonucleotides of ‘4.5 S’ and 5 S from
E.coli. FEBS Lett., 15, 165–168.
43. Hindley,J. (1967) Fractionation of 32P-labelled ribonucleic acids on
polyacrylamide gels and their characterization by fingerprinting.
J. Mol. Biol., 30, 125–136.
44. Sanger,F., Brownlee,G.G. and Barrell,B.G. (1965) A two-dimensional
fractionation procedure for radioactive nucleotides. J. Mol. Biol., 13,
373–398.
45. Brownlee,G.G. and Sanger,F. (1969) Chromatography of 32P-labelled
oligonucleotides on thin layers of DEAE-cellulose. Eur. J. Biochem., 11,
395–399.
46. Silberklang,M., Gillum,A.M. and RajBhandary,U.L. (1979) Use of
in vitro 32P labeling in the sequence analysis of nonradioactive
tRNAs. Methods Enzymol., 59, 58–109.
47. Branch,A.D., Benenfeld,B.J. and Robertson,H.D. (1989) RNA
fingerprinting. Methods Enzymol., 180, 130–154.
48. Donis-Keller,H., Maxam,A.M. and Gilbert,W. (1977) Mapping
adenines, guanines, and pyrimidines in RNA. Nucleic Acids Res., 4,
2527–2538.
49. Gupta,R.C. and Randerath,K. (1977) Use of specific endonuclease
cleavage in RNA sequencing. Nucleic Acids Res., 4, 1957–1978.
50. Gupta,R.C. and Randerath,K. (1977) Use of specific endonuclease
cleavage in RNA sequencing-an enzymic method for distinguishing
betweencytidine and uridine residues. Nucleic Acids Res., 4, 3441–3454.
51. Peattie,D.A. (1979) Direct chemical method for sequencing RNA.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 76, 1760–1764.
52. Yarus,M. and Barrell,B.G. (1971) The sequence of nucleotides in tRNA
Ile from E.coli B. Biochem. Biophys Res. Commun., 43, 729–734.
53. Brownlee,G.G., Cartwright,E., McShane,T. and Williamson,R. (1972)
The nucleotide sequence of somatic 5 S RNA from Xenopus laevis.
FEBS Lett., 25, 8–12.
54. Ehresmann,C., Stiegler,P., Carbon,P. and Ebel,J.P. (1977) Recent
progress in the determination of the primary sequence of the 16 S RNA of
Escherichia coli. FEBS Lett., 84, 337–341.
55. Balakin,A.G., Smith,L. and Fournier,M.J. (1996) The RNA world of the
nucleolus: two major families of small RNAs defined by different box
elements with related functions. Cell, 86, 823–834.
56. Pichon,C. and Felden,B. (2005) Small RNA genes expressed from
Staphylococcus aureus genomic and pathogenicity islands with specific
expression among pathogenic strains. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 102,
14249–14254.
57. Trotochaud,A.E. and Wassarman,K.M. (2005) A highly conserved 6S
RNA structure is required for regulation of transcription. Nature Struct.
Mol. Biol., 12, 313–319.
58. Gerhold,D. and Caskey,C.T. (1996) It’s the genes! EST access to human
genome content. Bioessays, 18, 973–981.
59. Ohlrogge,J. and Benning,C. (2000) Unraveling plant metabolism by
EST analysis. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol., 3, 224–228.
60. Martin,G. and Keller,W. (1998) Tailing and 30-end labeling of RNA with
yeast poly(A) polymerase and various nucleotides. RNA, 4, 226–230.
61. Huttenhofer,A., Cavaille,J. and Bachellerie,J.P. (2004) Experimental
RNomics: a global approach to identifying small nuclear RNAs
and their targets in different model organisms. Methods Mol. Biol.,
265, 409–428.
62. Aspegren,A., Hinas,A., Larsson,P., Larsson,A. and Soderbom,F. (2004)
Novel non-coding RNAs in Dictyostelium discoideum and their
expression during development. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, 4646–4656.
63. Vogel,J., Bartels,V., Tang,T.H., Churakov,G., Slagter-Jager,J.G.,
Huttenhofer,A. and Wagner,E.G. (2003) RNomics in Escherichia coli
detects new sRNA species and indicates parallel transcriptional output in
bacteria. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 6435–6443.
64. Kawano,M., Reynolds,A.A., Miranda-Rios,J. and Storz,G. (2005)
Detection of 50- and 30-UTR-derived small RNAs and cis-encoded
antisense RNAs in Escherichia coli. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, 1040–1050.
65. Willkomm,D.K., Minnerup,J., Huttenhofer,A. and Hartmann,R.K.
(2005) Experimental RNomics in Aquifex aeolicus: identification of
small non-coding RNAs and the putative 6S RNA homolog. Nucleic
Acids Res., 33, 1949–1960.
66. Lagos-Quintana,M., Rauhut,R., Lendeckel,W. and Tuschl,T. (2001)
Identification of novel genes coding for small expressed RNAs. Science,
294, 853–858.
67. Lagos-Quintana,M., Rauhut,R., Yalcin,A., Meyer,J., Lendeckel,W. and
Tuschl,T. (2002) Identification of tissue-specific microRNAs from
mouse. Curr. Biol., 12, 735–739.
68. Lee,R.C. and Ambros,V. (2001) An extensive class of small RNAs in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Science, 294, 862–864.
644 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 2
69. Chen,P.Y., Manninga,H., Slanchev,K., Chien,M., Russo,J.J., Ju,J.,
Sheridan,R., John,B., Marks,D.S., Gaidatzis,D. et al. (2005) The
developmental miRNA profiles of zebrafish as determined by small
RNA cloning. Genes Dev., 19, 1288–1293.
70. Lau,N.C., Lim,L.P., Weinstein,E.G. and Bartel,D.P. (2001)An abundant
class of tiny RNAs with probable regulatory roles in Caenorhabditis
elegans. Science, 294, 858–862.
71. Lu,C., Tej,S.S., Luo,S., Haudenschild,C.D., Meyers,B.C. and
Green,P.J. (2005) Elucidation of the small RNA component of the
transcriptome. Science, 309, 1567–1569.
72. Pfeffer,S., Lagos-Quintana,M. and Tuschl,T. (2003) Cloning of small
RNA molecules. Current Protocols in Molecular Biology,
26.24.21–26.24.18.
73. Darzacq,X., Jady,B.E., Verheggen,C., Kiss,A.M., Bertrand,E. and
Kiss,T. (2002) Cajal body-specific small nuclear RNAs: a novel class of
20-O- methylation and pseudouridylation guide RNAs. EMBO J., 21,
2746–2756.
74. Stoughton,R.B. (2005) Applications of DNA microarrays in biology.
Annu. Rev. Biochem., 74, 53–82.
75. Selinger,D.W., Cheung,K.J., Mei,R., Johansson,E.M., Richmond,C.S.,
Blattner,F.R., Lockhart,D.J. and Church,G.M. (2000) RNA expression
analysis using a 30 base pair resolution Escherichia coli genome array.
Nat. Biotechnol., 18, 1262–1268.
76. Tjaden,B., Saxena,R.M., Stolyar,S., Haynor,D.R., Kolker,E. and
Rosenow,C. (2002) Transcriptome analysis of Escherichia coli using
high-density oligonucleotide probe arrays. Nucleic Acids Res., 30,
3732–3738.
77. Zhang,A., Wassarman,K.M., Rosenow,C., Tjaden,B.C., Storz,G. and
Gottesman,S. (2003) Global analysis of small RNA and mRNA targets of
Hfq. Mol. Microbiol., 50, 1111–1124.
78. Valentin-Hansen,P., Eriksen,M. and Udesen,C. (2004) The bacterial
Sm-like protein Hfq: a key player in RNA transactions. Mol. Microbiol.,
51, 1525–1533.
79. Liu,C.G., Calin,G.A., Meloon,B., Gamliel,N., Sevignani,C.,
Ferracin,M., Dumitru,C.D., Shimizu,M., Zupo,S., Dono,M. et al. (2004)
An oligonucleotide microchip for genome-wide microRNA
profiling in human and mouse tissues. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 101,
9740–9744.
80. Barad,O., Meiri,E., Avniel,A., Aharonov,R., Barzilai,A., Bentwich,I.,
Einav,U., Gilad,S., Hurban,P., Karov,Y. et al. (2004) MicroRNA
expression detected by oligonucleotide microarrays: system
establishment and expression profiling in human tissues. Genome Res.,
14, 2486–2494.
81. Bentwich,I., Avniel,A., Karov,Y., Aharonov,R., Gilad,S., Barad,O.,
Barzilai,A., Einat,P., Einav,U., Meiri,E. et al. (2005) Identification of
hundreds of conserved and nonconserved human microRNAs. Nature
Genet., 37, 766–770.
82. Peng,W.T., Robinson,M.D., Mnaimneh,S., Krogan,N.J., Cagney,G.,
Morris,Q., Davierwala,A.P., Grigull,J., Yang,X., Zhang,W. et al. (2003)
A panoramic view of yeast noncoding RNA processing. Cell, 113,
919–933.
83. Hiley,S.L., Babak,T. and Hughes,T.R. (2005) Global analysis of yeast
RNA processing identifies new targets of RNase III and uncovers a link
between tRNA 50 end processing and tRNA splicing. Nucleic Acids Res.,
33, 3048–3056.
84. Hiley,S.L., Jackman,J., Babak,T., Trochesset,M., Morris,Q.D.,
Phizicky,E. and Hughes,T.R. (2005) Detection and discovery of RNA
modifications using microarrays. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, e2.
85. Xing,F., Hiley,S.L., Hughes,T.R. and Phizicky,E.M. (2004) The
specificities of four yeast dihydrouridine synthases for cytoplasmic
tRNAs. J. Biol. Chem., 279, 17850–17860.
86. Iyer,V.R., Horak,C.E., Scafe,C.S., Botstein,D., Snyder,M. and
Brown,P.O. (2001) Genomic binding sites of the yeast cell-cycle
transcription factors SBF and MBF. Nature, 409, 533–538.
87. Inada,M. and Guthrie,C. (2004) Identification of Lhp1p-associated
RNAs by microarray analysis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae reveals
association with coding and noncoding RNAs. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA, 101, 434–439.
88. Babak,T., Blencowe,B.J. and Hughes,T.R. (2005) A systematic search
for new mammalian noncoding RNAs indicates little conserved
intergenic transcription. BMC Genomics, 6, 104.
89. Cheng,J., Kapranov,P., Drenkow,J., Dike,S., Brubaker,S., Patel,S.,
Long,J., Stern,D., Tammana,H., Helt,G. et al. (2005) Transcriptional
maps of 10 human chromosomes at 5-nucleotide resolution. Science,
308, 1149–1154.
90. Bertone,P., Stolc,V., Royce,T.E., Rozowsky,J.S., Urban,A.E., Zhu,X.,
Rinn,J.L., Tongprasit,W., Samanta,M., Weissman,S. et al. (2004)
Global identification of human transcribed sequences with genome
tiling arrays. Science, 306, 2242–2246.
91. Kapranov,P., Drenkow,J., Cheng,J., Long,J., Helt,G., Dike,S. and
Gingeras,T.R. (2005) Examples of the complex architecture of the
human transcriptome revealed by RACE and high-density tiling arrays.
Genome Res., 15, 987–997.
92. Singer,B.S., Shtatland,T., Brown,D. and Gold,L. (1997) Libraries for
genomic SELEX. Nucleic Acids Res., 25, 781–786.
93. Shtatland,T., Gill,S.C., Javornik,B.E., Johansson,H.E.,
Singer,B.S., Uhlenbeck,O.C., Zichi,D.A. and Gold,L. (2000)
Interactions of Escherichia coli RNA with bacteriophage
MS2 coat protein: genomic SELEX. Nucleic Acids Res.,
28, E93.
94. Kim,S., Shi,H., Lee,D.K. and Lis,J.T. (2003) Specific SR
protein-dependent splicing substrates identified through genomic
SELEX. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 1955–1961.
95. Gold,L., Polisky,B., Uhlenbeck,O. and Yarus,M. (1995)
Diversity of oligonucleotide functions. Annu. Rev.
Biochem., 64, 763–797.
96. Bernstein,D.S., Buter,N., Stumpf,C. and Wickens,M. (2002) Analyzing
mRNA-protein complexes using a yeast three-hybrid system.
Methods, 26, 123–141.
97. Bardwell,V.J. and Wickens,M. (1990) Purification of RNA and
RNA-protein complexes by an R17 coat protein affinity method.
Nucleic Acids Res., 18, 6587–6594.
98. Zhang,B., Kraemer,B., SenGupta,D., Fields,S. and Wickens,M. (1999)
Yeast three-hybrid system to detect and analyze interactions between
RNA and protein. Methods Enzymol., 306, 93–113.
99. Wagner,E.G., Altuvia,S. and Romby,P. (2002) Antisense
RNAs in bacteria and their genetic elements. Adv. Genet., 46,
361–398.
100. Lewis,B.P., Burge,C.B. and Bartel,D.P. (2005) Conserved seed
pairing, often flanked by adenosines, indicates that thousands of human
genes are microRNA targets. Cell, 120, 15–20.
101. Krek,A., Grun,D., Poy,M.N., Wolf,R., Rosenberg,L., Epstein,E.J.,
MacMenamin,P., da Piedade,I., Gunsalus,K.C., Stoffel,M. et al. (2005)
Combinatorial microRNA target predictions. Nature Genet., 37,
495–500.
102. Lim,L.P., Lau,N.C., Garrett-Engele,P., Grimson,A., Schelter,J.M.,
Castle,J., Bartel,D.P., Linsley,P.S. and Johnson,J.M. (2005) Microarray
analysis shows that some microRNAs downregulate large numbers of
target mRNAs. Nature, 433, 769–773.
103. Vitali,P., Basyuk,E., Le Meur,E., Bertrand,E., Muscatelli,F., Cavaille,J.
and Huttenhofer,A. (2005) ADAR2-mediated editing of RNA
substrates in the nucleolus is inhibited by C/D small nucleolar RNAs.
J. Cell Biol., 169, 745–753.
104. Datsenko,K.A. and Wanner,B.L. (2000) One-step inactivation of
chromosomal genes in Escherichia coli K-12 using PCR products.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 97, 6640–6645.
105. Yu,D., Ellis,H.M., Lee,E.C., Jenkins,N.A., Copeland,N.G. and
Court,D.L. (2000) An efficient recombination system for chromosome
engineering in Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 97,
5978–5983.
106. Willingham,A.T., Orth,A.P., Batalov,S., Peters,E.C., Wen,B.G.,
Aza-Blanc,P., Hogenesch,J.B. and Schultz,P.G. (2005) A strategy for
probing the function of noncoding RNAs finds a repressor of NFAT.
Science, 309, 1570–1573.
107. Nakamoto,M., Jin,P., O’Donnell,W.T. and Warren,S.T. (2005)
Physiological identification of human transcripts translationally
regulated by a specific microRNA. Hum. Mol. Genet., 14,
3813–3821.
108. Krutzfeldt,J., Rajewsky,N., Braich,R., Rajeev,K.G., Tuschl,T.,
Manoharan,M. and Stoffel,M. (2005) Silencing of microRNAs in vivo
with ‘antagomirs’. Nature, 438, 685–689.
109. Mattick,J.S. (2005) The functional genomics of noncoding RNA.
Science, 309, 1527–1528.
110. Vogel,J., Argaman,L., Wagner,E.G. and Altuvia,S. (2004) The small
RNA IstR inhibits synthesis of an SOS-induced toxic peptide.
Curr. Biol., 14, 2271–2276.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 2 645
111. Udekwu,K.I., Darfeuille,F., Vogel,J., Reimegard,J., Holmqvist,E. and
Wagner,E.G. (2005) Hfq-dependent regulation of OmpA synthesis is
mediated by an antisense RNA. Genes Dev., 19, 2355–2366.
112. Rasmussen,A.A., Eriksen,M., Gilany,K., Udesen,C., Franch,T.,
Petersen,C. and Valentin-Hansen,P. (2005) Regulation of ompA mRNA
stability: the role of a small regulatory RNA in growth phase-dependent
control. Mol. Microbiol., 58, 1421–1429.
113. Opdyke,J.A., Kang,J.G. and Storz,G. (2004) GadY, a small-RNA
regulator of acid response genes in Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol., 186,
6698–6705.
114. Chen,S., Zhang,A., Blyn,L.B. and Storz,G. (2004) MicC, a second
small-RNA regulator of Omp protein expression in Escherichia coli.
J. Bacteriol., 186, 6689–6697.
115. Masse´,E. and Gottesman,S. (2002) A small RNA regulates the
expression of genes involved in iron metabolism in Escherichia coli.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 99, 4620–4625.
116. Vanderpool,C.K. and Gottesman,S. (2004) Involvement of a novel
transcriptional activator and small RNA in post-transcriptional
regulation of the glucose phosphoenolpyruvate phosphotransferase
system. Mol. Microbiol., 54, 1076–1089.
646 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 2
