PDBsum more: new summaries and analyses of the
known 3D structures of proteins and nucleic acids
Roman A. Laskowski*, Victor V. Chistyakov and Janet M. Thornton
European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK
Received August 26, 2004; Accepted August 29, 2004
ABSTRACT
PDBsum is a database of mainly pictorial summaries
of the 3D structures of proteins and nucleic acids in
theProteinDataBank. Itspagesaim toprovideanat-a-
glanceviewof the contentsof every 3Dstructure, plus
detailed structural analyses of each protein chain,
DNA–RNA chain and any bound ligands and metals.
In the past year, the database has been significantly
improved, in terms of both appearance and new con-
tent. Moreover, it has moved to its new address at
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/thornton-srv/databases/pdbsum.
INTRODUCTION
The PDBsum database was created at University College
London in 1995 (1,2). Its aim was to provide an illustrated
and informative summary for each of the 3D structures
released by the Protein Data Bank (PDB) (3).
As of July 1, 2004, the database has been transferred to the
European Bioinformatics Institute having had a complete
facelift and many new analyses and links added to it. Its new
address ishttp://www.ebi.ac.uk/thornton-srv/databases/pdbsum.
We describe in this paper, some of the improvements that
have been made and the new features that have been added.
NEW LAYOUT
The most obvious change that has been made is to the appear-
ance of the web pages. These have been modernized, simpli-
fied and structured in a more logical manner and are now
generated dynamically. Each structure’s home page now pro-
vides a thumbnail image(s) of the structure plus, below it, an
index listing the molecules it contains, in terms of protein
chain(s), DNA–RNA chains, small-molecule ligands, metal
ions and number of water molecules. Clicking on the items
in the index takes you to the analyses provided for that mole-
cule type (secondary structure diagrams for protein chains,
protein–ligand interactions for the ligands, and so on). The
index thus provides an at-a-glance summary of the molecules
contained in the PDB entry.
Much duplication of redundant information has been
removed. Thus, for example, where a structure contains multi-
ple copies of the same protein chain, only a representative
chain is described in detail; previously all structures were
rather unnecessarily described. This is reflected in the
index, which groups together or separates the protein chains
accordingly. So you can immediately see that, say, the struc-
ture consists of four chains (A, B, C and D) which are all
equivalent, or conversely, that the structure consists of two
dissimilar protein chains, A and B, etc. Similarly, for ligands,
multiple copies of the same ligand, making identical interac-
tions with equivalent protein chains, are now shown only once.
In addition to the thumbnail image and index of contents,
the home page of each entry also provides the usual descriptive
information (such as title, authors, date of deposition), links to
other sequence and structure databases, summary PRO-
CHECK (4) analyses and a button for viewing the structure
in RasMol (5).
A novel feature is a link to a server that allows you to
automatically generate your own image of the structure via
MolScript (6) and Raster3d (7). Another new feature, for most
enzyme structures, is a diagram of the reaction catalysed by the
enzyme. The diagram shows chemical drawings of the reac-
tants, products and, where relevant, cofactors. The drawings
are generated from mol2 files that were downloaded from the
KEGG (8) ftp site. Of particular interest are structures where
the bound ligand corresponds to, or is similar, to one of the
molecules involved in the reaction. These are identified on the
diagram with their percentage similarity to the molecule in
question. Similarities are calculated by using a simple graph-
match between the atom types and connectivities of the
structure’s ligands and the reaction molecules. Figure 1
shows an example.
PROTEIN PAGES
Each representative protein chain in a given structure has
its own page holding a ‘wiring diagram’ of its secondary
structure, plus domain organization as given in the CATH fold
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +44 1223 492 542; Fax: +44 1223 494 468; Email: roman@ebi.ac.uk
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use permissions, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org.
ª 2005, the authors
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 33, Database issue ª Oxford University Press 2005; all rights reserved
D266–D268 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gki001
classification database (9). As before, a detailed analysis of the
secondary structure motifs is provided, via PROMOTIF (10),
and any valid PROSITE patterns (11) contained within the
sequence are mapped to the 3D structure (12) via RasMol.
There are two new features on these pages. The first is the
thumbnail image, which shows the chain in question in solid
representation, any identical chains as semi-transparent and all
other molecules in the structure as transparent. Clicking on the
image brings up a picture of the chain itself. For large and
complex structures, this can help locate the chain in the struc-
ture as a whole.
The second novel feature is the inclusion of residue con-
servation data, where available. It is well known that highly
conserved residues are usually crucial to the function of the
protein, and their location on the surface of the protein can
pinpoint the functionally active region. The conservation of
each residue is computed by the ConSurf (13) program, which
uses multiple sequence alignments of the protein chain against
homologues in the sequence databases. The residues are
coloured according to their conservation score on the wiring
diagram and a RasMol view of the protein’s surface shows the
most and least highly conserved regions on the surface (see
Figure 2). An alternative view of the 3D structure, again using
RasMol, is provided by using the ConSurf colouring scheme.
LIGAND AND METAL ION PAGES
The ligand pages show the various ligand molecules and metal
ions bound to the protein or DNA molecules in the structure.
Where there are many instances of the same ligand or metal,
only a representative example is given; identical molecules
making identical interactions with equivalent protein chains
are merely listed. Such rationalization is necessary as some
structures these days have staggeringly large numbers of
bound ligands—see for example PDB code 1qzv, which has
no fewer than 334 alpha-chlorophyll A molecules, plus others,
bound to a large complex of 32 protein chains corresponding
to plant photosystem I.
THE ENZYME STRUCTURES DATABASE
(EC ! PDB)
The Enzyme Structures Database, http://www.ebi.ac.uk/
thornton-srv/databases/enzymes, is a subset of PDBsum,which
provides a separate grouping of all the enzymes structures in
the PDB, classified by their enzyme classification (EC) num-
bers (14). The database preserves the hierarchy of the EC
numbering scheme, showing the number of PDB structures
belonging to the class at each level. At the lowest level, the
listed PDB codes link directly to their PDBsum pages. Where
any of the listed structures contain ligands that resemble, or
correspond to, any of the reaction molecules, this resemblance
is given by a percentage similarity. This helps identify struc-
tures, belonging to a specific enzyme class, which may be the
most informative in terms of where and how the cognate
ligand(s) bind.
The EC hierarchy, descriptions, reactions and reaction
molecules are obtained from the ENZYME database (15).
The molecule definitions are downloaded as mol2 files from
the KEGG ftp site, as mentioned above.
Figure 2. Surface of the glucosamine 6-phosphate synthase structure (PDB
code 1gdo) coloured by residue conservation: red and pink for the most
highly conserved regions, and blue for the most variable. The bound
ligand—an L-glutamate—can be seen in spacefill representation within the
highly conserved binding pocket. Also bound are an acetate ion and a
sodium ion (green sphere).
Figure 1. Diagram showing the reaction catalysed by enzymes of class E.C.2.6.1.16—the glucosamine 6-phosphate synthases. The diagram is taken from the
PDBsumpage for 1gdo,where the bound ligand—an L-glutamate—corresponds to one of the enzyme’s products and is highlightedwith a blue border in the diagram.
Clicking on the highlighted molecule goes to the corresponding ligand page.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D267
PDBsum HIGHLIGHTS
A new feature, accessed from the PDBsum home page, is the
Highlights page. This tabulates the most extreme entries in the
database in terms of various attributes: oldest depositions,
youngest, largest, smallest, longest chain, most ligands, high-
est resolution, lowest, and so on (see Figure 3). This helps
locate some of the more unusual structures that have been
solved to date! More highlights are planned as the PDB is
full of the weird and the wonderful.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Wewould like to thanktheMSDgroupformaking theirdatabase
available for the extraction of PDB to SWISS-PROT and EC
numbermappings.Wealso thankDrNir-BenTal formaking the
ConSurf residue conservation data available and Dr Fabian
Glaser and Yossi Rosenberg for setting up an ftp mirror for
regular retrieval of these data. The development of the new
version of PDBsum has been funded by the Wellcome Trust.
REFERENCES
1. Laskowski,R.A., Hutchinson,E.G., Michie,A.D., Wallace,A.C.,
Jones,M.L., Thornton,J.M. (1997) PDBsum: a web-based database of
summaries and analyses of all PDB structures. Trends Biochem. Sci.,
22, 488–490.
2. Laskowski,R.A. (2001) PDBsum: summaries and analyses of PDB
structures. Nucleic Acids Res., 29, 221–222.
3. H.M. Berman,H.M., Westbrook,J., Feng,Z., Gilliland,G., Bhat,T.N.,
Weissig,H., Shindyalov,I.N., Bourne,P.E. (2000)The ProteinDataBank.
Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 235–242.
4. Laskowski,R.A., MacArthur,M.W., Moss,D.S., Thornton,J.M. (1993)
PROCHECK—a program to check the stereochemical quality of protein
structures. J. Appl. Crystallogr., 26, 283–291.
5. Sayle,R.A. and Milner-White,E.J. (1995) RASMOL: biomolecular
graphics for all. Trends Biochem. Sci., 20, 374–376.
6. Kraulis,P.J. (1991) MOLSCRIPT: a program to produce both detailed
and schematic plots of protein structures. J. Appl. Crystallogr.,
24, 946–950.
7. Merritt,E.A. and Bacon,D.J. (1997) Raster3D: photorealistic molecular
graphics. Methods Enzymol., 277, 505–524.
8. Kanehisa,M., Goto,S. (2000) KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
Genomes. Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 27–30.
9. Pearl,F.M.G, Lee,D., Bray,J.E, Sillitoe,I., Todd,A.E., Harrison,A.P.,
Thornton,J.M. and Orengo,C.A. (2000) Assigning genomic sequences to
CATH. Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 277–282.
10. Hutchinson,E.G. and Thornton,J.M. (1996) PROMOTIF — a program
to identify and analyze structural motifs in proteins. Prot. Sci., 5,
212–220.
11. Hulo,N., Sigrist,C.J.A., Le Saux,V., Langendijk-Genevaux,P.S.,
Bordoli,L., Gattiker,A., De Castro,E., Bucher,P. and Bairoch,A. (2004)
Recent improvements to the PROSITE database. Nucleic Acids Res.,
32, D134–D137.
12. Kasuya,A. and Thornton,J.M. (1999) Three-dimensional structure
analysis of PROSITE patterns. J. Mol. Biol., 286, 1673–1691.
13. Glaser,F., Pupko,T., Paz,I., Bell,R.E., Bechor-Shental,D., Martz,E. and
Ben-Tal,N. (2003) ConSurf: identification of functional regions in
proteins by surface-mapping of phylogenetic information.
Bioinformatics, 19, 163–164.
14. Bielka,H., Dixon,H.B.F., Karlson,P., Liebecq,C., Sharon,N.,
van Lenten,E.J., Velick,S.F., Vliegenthart,J.F.G. and Webb,E.C.
(1992) E.C. enzyme nomenclature 1992: recommendations of the
Nomenclature Committee of the International Union Of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology on the nomenclature and classification of
enzymes. Nomenclature Committee of the International
Union of Biochemistry. Academic Press, Inc., Ltd, London.
15. Bairoch,A. (2000) The ENZYME database in 2000. Nucleic Acids Res.,
28, 304–305.
Figure 3. Example of one of the PDBsum highlights listings, here showing the top five structures in terms of the highest quoted resolution.
D268 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
