Onto-Tools, the toolkit of the modern biologist:
Onto-Express, Onto-Compare, Onto-Design
and Onto-Translate
Sorin Draghici*, Purvesh Khatri, Pratik Bhavsar, Abhik Shah, Stephen A. Krawetz1 and
Michael A. Tainsky2
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, 431 State Hall, Detroit, MI 48202, USA, 1Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology and 2Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Karmanos Cancer Institute,
Detroit, MI, USA
Received February 17, 2003; Revised March 12, 2003; Accepted April 14, 2003
ABSTRACT
Onto-Tools is a set of four seamlessly integrated
databases: Onto-Express, Onto-Compare, Onto-
Design and Onto-Translate. Onto-Express is able to
automatically translate lists of genes found to be
differentially regulated in a given condition into
functional proﬁles characterizing the impact of the
condition studied upon various biological processes
and pathways. OE constructs functional proﬁles
(using Gene Ontology terms) for the following
categories: biochemical function, biological pro-
cess, cellular role, cellular component, molecular
function and chromosome location. Statistical sig-
niﬁcance values are calculated for each category.
Once the initial exploratory analysis identiﬁed a
number of relevant biological processes, speciﬁc
mechanisms of interactions can be hypothesized for
the conditions studied. Currently, many commercial
arrays are available for the investigation of speciﬁc
mechanisms. Each such array is characterized by a
biological bias determined by the extent to which the
genes present on the array represent speciﬁc path-
ways. Onto-Compare is a tool that allows efﬁcient
comparisons of any sets of commercial or custom
arrays. Using Onto-Compare, a researcher can
determine quickly which array, or set of arrays,
covers best the hypotheses studied. In many situa-
tions, no commercial arrays are available for speciﬁc
biological mechanisms. Onto-Design is a tool that
allows the user to select genes that represent given
functional categories. Onto-Translate allows the
user to translate easily lists of accession numbers,
UniGene clusters and Affymetrix probes into one
another. All tools above are seamlessly integrated.
The Onto-Tools are available online at http://vortex.
cs.wayne.edu/Projects.html.
INTRODUCTION
Microarrays are at the center of a revolution in biotechnology,
allowing researchers to screen tens of thousands of genes
simultaneously, generating a staggering amount of data. The
current challenge is to analyze these data and translate them
into an understanding of the underlying biological pheno-
menon. A microarray experiment can be broadly divided into
two steps. The first step is usually an exploratory search in
which one tries to identify a subset of genes that may be
playing an important role and formulate a hypothesis about the
phenomenon studied. The second step usually is a very
focused research that usually involves a small number of
pathways and processes as required by the hypothesis
proposed. Typically, the result of the first exploratory step is
a set of differentially regulated genes. A major challenge is to
translate this set of differentially regulated genes into a better
biological understanding of the phenomenon that would allow
a subsequent formulation of research hypotheses. This is
usually accomplished by a tedious search of the literature and
various online genomic databases such as NCBI, EMBL and
DDBJ. Searching various online databases is an enormous task
as different databases refer to the same piece of information
differently and complementary information about the same
gene may be stored in many different databases.
After finding a set of differentially regulated genes and
formulating various hypotheses based on such genes, the
research usually focuses on a small number of biological
processes believed to be highly relevant. However, in many
cases, even a small number of biological processes from few
pathways may still involve hundreds of genes thus making
microarrays the preferred tool. This focused research is best
carried out by using an appropriately focused microarray that
contains a set of genes that are only related to the problem
at hand. Literally tens of focused commercial microarrays are
available today. Some pathways are covered by several
competing commercial microarrays using different sets of
genes. Each such microarray will exhibit a biological bias
determined by the choice of the particular genes present on the
array. Furthermore, in spite of the large number of custom
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: þ1 3135775484; Fax: þ1 3135776868; Email: sod@cs.wayne.edu
# 2003 Oxford University Press Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 13 3775–3781
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkg624
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 31, No. 13 # Oxford University Press 2003; all rights reserved
arrays currently available, not every possible biological
problem will have a commercial array available. In many
cases, a researcher may need, or choose, to design a microarray
that is appropriate for testing their hypothesis.
This paper describes the Onto-Tools annotation databases
together with a set of ontology-based tools that help address
the problems identified above. Onto-Express (OE) is a tool
designed to mine the available functional annotation data and
help the researcher find relevant biological processes. Many
months of tedious and inexact manual searches are substituted
by a few minutes of fully automated analysis. Onto-Compare
(OC) helps researchers analyze the biological bias of various
commercial microarrays in order to find the array, or
combination of arrays, that is best suited to investigate a given
biological hypothesis. If one cannot find a suitable commercial
microarray, Onto-Design (OD) is a tool that allows to quickly
design a microarray by constructing an optimal set of genes for
a given set of biological processes or pathways. Finally, Onto-
Translate is a utility that allows quick conversions among a list
of probe identifiers (IDs), accession numbers or cluster IDs.
These tools are freely available at: http://vortex.cs.wayne.edu/
Projects.html.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Onto-Express
Microarrays have been introduced as powerful tools able to
screen a large number of genes in an efficient manner. The
typical result of a microarray experiment is a number of gene
expression profiles, which in turn are used to generate hypo-
theses and locate effects on many, perhaps unrelated pathways.
This is a typical hypothesis generating experiment. For this
purpose, it is best to use comprehensive microarrays, that
represent as many genes of an organism as possible. Currently,
such arrays include tens of thousands of genes. For example,
the HGU133 (A þ B) set from Affymetrix Inc. contains
44 928 probes that represent 42 676 unique sequences
from GenBank database corresponding to 28 036 UniGene
clusters.
Typically, after conducting a microarray experiment, inde-
pendent of the platform and the analysis methods used, one
selects a set of genes that are found to be differentially
expressed. These lists of differentially regulated genes need to
be translated into biological processes or molecular functions
characterizing the underlying biological phenomenon. This
poses a requirement to analyze the genes from a functional
point of view. Typically, in order to analyze a set of genes and
create their functional profiles, one needs to search the
literature and the various online databases. For example, a
typical analysis of a set of differentially regulated genes will
involve searching NCBI UniGene (1,2) and LocusLink (3)
databases for each of the genes in the list. This is an extremely
tedious and error-prone process. Furthermore, carrying out
these manual searches in a systematic manner and finding out a
simple frequency of a given biological process among
the differentially regulated genes may produce misleading
results (4).
Onto-Express (OE) (4,5) is one of the annotation databases
integrated in Onto-Tools. OE is a tool designed to mine the
available functional annotation data and help the researcher
find relevant biological processes (4,5). Many months of
tedious and inexact manual searches are substituted by a few
minutes of fully automated analysis. The result of this analysis
is a functional profile of the condition studied. In the latest
version, this functional profile is accompanied by the
computation of significance values for each functional
category. Such values allow the user to distinguish between
significant biological processes and random events. OE’s utility
has been demonstrated by analyzing data from a recent breast
cancer study.
The input to OE is a list of GenBank accession numbers,
Affymetrix probe IDs or UniGene cluster IDs. A functional
category can be assigned to a gene based on specific
experimental evidence or by theoretical inference (e.g.
similarity with a protein having a known function). OE shows
explicitly how many genes in a category are supported by
experimental evidence (labelled ‘experimented’) and how
many are inferred (‘inferred’). Those genes for which this
information is not available are labelled ‘non-recorded’. The
results are provided in graphical form and emailed to the user
on request. OE constructs a functional profile for each of the
Gene Ontology (GO) categories: cellular component, biologi-
cal process and molecular function as well as biochemical
function and cellular role, as defined by Proteome (http://
www.incyte.com/sequence/proteome). As biological processes
can be regulated within a local chromosomal region (e.g.
imprinting), an additional profile is constructed for the
chromosome location.
The probability model best suited to calculate the signi-
ficance values would use a hypergeometric distribution (4).
For a typical microarray experiment when the number of genes
on the chip N’ 10 000 and the number of selected genes
is K’ 100¼ 1%N, the binomial approximates well the
hypergeometric and, therefore, the hypergeometric was not
implemented. The w2 was also proposed for similar problems
(6). Finally, Fisher’s exact test is required when the sample size
is small and the chi-square test cannot be used. OE provides
implementations of the w2 test, Fisher’s exact test as well as
the binomial test. The user can select between the binomial
and the w2 test. If w2 is chosen, the program automatically
calculates the expected values and uses Fisher’s exact test
when w2 becomes unreliable (expected values <5).
Onto-Compare
Many microarray users embark upon ‘hypotheses generating
experiments’ in which the goal is to find subsets of genes
differentially regulated in a given condition. However, another
major application of this type of data mining is in experiment
design. An alternative to the ‘hypotheses generating experi-
ments’ is the ‘hypothesis driven experiments’ in which one
first constructs a hypothesis about the phenomenon under
study and then performs directed experiments to test the
hypothesis. However, specific hypotheses and a small number
of pathways may still involve hundreds of genes. This is still
too many for RT–PCRs, western blotting and other gene
specific techniques, so the microarray technology is still the
preferred approach.
3776 Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 13
Currently, no two arrays offer exactly the same set of genes.
When a hypothesis of a certain mechanism does exist, we
argue that one should use the array(s) that best represent the
corresponding pathways. This can be accomplished by
analyzing the list of genes on all existing arrays and providing
information about the pathways and biological mechanisms
covered by the genes on each array. If array A contains
10 000 genes but only 80 are related to a given pathway and
array B contains only 400 genes but 200 of them are related to
the pathway of interest, the experiment may provide more
information if performed with array B instead of A. This can
also translate into significant cost savings.
Many commercial microarray manufacturers have realized
the need for such focused arrays and have started to offer many
of them. Typically, a focused array includes a few hundreds of
genes covering the biological mechanism(s) being studied.
However, two microarrays produced by different companies
are extremely unlikely to use the same set of genes. In
consequence, various pathways will be represented to various
degrees on different arrays even if the arrays are all designed to
investigate the same biological mechanisms. This is an
unavoidable functional bias. Such a bias will be associated
with each and all arrays that include less than the full genome
of a given organism.
The Onto-Tools (OT) toolkit helps researchers assess the
biological bias of various commercial arrays through its Onto-
Compare (OC) tool. The Onto-Compare database is populated
with data collected from several online databases, as well as
the lists of genes (GenBank accession numbers) for each
microarray as provided by their manufacturers. From the list of
accession numbers, a list of unique UniGene cluster identifiers
is prepared for each microarray, and then a list of LocusLink
identifiers is created for each microarray from the list of
UniGene cluster identifiers in the OC database. Each locus in
the LocusLink database is annotated using ontologies from the
Gene Ontology Consortium (http://www.geneontology.org)
and ontologies from other researchers and companies. The
Gene Ontology Consortium provides ontologies for biological
processes, molecular functions and cellular components. The
data from these databases and gene lists is parsed and entered
into the Onto-Compare relational database. After creating a list
of locus identifiers for each array, the list is used to generate the
following profiles: biochemical functions, biological process,
cellular role, cellular component and molecular function. The
profiles for each microarray are stored in the database. The list
of genes deposited on a microarray is static, but the
annotations for those genes keep changing and are updated
automatically, as more information becomes available.
Onto-Design
In many cases, researchers prefer to print their own arrays. One
of the reasons for opting to print one’s own custom array is that
given the complexity of the biological research one may feel
that none of the commercially available microarrays represent
the targeted pathways and biological processes to the extent
needed. Other reasons may be related to the dramatically
reduced price of an in-house solution versus commercial arrays
and the ability to adapt the arrays to one’s own experimental
design and use of controls. In order to design a microarray that
constitutes a powerful and effective interrogation tool, a
researcher has to choose genes that are representative of key
mechanisms, pathways and biological processes. At present,
the choice of genes to include on a certain microarray is a very
laborious process requiring a high level of expertise.
Furthermore, this process is very time consuming, even for
experts, since they have to consult many online databases as
well as perform an extensive literature review in order to find
the set of genes that are involved in specific biological
processes of interest. Onto-Design is a tool that is developed to
assist in this gene selection process.
The OD interface allows the user to either upload a set of
functional categories of interest (such as biological processes),
or to browse through a graphical representation of a tree
representing the Gene Ontology hierarchy. Actually the GO
hierarchy is a directed acyclic graph (DAG), not a tree. The
internal structure of the database represents correctly the GO
but the interface is more conveniently represented as a tree.
Categories linked through DAG links not contained in the
tree are automatically travelled by the system in the
appropriate way.
Onto-Translate
In the annotation world, the same piece of information can be
stored and viewed differently across different databases. For
instance, more than one Affymetrix probe identifier (ID) can
refer to the same GenBank sequence (accession number) and
more than one nucleotide sequence from GenBank can be
grouped in a single UniGene cluster. The result of OE depends
on whether the input list contains Affymetrix probe IDs,
GenBank accession numbers or UniGene cluster IDs. In order
to illustrate this, let us consider an input specified as a list of 10
Affymetrix probe ids. Let us assume that the results show that
four out of 10 probes are involved in biological process A and
the remaining six probes are involved in biological process B.
Therefore the frequency of biological process A will be four
and for the process B will be six. In order to interpret this, a
researcher might need to use the data sheet provided with each
Affymetrix array (or the NetAffy web site) to map these probe
IDs into accession numbers. This reveals that the four probe
IDs for the process A correspond to only two different
accession numbers and the six probe IDs for the process B
correspond to another two different accession numbers.
Repeating the OE analysis using accession numbers will show
that the frequency of both the processes A and B is two.
Furthermore, mapping the accession number to UniGene
cluster IDs shows that all four accession numbers actually
come from the same UniGene cluster. Repeating the OE
analysis using cluster IDs will show the frequency of both A
and B as one.
This example illustrates that the user has to be aware of these
relationships between the different forms of the data in order to
interpret correctly the results. Furthermore, even if a user is
aware of the relationships and knows how to convert them,
most existing tools only allow conversions of individual genes.
This makes the process of translating hundreds of genes
absolutely unfeasible. Onto-Translate (OT) is a tool that allows
the user to perform easily such translations of entire sets of
genes. A user can input a list of genes specified by either
Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 13 3777
Affymetrix probe IDs, GenBank accession numbers or
UniGene cluster IDs, indicate the type of the list by clicking
the appropriate radio button and request the translation on the
input list in any of the remaining two forms by selecting the
appropriate radio button for output list.
Tool integration
All tools in the Onto-Tools package use a consistent interface.
Genes and functional categories can be prepared in advance
and submitted to the tools as a text file with one entry per line.
The results can generally be emailed back to the user.
As shown with the examples in the Results section, each of
the Onto-Tools addresses a specific problem currently faced
by microarrays users. However, the ensemble of the Onto
Tools is more than the sum of its components. This has been
achieved by seamlessly integrating the tools. For instance, it
is possible to use a general purpose array such as Affymetrix
HG133 in order to investigate a given condition by screening
a large number of genes. The list of differentially regulated
genes can be analyzed with OE in order to identify the
functional categories that are relevant in the given condition.
The user can inspect OE’s results and select a smaller number
of highly significant categories (see 4 for a discussion of
the significance values associated with the OE analysis).
Based on these highly significant categories, the researcher
might formulate a hypothesis about the underlying biological
phenomenon. At this point the user can seamlessly switch to
‘Onto-Compare’ in order to find and compare existing
commercial arrays that might be useful in the testing of this
specific hypothesis. If none of the commercially available
arrays covers the necessary pathways to a satisfactory
degree, the user can then switch to Onto-Design to create
their own custom array representing the chosen biological
processes.
Results can also be seamlessly passed between Onto-
Compare and Onto-Design. For example, the user compared
all available commercial microarrays for apoptosis, was not
satisfied with any of them and decided to create their own
array. After designing a custom apoptosis array with Onto-
Design, the user can click-switch back to Onto-Compare and
compare the newly designed array with any of the existing
commercial arrays. The user interfaces of the tools as well as a
possible navigational pathway through the various tools are
show in Figure 1. Future work will include an analysis at a
specified level of the GO hierarchy.
Figure 1. Onto-Tools (clockwise, from top left): regulated genes are analyzed with Onto-Express to find significantly impacted biological processes. Specific
hypotheses can be formulated based on such processes. Onto-Compare can be used to select those commercial microarrays that cover best the hypothesized
mechanism. If no satisfactory array is available, Onto-Design can be used to design a custom array for that specific set of hypotheses. Onto-Translate may be used
at any time to translate between UniGene cluster IDs, accession numbers and array specific Affymetrix identifiers.
3778 Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 13
RESULTS
Onto-Express
OE’s capabilities can be illustrated using an example from the
literature (4). A microarray strategy was recently used to
identify 231 genes (from an initial set of 25 000) that can be
used as a predictor of clinical outcome for breast cancer (7).
Using a classical approach based on putative gene functions
and known pathways, Van’t Veer et al. (7) identified several
key mechanisms such as cell cycle, cell invasion, metastasis,
angiogenesis and signal transduction as being implicated in
cases of breast cancer with poor prognosis. The 231 genes
found to be good predictors of poor prognosis were submitted
to OE using the initial pool of 25 000 genes as the reference
set. Our approach was validated by the fact that the results
included most of the biological processes postulated to be
associated with cancer including the positive control of cell
proliferation, anti-apoptosis, oncogenesis, cell cycle control
and cell growth and maintenance (Fig. 2). OE also identified
a host of novel mechanisms. Protein phosphorylation was one
of these additional categories significantly correlated with
poor prognostic outcome. Apart from its involvement in a
number of mitogenic response pathways, protein phosphory-
lation is a common regulatory tactic employed in cell cycle
progression.
Onto-Compare
In order to illustrate the utility of Onto-Compare, we compared
apoptosis arrays available from BD biosciences Clontech Inc.
(Palo Alto, CA), Sigma–Genosys Inc. (Woodlands, Texas, US)
and Perkin–Elmer Inc. (Wellesley, MA). Comparison of these
three apoptosis specific arrays using Onto-Compare is shown
in Table 1. Induction of apoptosis, tumor necrosis factor
receptors and caspases are represented to a similar degree on
all three arrays. Various interleukins are also reported to be
mechanistically associated with apoptosis at both protein and
gene levels (8–10). However, neither the Perkin–Elmer nor the
Clontech microarray contains any interleukin related gene. On
the other hand, the Sigma–Genosys microarray contains 14
such genes. Clearly, among the three arrays considered, the
Sigma–Genosys would be a better choice to test any hypothesis
involving the role of interleukins in apoptosis. Other processes
such as immune response, cell–cell signalling, cell surface
receptor linked signal transduction are also better represented
on the Sigma–Genosys array. However, it is important to
emphasize that the Sigma-Genosys array is not necessarily
better than the other two arrays. In fact, since the Sigma–
Genosys and the Clontech arrays have almost the same number
of genes, there must exist some functional categories that
are represented better on the Clontech array. Examples include
processes such as cell cycle control, oncogenesis and negative
control of cell proliferation.
Onto-Design
In order to validate Onto-Design, we used it to design an array
suitable for the study of apoptosis. We chose apoptosis because
several such arrays are available commercially. We compared
our self-designed custom array with three commercial arrays
from Clontech (206 genes), Perkin–Elmer (324) and Sigma–
Genosys (198). Our array has a similar size (250 genes) and yet
it covers all biological processes relevant to apoptosis equally
well or better compared to the three commercially available
microarrays.
Our custom apoptosis was designed in two steps. In the first
step, we selected all children of the apoptosis node from the
biological processes tree of GO. In order to minimize the
number of genes, OD was requested to provide a list of
Unigene clusters not unique to a biological process. The results
from OD are shown in the last column in Table 2. The results
are shown in (first step)/(second step) format.
In the first step, OD returned a list of 229 unique UniGene
clusters. The second step involved the addition of certain
biological processes, that are known to be relevant to apop-
tosis. These biological processes are shown in bold letters in
Table 2. OD returned a total of 700 UniGene clusters. In
order to minimize the number of genes on the custom array
designed, we used the Onto-Compare feature that allows the
user to manipulate subsets of genes. Arbitrary intersections
and unions can be calculated. We used this feature and found
that there are nine Unigene clusters common between
regulation of CDK activity and regulation of cell cycle and
10 clusters in common between regulation of cell prolifera-
tion and regulation of cell cycle. Also, there is no cluster
common between these two sets of nine and 10 clusters.
Hence, we have a total 19 clusters, of which three already
exist in the previous set of 229 clusters. Adding the new 16
genes makes the total number of clusters on the custom chip
245. The three Unigene clusters for RAS protein signal
transduction and two Unigene clusters for I-kappaB phos-
phorylation are only representative of their respective
processes. Adding these five clusters to the list brought the
total number of clusters on the custom array to 250. This was
our final design.
Our custom apoptosis array with 250 UniGene clusters was
compared with the apoptosis arrays from BD Biosciences
Clontech Inc., Perkin–Elmer and Sigma–Genosys Inc. The
results are shown Table 2, in the second half of the last column.
The comparison clearly shows that the custom array provides
equal or more number of genes for each of the apoptosis
related biological process compared to any of the commercial
arrays.
Figure 2. Significant correlations were observed between the expression level
and poor breast cancer outcome for 231 genes (7). This subset of genes was
processed by Onto-Express to categorize the genes into functional groups.
Red bar graphs represent genes for which the function was inferred, blue
graphs represent genes for which the function was proved experimentally
and green graphs represent genes for which this type of information was not
recorded in the source database.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 13 3779
Table 1. A comparison of three apoptosis specific microarrays: Clontech human apoptosis, Perkin–Elmer apoptosis and Sigma–Genosys human apoptosis
Ontology term Clontech Perkin–Elmer Sigma–Genosys
Total genes on array 214 346 210
Induction of apoptosis by DNA damage 3 (3) 4 (4) 3 (3)
Induction of apoptosis by extracellular signals 8 (8) 12 (12) 7 (7)
Induction of apoptosis by intracellular signals 2 (2) 2 (2) 2 (2)
Induction of apoptosis via death domain receptors 4 (4) 5 (5) 7 (7)
Anti-apoptosis 15 (15) 20 (20) 21 (21)
Regulation of cell cycle 30 (30) 30 (30) 12 (12)
Induction of apoptosis 16 (16) 27 (26) 23 (23)
Immune response 0 (0) 1 (1) 19 (19)
Cell–cell signalling 9 (9) 9 (9) 18 (18)
Oncogenesis 22 (22) 28 (28) 16 (16)
Cell surface receptor linked signal transduction 4 (4) 9 (9) 17 (17)
Positive regulation of cell proliferation 5 (5) 5 (5) 12 (12)
Negative regulation of cell proliferation 16 (16) 20 (20) 10 (10)
Caspases 11 (10) 16 (14) 13 (13)
Tumor necrosis factor receptors 4 (4) 4 (4) 4 (4)
Interleukins 0 (0) 0 (0) 16 (16)
Unique sequences (Clusters) 99 (98) 133 (132) 129 (129)
While some categories (e.g. induction of apoptosis, caspases and tumor necrosis) are almost equally represented on each of the chips, some other are very
unequally represented. For instance, neither Clontech nor Perkin–Elmer represent interleukins. Immune response, cell–cell signalling, cell surface
receptor linked signal transduction are better represented on the Sigma–Genosys array. Other processes such as regulation of cell cycle, oncogenesis and
negative regulation of cell proliferation are better represented on the Clontech array. The numbers represent sequences present on the arrays; the numbers
in parentheses represent distinct UniGene clusters.
Table 2. Comparison of three commercial human apoptosis arrays with our custom designed apoptosis array
Biological process Sigma–Genosys Perkin–Elmer Clontech Custom array
Unique sequences(Clusters) 210(198) 346(324) 214(206) (229)/(250)
DNA fragmentation 4(4) 3(3) 1(1) (4)
DNA repair 4(4) 9(9) 6(6) (2)
I-kappaB phosphorylation 2(2) 0(0) 0(0) (0)/(2)
RAS protein signal transduction 1(1) 3(3) 3(3) (0)/(3)
Anti-apoptosis 21(21) 20(20) 15(15) (53)/(55)
Apoptosis 16(16) 24(24) 15(15) (79)/(85)
Apoptotic program 7(7) 7(7) 8(7) (8)/(9)
Caspase activation 0(0) 1(1) 0(0) (5)
Caspase activation via cytochrome c 1(1) 1(1) 1(1) (2)
Cell death 0(0) 1(1) 0(0) (2)
Cell motility 6(6) 8(7) 4(4) (3)/(4)
Cell proliferation 20(20) 19(19) 21(21) (16)/(21)
Cell–cell signalling 18(18) 9(9) 9(9) (24)/(25)
Development 9(9) 4(4) 4(4) (11)/(13)
Immune response 19(19) 1(1) 0(0) (9)/(10)
Induction of apoptosis 23(23) 27(26) 16(16) (53)/(56)
Induction of apoptosis by DNA damage 3(3) 4(4) 3(3) (5)/(6)
Induction of apoptosis by extracellular signals 7(7) 12(12) 8(8) (18)
Induction of apoptosis by hormones 1(1) 1(1) 1(1) (4)
Induction of apoptosis by intracellular signals 2(2) 2(2) 2(2) (7)
Induction of apoptosis by oxidative stress 1(1) 0(0) 0(0) (0)/(1)
Induction of apoptosis via death domain receptors 7(7) 5(5) 4(4) (8)
Inflammatory response 8(8) 4(4) 2(2) (9)
Killing transformed cells 0(0) 1(1) 0(0) (1)
Killing virus-infected cells 0(0) 1(1) 0(0) (1)
Negative regulation of survival gene products 1(1) 2(2) 2(2) (4)
Neurogenesis 3(3) 5(5) 2(2) (8)
Positive regulation of cell proliferation 12(12) 5(5) 5(5) (3)/(13)
Proteolysis and peptidolysis 6(6) 7(7) 7(6) (7)/(8)
Regulation of CDK activity 4(4) 17(17) 16(16) (2)/(9)
Regulation of cell cycle 12(12) 30(30) 30(30) (16)/(32)
Signal transduction 56(56) 62(60) 42(42) (55)/(57)
The array is designed in two steps. The differences in the results of both steps are highlighted in bold letters and the changes in the number of Unigene
clusters are shown in the last column, separated by ‘/’.
3780 Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 13
DISCUSSION
The Onto-Tools package includes an annotation database as
well as a number of data mining and analysis tools.
Independently of the methods used to select these genes, the
common task faced by any researcher is to translate these lists
of genes into a better understanding of the biological
phenomena involved. Currently, this is done through a tedious
combination of searches through the literature and a number of
public databases. We developed OE as a novel tool able to
automatically translate such lists of differentially regulated
genes into functional profiles characterizing the impact of the
condition studied. OE constructs functional profiles (using
Gene Ontology terms) for the following categories: biochem-
ical function, biological process, cellular role, cellular
component, molecular function and chromosome location.
Statistical significance values are calculated for each category.
In most cases, the exploratory phase in which thousands of
genes are screened is followed by a more focused, hypothesis
driven stage in which certain specific biological processes and
pathways are thought to be involved. Since a single biological
process can still involve hundreds of genes, microarrays are
still the preferred approach as proven by the availability of
focused arrays from several manufacturers. Since focused
arrays from different manufacturers use different sets of genes,
each array will represent any given regulatory pathway to a
different extent. We argue that a functional analysis of the
arrays available should be the most important criterion used in
the array selection. We developed Onto-Compare as a tool that
can provide this functionality, based on the GO nomenclature.
However, many times, the research can be focused on
specific pathways or phenomena for which no commercial
arrays are available. In such cases, researchers may choose to
design their own arrays. One of the important issues in array
design is the choice of the genes to be deposited on the array.
In particular, it is important that the genes chosen represent
abundantly the biological processes and pathways relevant to
the condition studied. Onto-Design is a tool that was developed
to assist in this gene selection process. In order to validate
Onto-Design, we used it to design an array suitable for the
study of apoptosis. Several such arrays are available commer-
cially and we compared our self-designed custom array with
three commercial arrays from ClonTech (206 genes), Perkin–
Elmer (324) and Sigma–Genosys (198). Our array has a similar
size (250 genes) and yet it covers equally well or better all
biological processes relevant to apoptosis. This shows that our
approach is able to produce small and yet very effective
focused arrays. We also designed an array for the study of
estrogen regulated genes for which no commercial arrays are
available to our knowledge (data not shown).
Onto-Translate is a utility that allows a convenient trans-
lation between any type of gene identifiers (accession
numbers, UniGene cluster identifiers and Affymetrix probe
identifiers). All tools above are integrated allowing the user to
seamlessly pass data from one tool to another. The Onto-Tools
package is available online at http://vortex.cs.wayne.edu/
Projects.html. Users protected by a firewall must open port
8080 on their firewall in order to access these tools.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work has been supported by the NSF grant number NSF-
0234806, USMRMC grant number DAMD17-03-2-0035, NIH
grant numbers RO1-NS045207-01 and R21-EB000990-01,
and Michigan Life Sciences Corridor grant number MLSC-27.
REFERENCES
1. Schuler,G.D., Boguski,M., Stewart,E., Stein,L., Gyapay,G., Rice,K.,
White,R., Rodriguez-Tome,P., Aggarwal,A., Bajorek,E. et al. (1996) A
gene map of the human genome. Science, 274, 540–546.
2. Schuler,G.D. (1997) Pieces of puzzle: expressed sequence tags and the
catalog of human genes. J. Mol. Med., 75, 694–698.
3. Pruitt,K.D. and Maglott,D.R. (2001) Refseq and locuslink: Ncbi
gene-centered resources. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 137–140.
4. Draghici,S., Khatri,P., Martins,R.P., Ostermeier,G.C. and Krawetz,S.A.
(2003) Global functional profiling of gene expression. Genomics, 81,
98–104.
5. Khatri,P., Draghici,S., Ostermeier,G.C. and Krawetz,S.A. (2002) Profiling
gene expression using Onto-Express. Genomics, 79, 266–270.
6. Man,M.Z., Wang,Z. and Wang,Y. (2000) POWER SAGE: comparing
statistical tests for SAGE experiments. Bioinformatics, 16, 953–959.
7. van’t Veer,L.J., Dai,H., van de Vijver,M.J., He,Y.D. Hart,A.A.M., Mao,M.,
Peterse,H.L., van der Kooy,K., Marton,M.J., Witteveen,A.T. et al. (2002)
Gene expression profiling predicts clinical outcome of breast cancer.
Nature, 415, 530–536.
8. Aqeilan,R., Kedar,R., Ben-Yehudah,A. and Lorberboum-Galski,H. (2003)
Mechanism of action of interleukin-2 (IL-2)-Bax, an apoptosis-inducing
chimaeric protein targeted against cells expressing the IL-2 receptor.
Biochem. J., 370, 129–140.
9. Hodge,S., Hodge,G., Flower,R., Reynolds,P., Scicchitano,R. and
Holmes,M. (2002) Up-regulation of production of tgf-beta and il-4 and
down-regulation of il-6 by apoptotic human bronchial epithelial cells.
Immunol. Cell. Biol., 80, 537–543.
10. Schuhknecht,S., Duensing,S., Dallmann,I., Grosse,J., Reitz,M. and
Atzpodien,J. (2002) Interleukin-12 inhibits apoptosis in chronic lymphatic
leukemia (cll) b cells. Cancer Biother. Radiopharm., 17, 495–499.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 13 3781
