Brian P. Helmke
Choosing Sides in Polarized Endothelial Adaptation to Shear Stress
Print ISSN: 0009-7330. Online ISSN: 1524-4571 
Copyright © 2008 American Heart Association, Inc. All rights reserved.
is published by the American Heart Association, 7272 Greenville Avenue, Dallas, TX 75231Circulation Research 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.180836
2008;103:122-124Circ Res. 
 http://circres.ahajournals.org/content/103/2/122
World Wide Web at: 
The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is located on the
  
 http://circres.ahajournals.org//subscriptions/
is online at: Circulation Research  Information about subscribing to Subscriptions:
  
 http://www.lww.com/reprints
 Information about reprints can be found online at: Reprints:
  
document. Permissions and Rights Question and Answer about this process is available in the
located, click Request Permissions in the middle column of the Web page under Services. Further information
Editorial Office. Once the online version of the published article for which permission is being requested is 
 can be obtained via RightsLink, a service of the Copyright Clearance Center, not theCirculation Researchin
 Requests for permissions to reproduce figures, tables, or portions of articles originally publishedPermissions:
 by guest on February 28, 2014http://circres.ahajournals.org/Downloaded from 
Choosing Sides in Polarized Endothelial Adaptation to
Shear Stress
Brian P. Helmke
The endothelium is a primary integrator of biophysical andchemical cues that guide vascular wall physiology and
pathology. Normally, arterial endothelial cells appear elon-
gated longitudinally and rest on a basement membrane of
collagen type IV and laminin. In atherosclerosis, lesions form
primarily near arterial bifurcations and along the inner cur-
vature of the aorta where complex spatiotemporal profiles of
hemodynamic forces exist and where endothelial cells exhibit
a nonpolarized structure and upregulate expression of a
provisional matrix enriched in fibronectin and fibrinogen.
The regional heterogeneity in endothelial phenotype and
matrix expression suggests that lesion progression requires
transduction of mechanical cues associated with hemodynam-
ic wall shear stress and artery wall stretch into biochemical
signals for inflammation. Integrins have been proposed as
candidate mechanotransducers capable of differentiating both
physical cues and matrix composition, but an integrin-
mediated mechanism that confers directionality in response to
shear stress has remained elusive. In this issue of Circulation
Research, Goldfinger et al1 report that shear stress activates
protein kinase A (PKA) to phosphorylate 4 integrin locally
at the downstream edge of endothelial cells, and phosphory-
lated 4 releases inhibition of the GTPase Rac1 to direct
polarized reorganization of the cytoskeleton. The proposed
mechanism is important not only because it improves under-
standing of intracellular spatial organization in mechano-
transduction mechanisms but also because it suggests new
avenues for engineering a healthy endothelium after bypass
grafting or vascular stent procedures.
Spatial Organization During
Endothelial Mechanotransduction
Endothelial cells associated with an atheroprotective pheno-
type exhibit planar polarity characteristics that include elon-
gated shape, actin stress fibers oriented parallel to the shear
stress direction, and microtubule organizing centers
(MTOCs) located downstream of the nucleus. Goldfinger et
al propose that phosphorylated 4 integrin is localized
preferentially near the downstream edge of the cell and serves
as an early polarizing signal that is required for these
adaptations to occur. What transmits the direction of shear
stress to locations in the cell that drive these processes? One
possibility involves the apical plasma membrane itself. The
lateral mobility of lipids in the plasma membrane is increased
in regions downstream of the nucleus after onset of shear
stress,2 perhaps enabling increased activation of G protein–
coupled receptors.3 It is tempting to propose that this mech-
anism would also enhance transport rates of 4 integrins to
enable spatial concentration near the downstream edge, but
this hypothesis would require the unlikely assumption that 4
mobility is independent of interactions with the cytoskeleton.
A second possibility for transmitting directional cues in-
volves intracellular “decentralization” of force by transmis-
sion through the cytoskeleton from the apical surface to
locations where signaling is initiated.4,5 This idea is supported
by measurements of strain focusing in the cytoskeleton near
adhesions and junctions6 and by intracellular stress tomogra-
phy after onset of shear stress.7 For example, shear stress
onset induces coordinated displacement of stress fiber ter-
mini, adhesion sites, and extracellular matrix fibrils in the
downstream direction,8 reflecting a coordinated redistribution
of intracellular tension. It is likely that redistribution of
cytoskeletal tension in response to shear stress contributes to
spatially polarized phosphorylation of ligated 4 integrins, as
has been demonstrated for other integrins in nascent focal
adhesions.
Following integrin activation in this manner, spatial polar-
ization of downstream signaling is required for endothelial
cell adaptation to unidirectional shear stress. Shear stress
onset induces conformational activation and new ligation of
V3 integrins near the cell periphery, leading to transient
downregulation of the GTPase RhoA, and adaptive alignment
of endothelial cell shape and stress fibers does not occur if
any of these events is inhibited.9 Activation of Rac1 locally
near the downstream edges of endothelial cells is also
required for shear stress–induced alignment.10 Polarized Rac
activity promotes actin polymerization associated with lead-
ing edge lamellipodia, and endothelial cells in subconfluent
layers or at wound edges migrate parallel to shear stress in a
process termed mechanotaxis.11 However, a plausible link
that translates shear stress–induced integrin activation into
spatially polarized signaling has not been proposed until now.
An Integrin Whose Function Is Not
Adhesion Strengthening?
Most work in integrin mechanosignaling has focused on
explaining adhesion strengthening and cytoskeletal reinforce-
ment or stiffening under an external applied stress.12–14 In
these models, 51 or V3 integrins interact with “syn-
ergy” and “cell-binding” domains in type III repeats 9 and 10,
The opinions expressed in this editorial are not necessarily those of the
editors or of the American Heart Association.
From the Department of Biomedical Engineering and Robert M. Berne
Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Virginia, Charlottesville.
Correspondence to Brian P. Helmke, PhD, Department of Biomedical
Engineering, University of Virginia, P.O. Box 800759, Charlottesville,
VA 22908. E-mail helmke@virginia.edu
(Circ Res. 2008;103:122-124.)
© 2008 American Heart Association, Inc.
Circulation Research is available at http://circres.ahajournals.org
DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.180836
122
See related article, pages 177–185
 by guest on February 28, 2014http://circres.ahajournals.org/Downloaded from 
respectively, of matrix fibronectin. Although adhesion
strengthening occurs locally where forces are applied with
micrometer scale probes, evidence for spatial polarity in
response to a force gradient at the cell length scale (as might
be the case for shear stress) is lacking. The CS-1 domain of
fibronectin is a variably spliced segment containing the LDV
(leucine-aspartate-valine) consensus sequence of amino acids
that serves as a ligand for 41 and 47 integrins. Gold-
finger et al adhered endothelial cells on CS-1 fragment to
limit ligated integrin to 4 only. This strategy revealed a role
for 4 in sensing shear stress direction that may be distinct
from the functions of 5 and V in modulating mechano-
transmission and cytoskeletal reinforcement.
How does 4 transmit the direction of shear stress?
Previous work on cell migration suggests a mechanism.15 4
is phosphorylated on Serine-988 by PKA, preventing binding
of paxillin. Along the sides and trailing edges of migrating
cells where 4 is not phosphorylated, paxillin binds and
recruits a GTPase-activating protein (GAP) for ADP-
ribosylation factor (Arf). The Arf-GAP, known as GIT1,
decreases Arf activity, causing local inhibition of Rac1
activity. The resulting spatial polarization of activated Rac
leads to stabilization of a directional lamellipodium. Goldfin-
ger et al now suggest a similar role for PKA-mediated 4
phosphorylation in shear stress–induced directional Rac acti-
vation, lamellipodium stabilization, and cell migration. PKA
was responsible for phosphorylating 4, because PKA inhib-
itors blocked 4 phosphorylation at the leading edge, Rac1
activation near the leading edge, and adaptive elongation and
alignment of the cells. Thus, a primary role for 4 integrin in
establishing planar polarity in response to unidirectional
shear stress has been established.
Harnessing Mechano-Polarization Mechanisms
Several major questions remain to be answered to clear the
path for engineering endothelial wound healing after bypass
grafting or stent placement. For example, why is 4 phos-
phorylated by PKA only at the leading edge? In neutrophils,
exposure to a spatial gradient of PKA inhibitor is sufficient to
stimulate directional migration,16 but it remains unknown
whether PKA activation in endothelial cells is spatially
localized near the leading edge after shear stress onset. On an
in vivo matrix, local activation of PKA may depend on
crosstalk with other newly ligated integrins. Shear stress
induces activation of PKA and suppression of V3 confor-
mational activation in endothelial cells plated on collagen,
whereas PKC is activated and 21 is suppressed in cells
plated on fibronectin.17 Thus, elucidating the relative roles of
interacting integrin and matrix signals remains a hurdle to
solving directional mechanosensing.
Alternate 4 phosphorylation sites may also play an
important role in directional sensing. For example, overex-
pression in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells of 4 with
Tyrosine-991 mutated to alanine prevents paxillin binding to
4 and promotes leading edge spreading in response to shear
stress,18 suggesting that shear stress–induced tyrosine phos-
phorylation of 4 may counteract directional sensing inde-
pendently of paxillin binding. Interestingly, wild-type 4
expressed in CHO cells was phosphorylated on Ser-988 both
at the leading and trailing edges of cells migrating in response
to shear stress, and mutation of Ser-988 inhibited both leading
edge extension and trailing edge retraction. Thus, Ser-988
phosphorylation may serve a dual role to enhance directional
sensing in some cases.
Spatial polarization of 4-paxillin-GIT1 is not the only
mechanism proposed to regulate spatial activation of Rac.
Rac is activated in waves propagating from newly formed
adhesions in cells on micropatterned fibronectin substrates,19
suggesting that an alternative mechanism for establishing Rac
polarity exists that depends on new ligation of V3 or
51. However, a role for 4 ligation cannot be ruled out
because micropatterns were generated with full-length fi-
bronectin, so a “leading edge” would be determined by the
geometry of the micropatterns.
Biomedical engineers seek the ability to harness mechano-
transduction mechanisms to design substrates that enhance
endothelial wound healing for development of artificial vas-
cular grafts. On substrates coated with CS-1 fragment and
exposed to arterial levels of shear stress, retention of some
endothelial cell types but not others was improved, probably
because of variability in expression levels of 4.20 Even when
4 is exogenously overexpressed, the correlation between
4-paxillin–mediated signaling and adhesion strength is
weak.18 However, the ability to control directional migration
to enhance wound healing or reendothelialization may repre-
sent the real opportunity for improving therapies in patients
with advanced atherosclerosis. The mechanism elucidated by
Goldfinger et al represents a major step in the right direction.
Sources of Funding
The author is supported by NIH grants HL-071958 and HL-080956.
Disclosures
None.
References
1. Goldfinger LE, Tzima E, Stockton R, Kiosses WB, Kinbara K, Tkachenko E,
Gutierrez E, Groisman A, Nguyen P, Chien S, Ginsberg MH. Localized 4
integrin phosphorylation directs shear stress-induced endothelial cell
alignment. Circ Res. 2008;103:177–185.
2. Butler PJ, Norwich G, Weinbaum S, Chien S. Shear stress induces a time-
and position-dependent increase in endothelial cell membrane fluidity.
Am J Physiol. 2001;280:C962–C969.
3. Chachisvilis M, Zhang Y-L, Frangos JA. G protein–coupled receptors
sense fluid shear stress in endothelial cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2006;103:15463–15468.
4. Davies PF. Flow-mediated endothelial mechanotransduction. Physiol
Rev. 1995;75:519–560.
5. Helmke BP, Davies PF. The cytoskeleton under external fluid mechanical
forces: hemodynamic forces acting on the endothelium. Ann Biomed Eng.
2002;30:284–296.
6. Helmke BP, Rosen AB, Davies PF. Mapping mechanical strain of an
endogenous cytoskeletal network in living endothelial cells. Biophys J.
2003;84:2691–2699.
7. Hu S, Chen J, Fabry B, Numaguchi Y, Gouldstone A, Ingber DE,
Fredberg JJ, Butler JP, Wang N. Intracellular stress tomography reveals
stress focusing and structural anisotropy in cytoskeleton of living cells.
Am J Physiol. 2003;285:C1082–C1090.
8. Mott RE, Helmke BP. Mapping the dynamics of shear stress-induced
structural changes in endothelial cells. Am J Physiol. 2007;293:
C1616–C1626.
9. Tzima E, del Pozo MA, Shattil SJ, Chien S, Schwartz MA. Activation of
integrins in endothelial cells by fluid shear stress mediates Rho-dependent
cytoskeletal alignment. EMBO J. 2001;20:4639–4647.
Helmke Choosing Sides in Polarized Endothelial Adaptation 123
 by guest on February 28, 2014http://circres.ahajournals.org/Downloaded from 
10. Tzima E, del Pozo MA, Kiosses WB, Mohamed SA, Li S, Chien S,
Schwartz MA. Activation of Rac1 by shear stress in endothelial cells
mediates both cytoskeletal reorganization and effects on gene expression.
EMBO J. 2002;21:6791–6800.
11. Li S, Butler PJ, Wang Y, Hu Y, Han DC, Usami S, Guan J-L, Chien S.
The role of the dynamics of focal adhesion kinase in the mechanotaxis of
endothelial cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002;99:3546–3551.
12. Choquet D, Felsenfeld DP, Sheetz MP. Extracellular matrix rigidity
causes strengthening of integrin-cytoskeleton linkages. Cell. 1997;88:
39–48.
13. Shyy JYJ, Chien S. Role of integrins in endothelial mechanosensing of
shear stress. Circ Res. 2002;91:769–775.
14. Wang N, Butler JP, Ingber DE. Mechanotransduction across the cell
surface and through the cytoskeleton. Science. 1993;260:1124–1127.
15. Nishiya N, Kiosses WB, Han J, Ginsberg MH. An 4 integrin-paxillin-
Arf-GAP complex restricts Rac activation to the leading edge of
migrating cells. Nat Cell Biol. 2005;7:343–352.
16. Jones SL, Sharief Y. Asymmetrical protein kinase A activity establishes
neutrophil cytoskeletal polarity and enables chemotaxis. J Leukoc Biol.
2005;78:248–258.
17. Orr AW, Ginsberg MH, Shattil SJ, Deckmyn H, Schwartz MA. Matrix-
specific suppression of integrin activation in shear stress signaling. Mol
Biol Cell. 2006;17:4686–4697.
18. Dikeman DA, Rivera Rosado LA, Horn TA, Alves CS, Konstantopoulos
K, Yang JT. 41 integrin regulates directionally persistent cell
migration in response to shear flow stimulation. Am J Physiol. In press.
19. Xia N, Thodeti CK, Hunt TP, Xu Q, Ho M, Whitesides GM, Westervelt
R, Ingber DE. Directional control of cell motility through focal adhesion
positioning and spatial control of Rac activation. FASEB J. 2008;22:
1649–1659.
20. Rodenberg EJ, Pavalko FM. Peptides derived from fibronectin type III
connecting segments promote endothelial cell adhesion but not platelet
adhesion: implications in tissue-engineered vascular grafts. Tissue Eng.
2007;13:2653–2666.
KEY WORDS: mechanotransduction  planar cell polarity  integrin  Rac
 protein kinase A (PKA)
124 Circulation Research July 18, 2008
 by guest on February 28, 2014http://circres.ahajournals.org/Downloaded from 
