Leishmania/HIV co-infections in the second decade
Israel Cruz, Javier Nieto, Javier Moreno , Carmen Cañavate, Philippe Desjeux* & Jorge Alvar**
WHO Collaborating Centre for Leishmaniasis, National Centre of Microbiology, Institute of
Health Carlos III, Madrid, Spain;  Centre for Biological Research, CSIC, Madrid, Spain, *One World Health,
San Francisco, USA & **Neglected Tropical Diseases, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland
Received May 25, 2005
Leishmania-HIV co-infection has been globally controlled in Southern Europe since 1997 because
of highly active anti retroviral therapy (HAART), but it appears to be an increasing problem in
other countries such as Ethopia, Sudan, Brazil or India where both infections are becoming more
and more prevalent. Most of the scientific background on Leishmania/HIV co-infection has been
dropped from the Mediterranean experience and although the situations among countries are not
fully comparable, it is of high importance to take advantage of this knowledge. In this review
several aspects of the Leishmania/HIV co-infection are emphasized viz., epidemiological features,
new ways of transmission, pathogenesis, clinical outcome, diagnosis, treatment and secondary
prohylaxis. An extensive review of the literature on Leishmania/HIV co-infection has allowed the
inclusion of a comprehensive and updated list of bibliographical references.
Key words Co-infection - HIV - immunotherapy - Leishmania - pathogenesis
The development of the HIV/AIDS pandemic
during the last 20 yr has modified the spectrum of
leishmaniasis in both the clinical and epidemiological
fields. From middle of the 1980s, when the first case
of leishmaniasis associated with human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection was
published1, an increase in the cases of co-infection
has been registered; to date cases in 35 countries have
been detected2 (Fig. 1).
The increase in the number of cases of co-
infection arises from the overlap between the AIDS
epidemic, basically from urban transmission, and the
areas in which leishmaniasis is endemic,
Indian J Med Res 123, March 2006, pp 357-388
357
fundamentally from rural transmission.
Epidemiological changes, such as the increase of the
population in suburban areas where the vector and
the reservoir abound, have increased this overlap.
To date, the greatest prevalence of Leishmania/
HIV co-infection has been in the Mediterranean
basin. Of more than 2,000 cases notified to the WHO,
90 per cent of them come from Spain, Italy, France
and Portugal2-5. From the beginning of the AIDS
epidemic up to the era of highly active antiretroviral
therapy (HAART), between 25-70 per cent of all the
cases of visceral leishmaniasis (VL) in these
countries were associated with HIV infection, and it
Review Article
is anticipated that up to 1.5-9 per cent of AIDS
patients suffer a bout of leishmaniasis, either as a
new infection or as revival of a latent infection4. The
epidemiological data for Southern Europe indicates
that HIV infection is a risk factor associated with
VL6. A study carried out by Kubar et al7 demonstrated
that in zones of endemic leishmaniasis, such as the
south of France, about 10 per cent of HIV+ individuals
had an asymptomatic Leishmania  infection.
Similarly, in a series of HIV+ patients studied by
Alvar et al8 this percentage was to 17 per cent.  In
fact, two thirds of the cases of VL registered in
Madrid in the last decade were associated with HIV
infection6.
The majority of the cases of co-infection
registered in the South American continent happen
in Brazil, where the incidence of AIDS has increased
from 0.8 cases every 100,000 inhabitants in 1986 to
12.3 in 20019,10. In Africa the number of cases has
started increasing, affected by social phenomena such
as mass migration and wars11. In Addis Ababa
(Ethiopia) 35 per cent of all the cases of leishmaniasis
were found to be associated with HIV infection
(Berhe N, personal communication), while for Sudan
this percentage was 8 per cent12. In Asia cases of co-
infection are being registered in India, Bangladesh
and Nepal, countries in which the situation will be
aggravated by the phenomenon of increasing
resistance to antimonials13-15. Also leishmaniasis has
been described as an imported infection among HIV+
patients from non-endemic areas like Northern
Europe16.
Nevertheless, the real impact of Leishmania/HIV
co-infection is probably underestimated on the global
scale due to deficiencies in the surveillance systems.
The fact that leishmaniasis is not included among
the AIDS defining diseases of contributes to this
scarcity of information. For this reason, from 1998
the WHO, in collaboration with the United Nations
HIV/AIDS programme (UNAIDS), has created an
active surveillance network to determine the real
dimension of this problem5.
Considering principally the data from the
Mediterranean basin, it can be said that the
prevalence of VL in AIDS patients is between 100
and 2320 times greater than in immunocompetents
or other non-HIV+, immunodeficient groups of
358 INDIAN J MED RES, MARCH 2006
Fig. 1. Countries with endemic leishmaniasis and with Leishmania-HIV co-infection. (reproduced with permission2).
 global distribution of leishmaniasis;  countries that have reported co-infection.
people2,5,6,17-19. From this information it can be
highlighted that the AIDS epidemic indirectly reflects
the prevalence of latent leishmaniasis in the general
population19.
Particularly in Spain, the epidemiological view
of VL has changed since the advent of the AIDS
epidemic. Until 1985 the majority of VL cases
occurred in immunocompetent children, while since
then this proportion has inverted and up to 80 per
cent of the VL cases are related to immunodeficient
adults, the great majority of whom are HIV+6,20, 21. In
fact, in this country VL is the third most common
parasitic disease in HIV+ patients, after toxoplasmosis
and cryptosporidiosis22.
Co-infection in the HAART era
It is well known that the arrival of HAART has
modified the natural history of HIV infection and its
opportunistic infections, including leishmaniasis23-25.
Moreover, it has allowed a partial but substantial
recovery of several immune functions in HIV+
patients26, avoiding the need to use secondary
prophylaxis27-30.
The beneficial effect of HAART has been
demonstrated on other opportunistic infections, such
as toxoplasmosis, cryptosporidiosis and
microsporidiosis7, 31-33. A study carried out in France
demonstrated that the incidence of VL in HIV+
patients dropped from 12 in every 10,000 people per
year before 1996 to 7 per 10,000 per year after 1996,
the year in which HAART therapy was introduced
in this country25. Similar data have been published
for Spain and Italy34,35.
It is considered that the co-infected patients who
receive HAART have a better rate of survival than
those who do not receive it6,36. Once the immune
response has been restored, the patient shows better
possibilities of controlling the initial Leishmania
infection37. Unfortunately, HAART does not turn out
to be so beneficial when it comes to preventing
relapses.  It has been determined that between 38
and 70 per cent of the co-infected patients who
receive HAART end up relapsing in the 24 months
after the anti-Leishmania treatment34,38, the relapses
being able to happen independently of an increase in
the number of CD4+ cells and even with an
undetectable viral load. However, it should be noted
that the appearance of relapsing happens an average
of 7 months later in patients who receive HAART
than in those who do not receive it.
In spite of the positive data associated with the
use of these drugs, the benefits of this therapy are
only available to 5 per cent or less of the HIV+
patients in the world39. In developing countries where
HAART is not available, the incidence of
opportunistic infections like Pneumocystis carinii is
increasing40, which leads to the belief that the same
thing can happen with Leishmania/HIV co-
infection4,41-43.
Aspects of transmission
Although the geographical distribution of
Leishmania infection is restricted to the distribution
areas of the Phlebotomus and Lutzomyia vectors, the
HIV infection modifies the traditional zoonotic/
anthroponotic transmission patterns. The poor
therapeutic success rates, the high level of relapsing
and the high parasitaemia of VL in HIV+ patients, as
well as the atypical manifestations of the illness that
complicate the diagnosis and the difficulty of access
of these patients to the sanitary resources, mean that
the co-infected patients increase the number of
human reservoirs in areas where the transmission is
anthroponotic. In addition, these same characteristics
may help to create new foci of anthroponotic
transmission in areas where the transmission of
leishmaniasis has been traditionally zoonotic44.
In the countries of the Mediterranean basin, up to
70 per cent or more of the cases of VL in adults are
associated with infection by HIV.  Of these patients
between 50 and 90 per cent, according to the country
(Fig. 2), are intravenous drug users (IVDUs)21,45. A
common factor between these individuals is the
sharing of syringes and doses, such that Alvar et al8
proposed that this habit could be considered an
alternative cycle of Leishmania  transmission,
characterized by being artificial, epidemic and
anthroponotic.  A series of data support this
hypothesis, such as the presence of L. infantum
CRUZ et al: LEISHMANIA/HIV, CO-INFECTIONS 359
zymodemes in co-infected IVDUs that have not been
isolated in either immunocompetents or in dogs (the
natural reservoir of L. infantum).  Also, 52 per cent
of the co-infected patients exhibit amastigotes in
peripheral blood, which is rare in immunocompetent
patients46,47. Entomological studies suggest that
transmission is physically possible via shared
syringes, since even the small volume usually
engorged by a sand fly (0.3-0.5 µl) was sufficient to
initiate the spread of the parasite, in 100 per cent of
the studied cases.  IVDUs commonly can exchange
up to 0.3 ml of blood when sharing syringes, a
quantity that can assure the transmission of the
parasite and explain the high prevalence of VL
between HIV+ IVDUs48. This hypothesis was
reinforced by the findings of Cruz et al49 that
demonstrated the existence of Leishmania DNA in
the residual blood in syringes used by IVDUs.
Pineda et al50,51 and Del Giudice et al25 came to the
same conclusions after conducting different
epidemiological studies in which they measured the
prevalence of antibodies and the cellular response to
Leishmania in IVDUs, that the prevalence of the indicators
of Leishmania infection was greater in the IVDU
population, independently of whether HIV infection was
present or not. The results obtained by these teams indicate
the epidemiological importance that this group can have
in endemic zones of leishmaniasis.
Occasionally, the transmission of Leishmania has
been described by alternative methods that are also
shared by HIV infection, including blood transfusion,
congenital transmission, and in-laboratory
infection52. Therefore, even though no case of
Leishmania/HIV co-infection due to any of these
situations has been described, it is necessary to pay
attention to these possible methods of transmission.
Population at risk
Globally, the majority of leishmaniasis cases
happen in the HIV-negative population, where it is
considered to be principally a childhood
disease23,53-56. In fact, in the Mediterranean basin, the
majority of the paediatric patients with leishmaniasis
are HIV-negative57, with 3 yr old being the average
age of those diagnosed with VL58. In Bangladesh the
average age is higher, with the greatest incidence in
3-14 yr old, possibly due to associated malnutrition
(Bern, C., personal communication). However, the
association of infection by Leishmania and HIV has
resulted in a significant change in the age of the at-
risk population, leading to the largest number of cases
Fig. 2. Distribution of co-infected patients by risk group and country (n=1911). (reproduced with permission2).
360 INDIAN J MED RES, MARCH 2006
in people aged between 31-50 yr currently, coinciding
with the predominant age of the principal at-risk
group, the IVDUs2.
In the southwest of Europe, 65 per cent of the HIV-
and 83 per cent of the HIV+, patients that suffer from
leishmaniasis are male6,42,43, which reflects the density
of the IVDU population. This is the case in the
Mediterranean basin, where within the HIV at-risk
groups, the highest frequency of co-infection is
shown by the IVDUs25,59,60, who account for over
70 per cent of the cases2. Nevertheless, the
distribution profile of co-infection for groups at risk
is not homogeneous and depends on the local
characteristics of HIV transmission (Fig. 3).
In certain societies, the limited access of women
to medical care, due to social or cultural barriers,
can lead to underestimating the real impact of the
leishmaniasis among them. Though some
experimental models with mice suggest that they
might be less inclined to develop clinical symptoms
of VL55,61,62, it remains unclear if women are, due to
their constitution, protected against leishmaniasis.  In
fact, in Bangladesh the mortality associated with a
bout of VL is 15 per cent in women, while the same
figure for men is 5 per cent, though this could be
associated with poor access to medical resources63.
Among the HIV+ it is considered that between
33-78 per cent of the patients co-infected with a first
bout of VL must have had previously defined criteria
of AIDS6,17,19,22,50,60,64-66. Nevertheless, VL can be the
first infection related to HIV in 13-47 per cent of
patients6,17,22.
The size of CD4+ cells count is £ 200/µm3 in 62-
90 per cent of the co-infected patients and < 50/µl in
42 per cent of them6,25,46,66. However, VL also appears
in HIV+ patients with different levels of
immunodepression or in ymptomatics17,22,46,64.
There are studies that suggest that the success of
the therapeutic response may be inversely related to
the viral load prior to treatment67. Another fact that
also seems clear is that the patients who do not
receive HAART have more possibilities of
developing a bout of leishmaniasis and they show
Fig. 3. Comparison by risk group of the distribution of Leishmania/HIV co-infection (n=1911) in southwestern Europe and in Brazil.
(reproduced with permission10).
CRUZ et al: LEISHMANIA/HIV, CO-INFECTIONS 361
IVDU Homosexual Haemophilia Others
Heterosexual Bisexual Blood transfusion Mother-to-child
great risk of therapeutic failure, as well as of clinical
and parasitological relapse6,46,68.
Given that a good cellular immune response is
critical for the control of the infection of Leishmania,
two mechanisms have been proposed by which the
immunodepresion might allow the appearance of a
clinical VL bout16,46: (i) allowing the revival of a
latent infection, as happens with a large proportion
of the opportunistic infections associated with AIDS;
and (ii) facilitating the appearance of active VL after
the initial infection.
Microbiological aspects
The majority of the cases of Leishmania/HIV co-
infection has been described in adults infected by
HIV-1; however, they have also been reported in
patients infected by HIV-246. In these patients, the
VL is caused principally by L. infantum  or
L. donovani46. Other species of Leishmania, such as
L. braziliensis69,73,  L. aethiopica74, L.tropica75,76, and
L. major77, have been described as responsible for cases
of co-infection, according to the geographical area
concerned.
Three important considerations can be derived
from the microbiological aspects of Leishmania/HIV
co-infection: (i) a high variability of L. infantum
zymodemes affecting co-infected people exists78;
(ii) several new zymodemes have been described
exclusively in HIV+ patients, which have not been
discovered in immunocompetents or dogs of the same
geographical area46,47; and (iii) the anergy state of
HIV+ patients allows cutaneous Leishmania
zymodemes to visceralize and viceversa79. Various
dermotropic zymodemes of L. infantum, as well as
of L. braziliensis, L. mexicana and L. amazonensis,
have been described as causes of VL in HIV+
patients80-83. In addition, some visceral tropic variants
of L. infantum84 and L. chagasi85,86 have been found
in cutaneous lesions, and even in healthy skin of HIV+
patients87.
Pathogenesis of the Leishmania/HIV co-infection
Both infectious agents, in addition to producing
similar effects in the host, share target cells. Leishmania
infects and multiplies inside the macrophages, and the
HIV can also invade and replicate in these cells, in
addition to T CD4+ cells88,89. The presence of both
microorganisms in the same cellular type can have
important implications in their expression and spread90.
Both infections change the predominant cellular
immune response of Th1 or Th0 to Th2 through
complex mechanisms mediated by cytokines,
conferring susceptibility to both infections, according
to the murine model91. Among the cytokines changes
it has been recorded is an inhibition in the production
of inferon gamma (IFN-r), which causes a deficiency
in the leishmanicidal capacity of the macrophages92,
disabling their ability to eliminate the intracellular
amastigotes by means of nitric oxide’s toxic action93.
The effects of the viral infection tend to predominate
over those caused by the parasite, and the
immunodepresion induced by the HIV prevails over the
cellular response caused by Leishmania46. The depletion
of T CD4+ cells related to the HIV infection implies a
loss of T cells capable of recognizing Leishmania
antigens and of stimulating the B-lymphocytes. This
would explain the high valuation of false negatives in
Leishmania serology in co-infected patients, in contrast
to those found in immunocompetent patients, who
present  a  strong  specific  humoral  immune
response94-96. HIV also provokes an inhibition of the
proliferative response against Leishmania, favouring the
spread of the parasite, so that parasites can be
encountered in atypical locations, and high parasitaemia
is seen in these patients.
It has been observed that infection by Leishmania
increases the replication of the HIV, as much in in
vitro cultures as in co-infected individuals 89,
principally due to chronic activation of the immune
system97,98, which is one of the principal determinants
of the progression of the illness caused by the HIV.
The immune activation increases the expression of
viral co-receptors (CCR5 and CXR4), diminishes the
secretion of B cytokines99,100, and favours the entry,
integration, formation and release of viral particles101.
This brings with it an increase in the secretion of
tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a), interleukins
IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, and IL-10 and affects the cellular
cycle102,103. All this, therefore, results in a progression
of the immunodeficiency and a decline in the
patient’s survival rate104-109.
362 INDIAN J MED RES, MARCH 2006
Compared to HIV+ patients without leishmaniasis,
co-infected patients show a cytokine profile with high
levels of IL-4, IL-10 and IL-2 receptor (IL-2R), and
a decrease in the production (post-stimulation) of
IFN-γ97,98,110.
It has been proved that the lipophosphoglicon
(LPG) of L. infantum can induce the expression of
HIV in mononuclear cells of peripheral blood
infected in a latent manner111, probably due to the
secretion of TNF-a112,113. The initiation of the
expression of HIV has been suggested from
observations that mark a progressive increase of the
load of viral ribonucleic acid (RNA) in co-infected
patients, associated with an increase in the levels of
IL-4, IL-6 and IL-1097. In fact, the success in the
treatment of cutaneous, mucocutaneous and visceral
leishmaniasis has been correlated with the decrease
of the levels of TNF-a114. The response to the
leishmaniasis treatment in co-infected patients
depends on the initial viral load. Patients with good
response to the antileishmanial treatment showed a
marked reduction67 in post treatment viral load, in
contrast, post-treatment HIV viral concentrations
were markedly increased among patients with poor
response to anti-leishmanial therapy.
Therefore, it is seen that VL promotes the
development of the defining conditions of AIDS43
and its clinical progression. Equally it reduces the
life expectancy of HIV+ subjects. On the other hand,
infection by HIV raises the possibility of developing
VL by between 100 and 1,000 times (and sometimes
even more) in endemic areas41,43, it reduces the
possibility of post-treatment recovery, and it
increases the probability of relapsing6,21,41,43,46,68.
In this way, Leishmania/HIV co-infection
emerges as a very serious process, in which both
pathogens act in synergy.
Clinical presentation
Though the majority of infections by Leishmania
in HIV+ individuals show the classic signs of visceral,
cutaneous and mucocutaneous leishmaniasis in
immunocompetents115,116, the leishmaniasis associated
with HIV infection possesses several principal
characteristics: (i) parasitic dissemination via the
reticulo endothelial system without visceral
involvement, creating diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis;
(ii) it has been suggested that almost any organ that
contains phagocytic cells could become infected117;
Fig. 4. Prevalence of the different forms of leishmaniasis in the co-infection, according to area (reproduced with permission2,10). CL,
cutaneous leishmaniasis; VL, visceral leishmaniasis; MCL, mucocutaneous leishmaniasis; DCL, diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis.
CRUZ et al: LEISHMANIA/HIV, CO-INFECTIONS 363
(iii) atypical locations are affected as a consequence
of the parasite’s spread and deficiency in the cellular
immunity46; (iv) chronic progress and relapse115, with
each patient experiencing between two and three
relapses independently of the treatment received; (v)
poor response to classic therapy118; (vii) low presence
of anti-Leishmania antibodies, a factor that can be
observed in many endemic areas119; and (viii) the
prevalence of the different forms of leishmaniasis is
particular to each zone, in relation to the causative
species of Leishmania (Fig. 4).
The clinical aspects are comparable to those of
the classic disease19,65,115,119-121.  The period of
incubation is variable and can be related to age46,122.
During a bout of VL, other concomitant opportunistic
diseases can be diagnosed in 42-68 per cent of HIV+
patients17,64. The visceral form is widespread and
generally not only affects the organs of the reticulo
endothelial system but also unusually in many other
organs66.
A very important aspect in Leishmania/HIV co-
infection is the appearance of post-treatment relapses,
as happens to 27 per cent of patients in the first six
months after treatment and up to 60 per cent in first
twelve months19,123. These bouts are caused by the
reactivation of latent parasites because the immune
system is incapable of eradicating the infection,
although initially the patient may seem to have
recovered clinically22.
The prognosis of VL in HIV+ patients is very
different from that for immunocompetents.  The
levels of relapsing and of mortality are greater in the
cases of co-infection. Before the introduction of the
new antiretroviral therapies, the mortality of co-
infected patients reached 60 per cent in the first year,
of which 27 per cent died during the first month after
the diagnosis of VL124. Though the majority of the
patients die due to other diseases related to AIDS, it
is considered that leishmaniasis contributes to this,
causing immunosuppresion independently of the
HIV, and stimulating the virus replication.
Systemic signs and symptoms: The majority of co-
infected patients display fever, hepatomegaly and/
or splenomegaly, hypergammaglobulinaemia and
pancytopenia22,122.
Typically the splenomegaly is less frequent in the
HIV+125. The majority of co-infected patients present
some type of haematological cytopenia, the
frequency and the grade of anaemia, leucopoenia,
lymphopenia and thrombocytopenia have been
observed to be greater in this type of patient
than in the immunocompetent6,121.  The
hypergammaglobulinaemia has limited diagnostic
value because not only is it frequently found in VL,
but also in HIV infection per se and in other chronic
infections.  The constitutional syndromes (weakness,
anorexia and loss of weight) are frequent in 50-70
per cent of patients. The lymphadenopathy affects
15-60 per cent of patients. The disease tends to spread
to the skin and other organs, so that the presentation
outside of the reticulo endothelial system can lead
to clinical errors8,126,127. Between 7-17 per cent of the
fevers of unknown origin in HIV+ patients are due to
Leishmania infection, and 45 per cent of the HIV+
patients diagnosed with VL present fever of unknown
origin6.
Gastrointestinal implications : Gastrointestinal
implications are among the most frequent
complications in HIV+ patients128,129. Leishmania has
been identified in the gastrointestinal tract of 50 per
cent of HIV- patients with VL130, and also in those
who are HIV+.  The parasite can appear in any section
of the gastrointestinal tract130-139. In HIV- patients the
principal digestive signs are diarrhoea,
malabsorption, hypoalbuminaemia and loss of
weight.  However, these symptoms are not specific
in the AIDS patient, and therefore could have been
caused by another source140.  Besides, Leishmania
can co-exist with other pathogens in the same stretch
of the digestive tract141. Therefore, the endoscopy and
routine biopsy are the best diagnostic tools in HIV+
patients who display gastrointestinal symptoms of
unknown origin137-139,141. Endoscopic examination
gives very varied views, such as normal mucous,
oesophagus mucous with diffuse erythemas,
oesophagus mucous with extensive ulceration,
erosive gastroduodenitis, gastric ulcers and multiple
petechial lesions in the colon137,141. The co-existence
of Leishmania in Kaposi’s sarcoma lesions, ulcers
caused by cytomegalovirus, or in the oesophagus
caused by Candida or Herpes simplex have been
described137,141.
364 INDIAN J MED RES, MARCH 2006
Cutaneous and mucocutaneous implications: The
cutaneous involvement in VL is rare142; nevertheless
it is more frequent in VL associated with AIDS, being
observed in 4.8 per cent of co-infected patients2.
These lesions can occur simultaneously with a bout
of VL and can be papular, macopapular or nodular.
On occasions, the discovery of Leishmania is
associated with changes attributable to other
dermatological processes, such as dermatofibromas,
psoriasis, Reiter’s syndrome, bacillary angiomatosis,
cryptococcosis and oral aphtha, though its presence
does not necessarily imply a causal role84.  Cases of
cutaneous, mucocutaneous, and diffuse cutaneous
leishmaniasis and post kala-azar dermal
leishmaniasis (PKDL) have also been described73,143-
145
. On the other hand, primary cutaneous lesions may
spread to the viscera in patients with severe
immunodepression80,81,83.
The mucocutaneous forms appear in 0.3 per cent
of European co-infection cases2. Practically all the
species of Leishmania could be responsible for
mucocutaneous lesions in HIV+ patients, and they are
also not unknown in HIV- subjects due to other
species, including L. infantum146, distinct from the
subgenus Viannia.  Although nasal septum and the
soft palate could appear to be involved due to
metastasis, they might also be affected as
consequence of a primary lesion147. In the latter case,
taking a nasal biopsy is usually necessary to establish
the definitive diagnosis of mucocutaneous
leishmaniasis, a greater number of amastigotes being
observed than in the case when the lesion is produced
by species of the subgenus Viannia  in
immunocompetent patients.
If the opposite is not found, for any cutaneous
specimen from HIV+ patients in whom there are
Leishmania amastigotes, the first option to be
considered should be a disseminated form of VL
rather than a primary cutaneous lesion.
Respiratory tract forms: In anatomopathological
studies Leishmania amastigotes have been found in
the alveolar and pulmonary septums of 75 per cent
of the co-infected patients148. Nevertheless, the
clinical meaning of this finding is hard to discern
due to the fact that the frequent pulmonary form is
not normally accompanied by clinical symptoms or
complications and, when this happens, it is difficult
to differentiate the role of Leishmania from that of
other, more frequent, pulmonary infections.
Renal form and acute renal failure: Glomerulopathy is
associated with VL and not with cutaneous or
mucocutaneous leishmaniasis.  In 60 per cent of HIV-
patients with VL proteinuria, haematuria and
leucocituria have been described149. The frequency of
these symptoms is not known in case of HIV+ patients.
The pathological findings include glomerulonephritis,
which changes from mesangioproliferative, sometimes
associated with the focal and segmental collapse of the
capillary handles, to tubulointerstitial damage150. Renal
condition is not common in human leishmaniasis.
Nevertheless, a case of renal failure has been described
at the start of VL in an HIV+ patient151.
Other locations: A frequent aspect of bouts of VL in
immunodeficient patients is the appearance of atypical
signs. The condition of severe immunodepresion that
characterizes these patients facilitates the
haematogenous dispersion of Leishmania to tissues
that are not normally affected in immunocompetent
conditions152,153. These types of signs are more frequent
when the level of CD4+ cells is lower than 50 cells/µl
of blood2. The list of infrequent signs includes, in
addition to those described previously (cutaneous,
mucocutaneous, gastrointestinal, renal and
pulmonary), others such as pleural, laryngeal,
pancreatic, adrenal, peritoneal, synovial and cerebral,
as well as of the pericardium, myocardium and tongue
involvement46,59,84,117,139,148,154-160. A retrospective study
in France found amastigotes in atypical locations in
34 per cent of the HIV+ patients with VL, while finding
diagnostic evidence in only 15 per cent of the cases161.
It is important to bear in mind that the atypical
locations can be the first clinical manifestation of VL
in immunodeficient patients. However, the majority
of these manifestations have been described
previously, though with a low frequency, in
immunocompetent patients130,148,162,163.
Diagnosis
In HIV+ patients the clinical diagnosis of VL has
an even more limited value since in the AIDS patient
CRUZ et al: LEISHMANIA/HIV, CO-INFECTIONS 365
leishmaniasis can first appear in an unusual way and
with not very specific clinical signs159,164,165. To this
should be added that the splenomegaly is less
frequent in these patients6. An aspect to bear in mind
is that in 68 per cent of the cases of co-infection other
opportunistic infections associated with HIV also
appear which display clinical and biological signs
similar to those of VL21,64,66,165.
Microscopy: In this case the experience of the
microscope user is fundamental, since they might
need to recognise Histoplasma or other organisms
that could infect these patients and lead to false
positive results.
For the microscopic observation of bone marrow
a sensitivity has been described of between 67 and
94 per cent6,22,166,167. On occasion, false negatives
could be present for several reasons, as for example,
the presence of a low number of leishmania infected
cells (as a consequence of pancytopenia) or the
sample is haemodiluted due to incorrect collection.
Another parameter that can affect the parasitic load
is if the patients have been treated with pentamidine
or amphotericin B against mycosis or
pneumocystosis168.
Amastigotes can be found in the peripheral blood
of approximately 50 per cent of HIV+ patients119,169,
although Delgado et al170 established that the
sensitivity of this method varies according to whether
the patient presents symptomatic or asymptomatic
examination leishmaniasis. The study of other samples
different than biopsies from blood or bone marrow is
not very common in HIV+ patients, though Montalbán
et al22 found a sensitivity of 87.7 per cent for the
microscopic examination of hepatic biopsies. A typical
feature in this type of patient is that, occasionally,
parasitation can also be observed in unusual locations
such as the lungs, larynx, gastrointestinal tract, rectum,
spinal fluid and others46,153.
Culture: In patients co-infected by Leishmania/HIV,
the culture of mononuclear peripheral blood cells has
a sensitivity of 67 per cent according to López-Vélez
et al152. Mathis and Deplazes171 observed a similar
percentage (64%).  This is interesting since, unlike
in immunocompetents, the choice of non-invasive
sampling turns out to be useful in the diagnosis of
leishmaniasis. The culture of splenic aspirate can
reach a greater sensitivity (63-100%)6,19, though due
to the danger involved in the collection of this type
of sample, myelocultivation is recommended for
these patients as it has a similar sensitivity according
to some other authors46,172. However, when using
culture for diagnosis, one should remember that some
special precautions are required in the routine
handling of leucocytic samples from AIDS patients.
Serology: In Leishmania/HIV co-infection, the
humoral specific response to Leishmania turns out
to be partial, weak or absent, due to the fact that the
cellular immunity is affected after infection by HIV64,
causing a decrease of total lymphocytes in the
production of antibodies95. Leishmania infection
affects the appearance of antigens to the B cells as
much as does HIV. Thus, the process of antibodies
production remains blocked173,174. This fact has been
confirmed by Mary et al175, who estimated that the
level of specific anti-Leishmania antibodies in
patients with AIDS was 50 times lower than in
patients with an intact immune system. Other authors
shown that the serology is positive for Leishmania
only in 40-50 per cent of co-infected patients22,176,
this percentage being inversely related to the level
of depletion of T CD4+ cells. Therefore, it is
recommended that at least two different serological
techniques are used in the diagnosis of every patient2.
Lymphocyte proliferation test: Leishmania is capable
of modulating the lymphocyte function177 causing a
severe immunosupression in patients with VL178,179.
During the course of the diseases there is a
pronounced depression of the cellular response to
Leishmania antigens179,180 and a polyclonal activation
of B cells with a high level of both specific and
unspecific antibodies181. The immune response of T
cells is crucial for the cure and protection from later
infections by Leishmania182. Therefore, after a
successful treatment, the proliferation of T cells and
delayed hypersensitivity against the Leishmania
antigens are developed179,183.
Though this test is currently not practical for
diagnosing a bout of VL, it is in epidemiological
studies in endemic zones to determine to determine
366 INDIAN J MED RES, MARCH 2006
the exposure of the population to the Leishmania
infection184.
In co-infected individuals this technique has
allowed the verification of the finding that the
absence of a cellular response to the Leishmania
antigens, on having finished the treatment, is
responsible for the high number of relapses suffered
by these patients185,186.
Indirect immunofluorescence test: Due to the
immunodepresion, this test applied on the sera of
Leishmania/HIV co-infected patients gives a low
sensitivity, between 11 and 58 per cent2,96 .
Enzyme immunoassay: Most of the assays performed
on HIV+ patients samples where by using the rk39
antigen, which is supposed to detect only active VL
cases187. Medrano et al96 established a sensitivity of
22 per cent for the rk39 ELISA in patients co-infected
by Leishmania /HIV. Other authors reported
a sensitivity of 20 per cent for the
immunochromatographic test and 62 per cent for the
ELISA form2,188.
Agglutination tests: Hailu and Berhe189 obtained a
sensitivity of 90 per cent for the direct agglutination
test (DAT) in a work carried out in Ethiopia, similar
to the result the same authors found for
immunocompetent patients. Vilaplana et al190, in a
study undertaken in Spain, found a sensitivity of 100
per cent and a specificity of 96 per cent for the
detection of the Leishmania antigen in urine by means
of KAtex.
Immunoblot: Studying the serum of 37 patients with
VL and 11 with HIV/VL using immunoblot, Mary et
al175 showed that the antigens of 14 and 16 kDa had
the highest specificity for VL. Those of 14 kDa were
detected in the serum of 92 per cent of the patients
with VL and 95 per cent for those of 16 kDa. The
same standard was found in HIV/VL co-infected
patients, although the 14 kDa band was not present
in any of the cases, whereas 16 kDa appeared in a
constant way for these patients. In another study
undertaken with co-infected patients, Medrano et al96
reported a sensitivity of 78 per cent for the
immunoblot technique, confirming that this type of
test provides an increase in sensitivity when detecting
anti-Leishmania antibodies. Similar results have been
presented by Moreno et al186, attributing a sensitivity
of 85 per cent to the immunoblot in the diagnosis of
these patients.
Molecular diagnosis - PCR: PCR has been shown to
be of great utility in the diagnosis of co-infected
patients. Analyzing samples of bone marrow,
Piarroux et al168 obtained a sensitivity of 82 per cent
for the PCR, whereas other studies showed 100 per
cent165. In 165 blood sensitivity samples ranged
between 72 and 100 per cent191,192.
Due to the relapsing character of leishmaniasis in
HIV+ patients, the PCR can be a useful technique in
monitoring patients post-treatment, as it can be
applied to non-invasive biopsies so avoiding
unnecessary pain to the patient when evaluating the
parasitic evolution during the follow up.
Real time quantitative PCR (RTQ-PCR): Although
the classic PCR technique is very useful as a
diagnostic tool it has some disadvantages, such as
the need to analyze the amplified products using
electrophoresis, and it has limited utility when the
parasitic load needs to be monitored precisely as it
is not able to quantify the obtained DNA.
The real time quantitative PCR allows continuous
monitoring of the PCR products generated during the
amplification process. Thus it is possible to identify
the cycle in which the PCR product is generated in a
logarithmic way and, by inference, the quantity of
the target DNA present at the beginning of the
reaction.  Provided that the amplification product is
monitored in real time as is formed cycle by cycle,
no post-amplification manipulation is needed.
The absolute quantification is realized in
accordance with an internal standard coamplified
with the sample DNA, or in relation to a standard
external curve obtained using the parallel
amplification of a series of known concentrations
of a sequence of reference DNA. An estimation of
the parasitic load in a given sample can be obtained
from the quantification of the target DNA. The
advantages, compared to the classic PCR, are a
CRUZ et al: LEISHMANIA/HIV, CO-INFECTIONS 367
reduction in the time needed for the assay and the
possibility of determining the parasitic load of the
studied sample.
Different approaches exist to monitor the
amplification of the products, generally based on the
use of fluorescent markers. An example is the
technology based on SYBR Green I, a detection system
based on a fluorescent agent that can be inserted in the
double stranded DNA. Another example is the TaqMan
technology, which uses a specific fluorescent probe for
a region of the product amplified during the PCR. The
intensity of the fluorescent signal accumulates at the
end of every amplification cycle and is related to the
quantity of PCR-generated product.
In the recent years, different methods of
quantitative PCR based on either the SYBR Green I
method or on the TaqMan probes have been applied
in the study of leishmaniasis. Bretagne et al193 used
the TaqMan system to determine the parasitic load
in the liver of mice infected with L. infantum; whereas
Nicolas et al194 applied the SYBR Green I system in
a study of L. major infection, also in mice. In human
leishmaniasis Schulz et al195 managed to detect and
to quantify parasites in different biopsies (peripheral
blood, bone marrow aspirate, skin and liver) with a
model similar to the TaqMan probes, although they
thought that its applicability to monitoring treatment
could be affected by high variability in samples with
low parasitic loads. On the other hand, Bossolasco
et al196 applied the real time PCR and also a
fluorescent probes model to monitor the parasitic
load in the peripheral blood of patients co-infected
by HIV and Leishmania  who had been under
treatment. Although the sensitivity obtained with this
method in the initial attack did not turn out to be
very high (40%), it allowed a relationship between
the parasitic load in the blood and the clinical course
of the VL to be established. Mary et al197 obtained
similar results and improved the sensitivity, also
using TaqMan probes, even though the variation in
the number of copies of the target that they used could
lead to a quantification calculation error between
patients infected by different strains.
Though the application of real time quantitative
PCR in the diagnosis and monitoring of Leishmania
infection is in an early phase of development, the
standardization of a method capable of determining
the parasitic load in a sensitive and reliable way will
be of great utility. It will find applications both in
the study of the effectiveness of treatments and
vaccines and as an aid to diagnosis.
Plasmatic markers with prognostic value: IFN-g and
TNF-a: As Leishmania is an intracellular parasite of
the macrophages, specific immunity against VL has to
come from a Th1 type cellular immune response that
can produce cytokine stimulators for macrophages
(including IFN-g). On the other hand, susceptibility to
this illness is associated with an impairment to generate
a Th1 response, generating Th2 type cytokines, as well
as high levels of TNF-a198-207. It has been observed that
oligosymptomatic individuals or those with subclinical
infection produce cytokines of types Th1 and Th2, with
low or absent levels of detected IFN-g.  These
individuals are in an intermediate position between
illness and protective immunity206,208.
IFN-g : During a bout of VL the natural killer (NK)
cells and the T cells produce IFN-r, influencing
the development of a protective Th1 response. The
product ion of  IFN-g ,  with the consequent
activation of the macrophages, is crucial for the
ini t ia l  containment  of  the parasi te’s
multiplication205,209-211.
In the asymptomatic or subclinical cases, the
production of IFN-g influences the self-limiting
evolution of the clinical symptoms and signs,
reaching in the spontaneous resolution of the bout of
VL208,212-215. Gama et al206 found that 48 per cent of
the children with asymptomatic infection showed
detectable levels of IFN-g, whereas this cytokine was
not detected in children who suffered the acute form.
Supporting this data, Carvalho et al201 also observed
high levels of IFN-g in oligosymptomatic individuals,
confirming the fact that resistance to the illness is
associated with an effective cellular immune
response.
As for the treatment of leishmaniasis, it has been
proved that IFN-g  augments the therapeutic
effectiveness of antimonials, both in VL and in
cutaneous leishmaniasis216.
368 INDIAN J MED RES, MARCH 2006
TNF-a: TNF-a is considered to be a prognosis
marker in VL, as its level is found to be significantly
higher in acute and persistent cases of the illness,
which then drops drastically after the parasite has
been treated217.  Though it is possible to detect TNF-
a in 100 per cent of the patients who showed
subclinical infection206, during active and acute bouts
of VL these levels increase notably with regard to
subclinical and asymptomatic cases80,206,218.
Moderate levels of TNF-a  facilitate the
elimination of intracellular parasites, whereas its
increase might predispose the patient towards clinical
manifestations of VL, such as fever, cachexia,
anorexia, pancytopenia and polyclonal activation of
B cells199,219. The blood pathogens induce the
macrophages in liver, spleen and other locations to
produce TNF-a, and the systemic release of TNF-a
causes expansion of blood vessels with the
consequent extravasation of fluids towards the
tissues. In this way septic shock can take place,
coagulating the extravased blood in the capillaries,
leading to failure of vital organs such as the kidneys,
liver, heart and lungs, which are compromised by
the loss of blood supply220. For this reason, it is
considered that high levels of TNF-a in serum are
correlated with the severity of human VL221, giving
it a principal role in systemic alterations and,
consequently, in the symptoms observed222-224.
TNF-a plays an important role in HIV infection
since it has been proved that it has a positive effect
on the replication of the virus111,225 associating high
levels of TNF-a in serum with the progression of
the infection from HIV to AIDS226.
Co-infected patients display higher levels of
TNF-a in serum than HIV+ patients not infected by
Leishmania, and these levels also remain high after
recovery from a bout of VL89. This fact contrasts
with that seen by others in immunocompetent VL
patients where the levels of TNF-a normalize after
successful treatment199,227.
Treatment
Given that HIV+ patients generally develop VL
when they are in a state of severe immunodepression
and are affected by other concomitant diseases, it is
particularly difficult to evaluate the effectiveness and
toxicity of drugs in these patients118.  Although
between 11 and 27 per cent of co-infected patients die
within a month after diagnosis of VL, these deaths
are rarely attributed to the leishmaniasis or to the
toxicity of the drugs administered to combat the
disease6,19,124. The clinical criteria used to verify the
response to the anti-Leishmania treatment, useful in
the immunocompetent patients, are of less value in
the immunodepressed. Only the initial remedy should
be considered as, if the immunodepression does not
change, the probability of a full recovery is practically
nil and the patient tends to relapse. The parasitological
response to the anti-Leishmania treatment in HIV+
patients has partially been studied6,19,22,64,124,166. Finally,
it is necessary to consider that other medicines
administered to HIV+ patients can increase the toxicity
of some leishmanicide drugs.
Pentavalent antimonials: The results of several
retrospective studies indicate a high level of
clinical response to antimonials in the patients co-
infected with HIV19,22,59,64,166. However, the drug
doses and the criteria used to identify the clinical
recovery were not uniform, observation of the
clinical cure turned out to be difficult due to the
co-existence of other diseases associated with
AIDS, and clinical progress does not necessarily
mean that parasitological recovery has occurred228.
In all these groups of patients a high percentage
of them relapsed during the year after the treatment
finished.
Moreover, pentavalent antimonials are known to
be more toxic for HIV+ patients than for HIV- ones6.
Effects described are; pancreatitis (becoming fatal
in some patients229), myocarditis and renal failure118.
In fact, these developments interrupt the therapy in
11-28 per cent of patients6,123,124,230.
Amphotericin B (AmB): More than half of the patients
treated with AmB showed a series of typical side
effects related to the infusion, such as tremors, fever,
nausea, vomiting, anorexia, headache, myalgia and
arthralgia231-233. The duration of the infusion dosage
must range between 2 and 6 h, to reduce these adverse
effects231,232.
CRUZ et al: LEISHMANIA/HIV, CO-INFECTIONS 369
The most important side effect associated with
AmB is undoubtedly the nephrotoxicity, which
occurs in many of the patients treated233. The
mechanism by which these changes take place is not
understood, though it is thought that it stems from
an alteration in the permeability of the glomerular
membrane234. The worsening, generally reversible,
of the renal function happens during the first two
weeks of treatment and occurs in 80 per cent of the
patients treated with AmB.  They usually recover
after the treatment is terminated though it can take
several months for the renal function to recuperate234.
Daily monitoring of the levels of creatinine and other
renal parameters is recommended when using AmB
treatment. When the level of creatinine rises above
3 mg/dl, the therapy must be interrupted until the
level returns to normal231. It is also recommended that
the treatment be administered on alternate days to
reduce the renal toxicity232. The use of lipidic
formulations diminishes the AmB toxicity,
supporting its therapeutic activity235.
Treatment can be started by administering the
AmB-disoxicolate in very small doses, increasing
gradually (0.1, 0.25 up to 0.5 - 0.8 mg/kg, etc.),
diluted in 5 per cent dextrose236. It should be
administered as an intravenous (iv) infusion over
2 - 6 h, with the treatment lasting about 4 wk. The
maximum daily dose must never exceed 1.5 mg/kg,
but it is possible to administer a dose of 1.5 mg/kg
on the alternate days because the elimination half-
life of AmB is very high237.
On comparing the parasitological effectiveness of
administering maximum doses of 1 mg/kg up to a
total dose of 20 mg/kg of AmB, every day or on
alternate days, it was proved that the two regimens
were equally effective, since all the patients
recovered and 6 months later no parasites were
observed in splenic aspirates, though the daily
schedule was more economic as it reduced the period
of hospitalization238.  If the dose is diminished to
0.5 mg/kg in 14 administrations on alternate days,
100 per cent aseptic curing was achieved at 6 wk
and 98 per cent at 6 months239. If the same regimen
is compared with the administration of sodium
stibogluconate (SGS) (20 mg/kg/day for 40 days),
the level of curing is 62 per cent, as opposed to 100
per cent for the AmB, which indicates around a
40 per cent resistance to the SbV in patients of India240.
AmB was also used in paediatric patients with a
dosage of 1 mg/kg every 2 days for 20 days, which
was tolerated perfectly, achieving 100 per cent
healing. Pregnant women tolerated this dosage,
without apparent damage to the foetus, and with good
results against the parasite241.
In a study undertaken by Laguna et al123 on HIV+
patients, the parasitological recovery was similar to
that shown by the patients who were treated with
pentavalent antimonials. However, the level of
relapsing in the first year post-treatment was similar
in both groups.
Delivery systems: One of the most significant
advances in recent decades in chemotherapy against
Leishmania has been the use of lipidic vehicles to
transport the amphotericin B. The drug delivered in
this way is rapidly captured by the cells of the
endothelial-reticulum system and directed
specifically to the organs rich in this type of cells,
avoiding the organs in which toxicity takes place,
prolonging the liberation and therefore the presence
of the drug in the organism. The pharmacokinetic
and pharmacodynamic differences between the
transported forms and the free drugs are due to the
changes which are produced in the distribution, at
the different levels of plasmatic concentration, as
well as to the changes that take place when the
plasmatic proteins bound, in their metabolism and
elimination of the transported drugs242.
It has been proved that the effectiveness of
liposomal Amphotericin B (AmBisome®) in both
adults and children is independent from the form of
administration (21 days with a dose of 1 mg/kg or
10 days at 3 mg/kg/day) and none of the
immunocompetent patients relapsed between 12 and
24 months after treatment243. When the treatment was
shortened by increasing the doses (5 consecutive days
and then a dose on the 10th day, up to a total dose of
18 mg/kg). With this regimen parasitological cures
were achieved, but renal alterations occurred244.
The liposomal AmB used in Sudanese patients
with complicated kala-azar was more effective if
370 INDIAN J MED RES, MARCH 2006
6 doses of 3-5 mg/kg were used (curing 88% of
the pat ients) ,  than i f  the same dose was
administered only 3 times (50% cure rate), whereas
if the patients were given AmBisome® (3 mg/kg)
over  10 successive days,  a  ful l  cure was
achieved245. When the effectiveness and tolerance
of  3 different  administrat ion protocols  of
AmBisome® (total doses of 14, 10 and 5 mg/kg)
were compared, it was found that Indian patients
(n = 30) responded to all 3 protocols. The blood,
biochemical and clinical parameters returned to
normal and after 12 months no parasites appeared
in bone marrow or splenic aspirates and the
symptoms of hepatic toxicity, especially in the
group that received the larger dose, disappeared
after 2-6 months246.
The use of the amphotericin B on lipidic discs
(amphotoricin B cholesterol dispersion, ABCD or
Amphocil®) in leishmaniasis therapy has hardly been
tested. It was used in Brazil, at a dose of 2 mg/kg over
10 or 7 days, with good parasitological results (no
parasites appeared in 19 of 20 patients treated) and
the clinical and biochemical parameters normalized.
However, symptoms of toxicity attributed to the
infusion (fever, tremors and respiratory disorders) did
appear, mainly in children247.  Amphotericin B in
lipidic complexes (ABCL or Abelcet®) represent an
important alternative in the treatment of VL.  A dose
of 3 mg/kg for 5 consecutive or alternate days achieved
100 per cent cure rate. Nevertheless, symptoms of
toxicity appeared during the first infusion day in 95 per
cent of the patients, and in 50 per cent in the last
dose248. To verify the effectiveness when reducing the
dose, 3 different protocols were evaluated: doses of
1, 2 or 3 mg/kg for 5 days.  At day 14 parasites were
not observed in the splenic aspirates, while after 6
months the cure rates were 84, 90 and 100 per cent,
respectively249.
In India, 11 patients with kala-azar were treated
with AmB associated with lipidic emulsion
(progressive doses of between 0.05 and 1 mg/kg
every day for 25 days with a total dose of 20 mg/kg
and 2 h of infusion) and 11 with free AmB (with the
same regimen, but with an infusion duration of 4 h).
The patients of both groups were cured clinically
(biochemical parameters, weight and size of the liver
and spleen) and parasitologically (splenic aspirate)
during a period of at least 6 months246.  Increasing
the dose of this combination to 2 mg/kg and reducing
the treatment to 8 days, also gave good
parasitological results. Seven days after finishing the
treatment no parasites were observed in the bone
marrow and no relapse had occurred 14 months
later250.
HIV+ patients and recipients of transplanted
organs usually need greater doses and a longer
treatment251-253. Two prospective, non-comparative
studies evaluated the effectiveness and toxicity of
liposomal amphotericin B in co-infected patients. In
the first one, seven patients were treated with 100
mg of liposomal AmB per day for 21 days (to a total
dose of 29-38.9 mg/kg). Of these, 5 patients who
initially showed parasitological recovery later
relapsed243. In the second study, in an attempt to
reduce the relapsing rate, Russo et al251 used high
and intermittent doses (4 mg/kg/day on the 1st to 5th
days, and then on the 10th, 17th, 24th, 31st and 38th days)
to treat 10 co-infected patients.  This regimen gave a
similar effectiveness to the low dose used by
Davidson et al243 and also was not able to prevent
the relapses.
The experience of using ABCL to treat co-infected
patients is very limited. In a study carried out by
Laguna118, in which co-infected patients were treated
by ABLC (3 mg/kg/day for 5 or 10 days) or with
meglumine antimoniate (20 mg SbV/kg/day for 28
days), found a similar level of effectiveness for the
three groups, although the treatment with antimonials
gave the greatest toxicity.
Pentamidine: To tackle the problem of the resistance
of Leishmania to conventional treatments, one of the
drugs that has been evaluated in the treatment of
human leishmaniasis has been pentamidine.  Berman
et al254 verified the sensitivity of Leishmania to this
medicine. Although at the beginning of the 1980s,
with 5 wk of treatment, high cure rates were obtained
in endemic regions (India), in the 1990s, in the same
zones resistances had already developed255.
Its mechanism of action is not known exactly, but
is believed to be related to the kinetoplast DNA256.
CRUZ et al: LEISHMANIA/HIV, CO-INFECTIONS 371
In 1993, Murray et al257 demonstrated that in athymic
mice (deficient in T cells) pentamidine was not
effective against Leishmania whereas it was effective
in euthymic mice.
The recommended dose depends on the salt used.
If it is in the isotianate form the dose is 4 mg/kg
(up to a maximum of 300 mg daily), if the
metilsulphonate is used, the dose is 2.4 mg/kg (up to
a maximum of 180 mg daily). Short treatment
regimes with low doses of pentamidine, which are
used in cutaneous leishmaniasis treatments often
result in myalgia, pain in the injection site, nausea,
headache and, rarely, a metallic taste. The incidence
and severity of these side effects are much greater in
visceral leishmaniasis treatments, with their high
doses over long periods, sometimes also inducing
hypotension, tachycardia and hyperglycaemias, and
even diabetes255,258.
In the treatment of visceral leishmaniasis, using
4 mg/kg, three times per week up to the
parasitological cure of the patient, 77 per cent of the
patients were cured after 15 injections (5 wk of
treatment) and 94 per cent after 27 injections (9 wk
of treatment), however, 21 per cent relapsed within
a year. In Colombia, a regimen of 2 mg/kg every two
days for seven days was used, with 96 per cent
effectiveness259. The treatment of VL needs high
doses of pentamidine for several weeks, and is even
more toxic than the treatments with antimonials.
Thus, this drug should be used exclusively when there
are reasons to think that it is going to be more
effective than any other, in geographical zones where
antimonial treatments habitually fail, or in areas
where this product has not been in use for some time
and therefore resistance has not been created and, of
course, in individual cases where other therapies have
not succeeded.
Paramomycin: This is an aminoglycosid antibiotic
with a short half-life, much used against intestinal
parasites. The mechanism of action against
Leishmania is not known, though it is possible that it
acts on the ribosome blocking the synthesis of
proteins260. The resistance to paramomicine that certain
strains of Leishmania develop is due to changes in the
membrane that reduce absorption. The promastigotes
maintain this resistance in the absence of the antibiotic
in the culture system and it is transmitted to the
amastigotes, which can infect macrophages261.
Paramomycin can be used alone or in combination
with other drugs to increase their effectiveness
against the parasite, with antimonials being the
preferred combination. According to Thakur et al262
the use of half doses of paramomycin partnered with
antimonials turns out to be the most effective
combination.  In the treatment of VL in Kenya,
Chunge et al263 used the sulphate of paramomycin
(15 mg/kg/day, over an average of 19 days), healing
79 per cent of the patients. In India, with the
combination of paramomycin (17 mg/kg) with
Pentostan® (20 mgSbV/kg) for 20 days, 82 per cent
of the patients were cured, a percentage similar to
that obtained with paramomycin alone for 40 days264.
Similar results were obtained in Sudan265.
Though monotherapy with paramomycin is
effective, it never reaches the levels of healing
obtained with antimonials or with amphotericin B266.
However, as already indicated, the combination of
antimonials and paramomycin is more effective and
allows shorter treatment periods. A recent Phase III
trial of paromomycin (PM) efficacy resulted in a cure
rate of 94.6 per cent at 6 months after EOT267.
Miltefosine: Miltefosine is a synthetic phospholipid
(alquil phospholipid), normally used as an
antineoplastic, with a very long half-life, which means
that resistance to it develops rapidly. It cannot be given
to women during pregnancy or lactation. A particular
advantage is that it is administered orally, however a
disadvantage is that this can lead to gastrointestinal side
effects and, teratogenicity in the experimental model.
Apparently it blocks the multiplication of Leishmania
and alters its phospholipid and sterol composition268.
Similarly, it seems that its anti-Leishmania activity is
not only related to a direct cytotoxic effect on the
parasite, but also to an activation of the cellular
immunity269-271.
Kuhlencord et al272 verified that this drug is
effective against different Leishmania species as much
in vitro as in vivo. This effectiveness has been
demonstrated in both acute and chronic murine
372 INDIAN J MED RES, MARCH 2006
infections, showing a very notable reduction in the
number of amastigotes after the treatment273. It has
also been demonstrated that using topical miltefosine
on experimental cutaneous leishmaniasis in mice
produced good results, giving a considerable reduction
of the parasitic load in the lesions, and it was found
that they did not usually reappear in the lesions after
the treatment274. The recommended dose in the various
recent clinical studies undertaken on humans in India
was 100 mg/day as higher doses can provoke toxicity,
basically gastrointestinal disorders, and it is
recommended that it be taken with food275,276. It is
believed that total doses of between 2,100 and 3,850
mg were used in a clinical assay with 120 Indian
patients with VL, which achieved parasitological cure
(absence of parasites in splenic aspirates two weeks
after the treatment ended) and clinic healing in 97 per
cent of the patients, with no relapsing in the following
six months277. In another clinical assay the conclusion
was reached that the effective treatments must last
between 21 and 28 days with a recommended dose of
100mg/day278. It has only been in use in a limited
number of co-infected patients in a compassionate
way, though the most suitable protocol has still not
yet been established279,280.
Allopurinol: In general, the reports published with
regard to allopurinol are quite contradictory. Kager
et al281 treated 10 Kenyan patients only with
allopurinol and cured three. However, Jha in 1983282
treated 16 patients in India and cured 13. The
combination of allopurinol with ketoconzol was
shown to have been successful in a kidney
transplanted patient with VL283 and in cases of
cutaneous leishmaniasis in the New World284.
The combination of allopurinol and antimonials has
been widely used, though the results obtained with
this combination are contradictory, in the treatment
of relapsing patients285 and against Mediterranean
VL286. In a study of 124 patients, the combination of
the two medicines did not demonstrate any
improvement in effectiveness when compared with the
use of only pentavalent antimonials287.
The role of allopurinol in leishmaniasis is difficult
to evaluate. It seems improbable that it has
leishmanicide effects by itself, though in combination
with other typical drugs its effects against Leishmania
seem to improve. Ribera et al288 in a study on
Leishmania HIV co-infected patients, in which all
the subjects were previously treated with antimonials,
later administered a secondary prophylaxis. The
relapse rate was 65 per cent in the control group
patients, who did not receive any secondary
treatment, 56 per cent in the group that received
allopurinol, and 18 per cent in those who were
receiving antimony as a prophylaxis.
Immunotherapy
The progression of VL ends in immunosuppression,
and follows the Th2 route with decrease in the levels
of IL-2 and IFN-r typical of the Th1 route. Therefore,
in the treatment of resistant cases, where it is more
probable that they will suffer immunological
depletion, it has been suggested to use a combination
of chemotherapy with microbial  or synthetic
immunostimulants. Badaró et al289 were the first to
use IFN-g in combination with pentavalent antimonials
in the treatment of VL, finding that seven of nine
patients with antimonial resistant kala-azar, were cured
with the combination of 100 µg/m2/day of IFN-g and
20 mg/kg/day of pentavalent antimony over 28 days.
In 1993, Squires et al290, demonstrated that the same
treatment produced a more rapid elimination of the
parasites in Kenyan patients that had not received a
previous treatment. With the same treatment, in India,
Sundar et al291, also observed a faster reduction in the
parasitic load in the patients treated with the
combination of two products, than in those treated only
with antimonials. A later assay demonstrated that IFN-g
has only a partial effectiveness by itself.  Four out of
9 patients in India, who previously had not received
any treatment, showed no response and the others only
a partial elimination of the parasites292.
IFN-g has pronounced side effects such as fever,
tremors and granulocytopenia, in addition to a high
price.  Very recently,  the immunomodulator
tucaresol has been tested experimentally in infected
mice293.  The effectiveness of recombinant
granulocyte-macrophage colony - stimulating factor
(GM-SCF) has also been evaluated at a dose of 5
µg/kg/day in combination with pentavalent
antimony in 24 patients.  This led to parasitological
CRUZ et al: LEISHMANIA/HIV, CO-INFECTIONS 373
healing after three months, although three of the
patients had relapses294.   Information on the
therapeutic use of IL-12 and IL-2 is still scarce and
these have only been tested in experimental murine
leishmaniasis in which an increase in the production
of INF-g and an important cellular response were
observed295,296.
Factors that influence the choice of therapy
Several factors have to bear in mind when
choosing the most appropriate reagent for the
therapeutic management of VL. Among them are not
only medical factors, but also socio-economic and
cultural considerations. It is necessary to have
information about the endemicity of the strains of
Leishmania, the immune and nutritional state of the
population, the level and pattern of the parasite’s
resistance to drugs, and obviously the cost. In HIV+
patients it is necessary to bear in mind the important
problem posed by the frequent relapsing and the need
of secondary chemoprophylaxis, which will depend
on the level of CD4+ cells297,298.
Recommendations for the treatment of VL in
immunodepressed patients
The treatment of VL in HIV+ patients is
controversial. The use of pentavalent antimonials or
amphotericin B desoxycholate, though useful, results
in high toxicity and the therapy takes a long time123.
The new lipidic formulations of amphotericin B offer
greater tolerability and can be used in short treatments.
The Leishmania infection reappears in HIV+
patients, including those that receive HAART, after a
successful treatment.  Apparently this is related to low
levels of CD4+ cells297,298. Agreement does not exist
with regard to the use of secondary prophylaxis, but it
seems that the use of these can be suspended once the
count of CD4+ cells is greater than 300/ml298,299.
Secondary prophylaxis
In HIV+ patients, including those that receive
HAART, relapsing of VL has been observed in spite
of having received an effective therapy300. However,
this is not very frequent, and is more probable due to
lower level of the patient’s CD4+ cells297,298. In fact, if
a stable level of CD4+ is obtained after HAART, there
are those who recommend interrupting the secondary
prophylaxis, although this is controversial298.
In the absence of a controlled study, no consensus
exists on what type of secondary prophylaxis to
administer to co-infected patients. Nevertheless, the
period free of relapsing in patients treated with
amphotericin B in lipidic complex (Abelcet® 3 mg/
kg every 3 wk) compared to patients who do not
receive any prophylaxis has been evaluated by
López-Vélez et al301, and after a year of monitoring
it was observed that 50 per cent of the patients that
received the prophylaxis did not show any new
episode, whereas this percentage was 22 per cent in
the group that did not receive it.  In a similar study
with five patients, Montana et al302 also indicated the
benefit of liposomal amphotericin B as the secondary
prophylaxis.
The improvement of treatment of leishmaniasis
in HIV-positive patients should be based on both the
development of new regimens based on already tested
drugs and the experimentation with oral drugs such
as miltefosine303.
References
1. De la Loma A, Alvar J, Martínez-Galiano E, Blázquez J,
Alcalá-Muñoz A, Nájera R. Leishmaniasis or AIDS?
Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1985; 79 : 421-2.
2. Desjeux P, Alvar J.  Leishmania /HIV co-infections:
epidemiology in Europe. Ann Trop Med Parasitol 2003;
97 : S3-15.
3. WHO. Report on the consultative meeting on Leishmania/
HIV co-infection.  WHO/LEISH/95.35. Geneva: World
Health Organization; 1995 p. 1-4.
4. Leishmania/HIV co-infection. Epidemiological analysis
of 692 retrospective cases. Wkly Epidemiol Rec 1997;
72 : 49-54.
5. Leishmania/HIV co-infection, south western Europe,
1990-1998. Wkly Epidemiol Rec 1999; 74 : 365-75.
6. Pintado V, Martín-Rabadán P, Rivera ML, Moreno S,
Bouza E.  Viscera l  le ishmanias is  in  human-
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected and non HIV-
infected patients. Medicine 2001; 80 : 54-73.
374 INDIAN J MED RES, MARCH 2006
7. Kubar J, Marty P, Lelievre A, Quaranta JF, Staccini P,
Caroli-Bosc C, et al. Visceral leishmaniosis in HIV-
positive patients: primary infection, reactivation and latent
infection. Impact of the CD4+ T-lymphocyte counts.
AIDS 1998; 12 : 2147-53.
8. Alvar J, Gutiérrez-Solar B, Molina R, López-Vélez R,
García-Camacho A, Martínez P, et al . Prevalence of
Leishmania infection among AIDS patients. Lancet 1992;
339 : 264-5.
9. Sampaio RN, Salaro CP, Resende P, De Paula CD.
American cutaneous leishmaniasis associated with HIV/
AIDS: report of four clinical cases. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop
2002; 35 : 651-4.
10. Rabello A, Orsini M, Disch J. Leishmania/HIV co-infection
in Brazil: an appraisal. Ann Trop Med Parasitol 2003; 97 :
S17-28.
11. Guiguemde RT, Sawadogo OS, Bories C, Traore KL,
Nezien D, Nikiema L, et al. Leishmania major and HIV
co-infection in Burkina Faso. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg
2003; 97 : 168-9.
12. Mukhtar  MM, Khal i l  AM, Elhassan AM, Musa F,
Modabber F. Leishmania first  generation vaccines:
vaccine trials in Sudan. In: Mas-Coma S, Bargues MD,
Esteban JG,  Valero  MA, edi tors .  IX European
Multicolloquium of Parasitology, Valencia, Spain 2004;
KS : 128.
13. Sundar S. Drug resistance in Indian visceral leishmaniasis.
Trop Med Int Health 2001; 6 : 849-54.
14. Sundar S, Jha TK, Thakur CP, Engel J, Sindermann H,
Fischer C, et al. Oral miltefosine for Indian visceral
leishmaniasis. N Engl J Med 2002; 347 : 1739-46.
15. Sinha PK, Rabidas VN, Pandey K, Verma N, Gupta AK,
Ranjan A,  et  a l .  Viscera l  le ishmanias is  and HIV
coinfection in Bihar, India. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr
2003; 32 : 115-6.
16. Albrecht HI, Sobottka I, Emminger C, Jablonowski H,
Just G, Stoehr A, et al. Visceral leishmaniasis emerging
as an important opportunistic infection in HIV-infected
persons living in areas nonendemic for Leishmania
donovani. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1996; 120 : 189-98.
17. Rosenthal E, Marty P, Poizot-Martin I, Reynes J, Pratlong F,
Lafeuillade A, et al. Visceral leishmaniasis and HIV-1 co-
infection in southern France. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1995;
89 : 159-62.
18. Gradoni L, Scalone A, Gramiccia M, Troiani M.
Epidemiological surveillance of leishmaniasis in HIV-1-
infected individuals in Italy. AIDS 1996; 10 : 785-91.
19. López-Vélez R, Pérez-Molina JA, Guerrero A, Baquero F,
Villarrubia J, Escribano L, et al. Clinicoepidemiologic
characteristics, prognostic factors, and survival analysis of
patients coinfected with human immunodeficiency virus and
Leishmania in an area of Madrid, Spain. Am J Trop Med
Hyg 1998; 58 : 436-43.
20. Botet J, Portús M. La leishmaniosis en la España peninsular.
Revision histórico-bibliográfica (1912-1985). Rev San Hig
Pub 1993; 67 : 255-66.
21. Alvar J. Leishmaniasis and AIDS co-infection: the Spanish
example. Parasitol Today 1994; 10 : 160-3.
22. Montalbán C, Calleja JL, Erice A, Laguna F, Clotet B,
Podzamczer D, et al. Visceral leishmaniasis in patients
infected with human immunodeficiency virus. Co-operative
Group for the Study of Leishmaniasis in AIDS. J Infect 1990;
21 : 161-70.
23. Palella FJ Jr, Delaney KM, Moorman AC, Loveless MO,
Fuhrer J, Satten GA, et al. Declining morbidity and mortality
among patients with advanced human immunodeficiency
virus infection. HIV Outpatient Study Investigators. N Engl
J Med 1998; 338 : 853-60.
24. Mocroft A, Vella S, Benfield TL, Chiesi A, Miller V,
Gargalianos P, et al. Changing patterns of mortality across
Europe in patients infected with HIV-1. EuroSIDA Study
Group. Lancet 1998; 352 : 1725-30.
25. Del Giudice P, Mary-Krause M, Pradier C, Grabar S,
Dellamonica P, Marty P, et al. French Hospital Database on
HIV Clinical Epidemiologic Group. Impact of highly active
antiretroviral therapy on the incidence of visceral
leishmaniasis in a French cohort of patients infected with
human immunodeficiency virus. J Infect Dis 2002; 186 :
1366-70.
26. Autran B, Carcelain G, Li TS, Blanc C, Mathez D,
T u b i a n a  R ,  e t  a l .  P o s i t i v e  e f f e c t s  o f  c o m b i n e d
antiretroviral therapy on CD4+ T cell  homeostasis
and function in advanced HIV disease. Science  1997;
277  :  112-6.
27. Tural C, Romeu J, Sirera G, Andreu D, Conejero M, Ruiz
S, et al. Long-lasting remission of cytomegalovirus retinitis
without maintenance therapy in human immunodeficiency
virus-infected patients. J Infect Dis 1998; 177 : 1080-3.
CRUZ et al: LEISHMANIA/HIV, CO-INFECTIONS 375
28. Weverling GJ, Mocroft  A, Ledergerber B, Kirk O,
González-Lahoz J ,  D’Arminio-Monforte A, et  al .
Discontinuation of Pneumocystis carinii  pneumonia
prophylaxis after start of highly active antiretroviral
therapy in HIV-1 infection. EuroSIDA Study Group.
Lancet 1999; 353 : 1293-8.
29. Jouan M, Saves M, Tubiana R, Carcelain G, Cassoux N,
Aubron-Olivier C, et al .  RESTIMOP study team.
Discontinuation of maintenance therapy for cytomegalovirus
retinitis in HIV-infected patients receiving highly active
antiretroviral therapy. AIDS 2001; 15 : 23-31.
30. López Bernaldo de Quirós JC, Miró JM, Pena JM,
Podzamczer D, Alberdi JC, Martínez E, et al. A randomized
trial of the discontinuation of primary and secondary
prophylaxis against Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia after
highly active antiretroviral therapy in patients with HIV
infection. N Engl J Med 2001; 344 : 159-67.
31. Carr A, Marrito D, Field A, Vasak E, Cooper DA. Treatment
of HIV-1-associated microsporidiosis and cryptosporidiosis
with combination antiretroviral therapy. Lancet 1998; 351 :
256-61.
32. Foudraine NA, Weverling GJ, Van Gool T, Roos MT,
De Wolf F, Koopmans PP, et al. Improvement of chronic
diarrhoea in patients with advanced HIV-1 infection during
potent antiretroviral therapy. AIDS 1998; 12 : 35-41.
33. Miró JM, López JC, Podzamczer D, Peña JM, Alberdi C,
Claramonte X, et al.  GESIDA 04/98-B Study.
Discontinuation of toxoplasmic encephalitis prophylaxis is
safe in HIV-1 and T. gondii coinfected patients after
immunological recovery with HAART: Preliminary results
of the GESIDA 04/98-B study. San Francisco: Proceedings
of the 7th Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic
Infections (Abstract Book); 2000.
34. López-Vélez R. The impact of highly active antiretroviral
therapy (HAART) on visceral leishmaniasis in Spanish
patients who are co-infected with HIV. Ann Trop Med
Parasitol 2003; 97  : S143-7.
35. Russo R, Nigro L, Panarello G, Montineri A. Clinical survey
of Leishmania/HIV co-infection in Catania, Italy: the impact
of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). Ann Trop
Med Parasitol 2003; 97 : S149-55.
36. De la Rosa R, Pineda JA, Delgado J,  Macías J,
Morillas F, Mira JA, et al. Incidence of and risk factors for
symptomatic visceral leishmaniasis among human
immunodeficiency virus type 1-infected patients from Spain
in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy. J Clin
Microbiol 2002; 40 : 762-7.
37. López-Vélez R, Casado JL, Pintado V. Decline of a visceral
leishmaniasis epidemic in HIV-infected patients after the
introduction of highly active antiretroviral therapy
(HAART). Clin Microbiol Infect 2001; 7 : 394-5.
38. Mira JA, Corzo JE, Rivero A, Macías J, De León FL,
Torre-Cisneros  J ,  et  a l .  Frequency of  v iscera l
leishmaniasis relapses in human immunodeficiency virus-
infected patients receiving highly active antiretroviral
therapy. Am J Trop Med Hyg  2004; 70 : 298-301.
39. UNAIDS. AIDS Epidemic Update 2002. www.unaids.org,
accessed on April 8, 2005.
40. Fisk DT, Meshnick S, Kazanjian PH. Pneumocystis carinii
pneumonia in patients in the developing world who have
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Clin Infect Dis  2003;
36 : 70-8.
41. Desjeux P. Leishmania and HIV co-infection in south-
western Europe, 1990-1998, retrospective analysis of 965
cases. Geneva: World Health Organization, WHO/Leish/
2000.42 2000.
42. WHO. The world health report. Geneva: World Health
Organization 2001.
43. Guerin PJ, Olliaro P, Sundar S, Boelaert M, Croft SL,
Desjeux P, et al. Visceral leishmaniasis: current status
of control, diagnosis, and treatment, and a proposed
research and development agenda. Lancet Infect Dis
2002; 2 : 494-501.
44. Molina R, Gradoni L, Alvar J. HIV and the transmission of
Leishmania. Ann Trop Med Parasitol 2003; 97 : S29-S45.
45. Desjeux P, UNAIDS. Leishmania and HIV in Gridlock.
WHO/CTD/LEISH/98.9 Add.I,  UNAIDS/98.23.1998.
Geneva: World Health Organization; 1998.
46. Alvar J, Cañavate C, Gutiérrez-Solar B, Jiménez MI,
Laguna F, López-Vélez R, et al. Leishmania and human
immunodeficiency virus coinfection: the first 10 years.
Clin  Microbiol Rev 1997; 10 : 298-319.
47. Prat long F,  Dereure J ,  Deniau M, Marty P,
Faraut-Gambarelli F, Dedet JP. Enzymatic polymorphism
during Leishmania /HIV co-infection: a study of 381
Leishmania strains received between 1986 and 2000 at the
376 INDIAN J MED RES, MARCH 2006
international cryobank in Montpellier, France. Ann Trop
Med Parasitol 2003; 97 : S47-56.
48. Molina R, Cañavate C, Cercenado E, Laguna F, López-Vélez
R, Alvar J. Indirect xenodiagnosis of visceral leishmaniasis
in 10 HIV-infected patients using colonized Phlebotomus
perniciosus. AIDS 1994; 8 : 277-9.
49. Cruz I, Morales MA, Noguer I, Rodríguez A, Alvar J.
Leishmania in discarded syringes from intravenous drug
users. Lancet 2002; 359 : 1124-5.
50. Pineda JA, Macías J, Morillas F, Fernández-Ochoa J, Cara J,
De La Rosa R, et al. Evidence of increased risk for Leishmania
infantum infection among HIV-seronegative intravenous drug
users from southern Spain. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis
2001; 20 : 354-7.
51. Pineda JA, Martín-Sánchez J, Macías J, Morillas F.
Leishmania spp infection in injecting drug users. Lancet
2002; 360 : 950-1.
52. Rosenthal PJ, Chaisson RE, Hadley WK, Leech JH. Rectal
leishmaniasis in a patient with acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome. Am J Med 1988; 84 : 307-9.
53. Heisch R. Studies in leishmaniasis in East Africa. I.
The epidemiology of an outbreak of kala-azar in Kenya.
Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1954; 48 : 449-69.
54. Aggarwal P, Wali JP. Profile of kala-azar in north India.
Asia-Pacific J Public Health  1991; 5 : 90-3.
55. Evans TG, Teixeira MJ, McAuliffe IT, Vasconcelos I,
Vasconcelos AW, Sousa A de A, et al. Epidemiology of
visceral leishmaniasis in northeast Brazil. J Infect Dis 1992;
166 : 1124-32.
56. Belazzoug S. Leishmaniasis in Mediterranean countries.
Vet Pathol 1992; 44 : 15-9.
57. Cascio A, Colomba C, Antinori S, Orobello M, Paterson D,
Titone L. Pediatric visceral leishmaniasis in Western Sicily,
Italy: a retrospective analysis of 111 cases. Eur J Clin
Microbiol Infect Dis 2002; 21 : 277-82.
58. Kafetzis DA. An overview of paediatric leishmaniasis.
J Postgrad Med  2003; 49 : 31-8.
59. Berenguer J, Moreno S, Cercenado E, Bernaldo de Quirós
JC, García de la Fuente A, Bouza E. Visceral leishmaniasis
in patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV). Ann Intern Med 1989; 111 : 129-2.
60. Pineda JA, Gallardo JA, Macías J, Delgado J, Regordan C,
Morillas F, et al. Prevalence of and factors associated with
visceral leishmaniasis in human immunodeficiency virus
type 1-infected patients in southern Spain. J Clin Microbiol
1998; 36 : 2419-22.
61. Alexander J. Sex differences and cross-immunity in DBA/2
mice infected with L. mexicana and L. major. Parasitology
1988; 96 : 297-302.
62. Brabin L, Brabin BJ. Parasitic infections in women and their
consequences. Adv Parasitol 1992; 31 : 1-81.
63. Ahluwal ia  IB ,  Bern  C ,  Waga tsuma Y,  Cos ta  C ,
Chowdhury R, Ali M, et al . Visceral leishmaniasis:
consequences to women in a Bangladeshi community.
J Womens Health (Larchmt) 2004; 13 : 360-4.
64. Medrano FJ, Hernández-Quero J, Jiménez E, Pineda JA,
Rivero A, Sánchez-Quijano A, et al. Visceral leishmaniasis
in HIV-1-infected individuals: a common opportunistic
infection in Spain? AIDS 1992; 6 : 1499-503.
65. Ribera E, Cucurull E, Ocaña I, Vallespi T, Gasser I, Juste
C. Visceral leishmaniasis in patients with HIV infection.
Enferm Infecc Microbiol Clin 1995; 13 : 73-9.
66. Russo R,  Laguna F,  López-Vélez R,  Medrano FJ,
Rosenthal E, Cacopardo B, et al. Visceral leishmaniasis
in those infected with HIV: clinical aspects and other
opportunistic infections. Ann Trop Med Parasitol 2003;
97 : S99-105.
67. Berhe N, Wolday D, Hailu A, Abraham Y, Ali A,
Gebre-Michael T, et al. HIV viral load and response to
antileishmanial chemotherapy in co-infected patients. AIDS
1999; 13 : 1921-5.
68. Pintado V, López-Vélez R. Visceral leishmaniasis associated
with human immunodeficiency virus infection. Enferm
Infecc Microbiol Clin 2001; 19 : 353-7.
69. Da-Cruz AM, Machado ES, Menezes JA, Rutowitsch MS,
Coutinho SG. Cellular and humoral immune responses of a
patient with American cutaneous leishmaniasis and AIDS.
Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1992; 86 : 511-2.
70. Machado ES, Braga MP, Da-Cruz AM, Coutinho SG,
Vieira ARM, Rutowitsch MS, et al. Disseminated merican
muco-cutaneous leishmaniasis caused by Leishmania
braziliensis braziliensis in a patient with AIDS: a case report.
Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz 1992; 87 : 487-92.
CRUZ et al: LEISHMANIA/HIV, CO-INFECTIONS 377
71. Echevarría J, Campos P, Chang J, Cuéllar L, Gotuzzo E,
Paz L, et al. Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis and AIDS.
Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1993; 87 : 186.
72. Hernández DE, Oliver M, Martínez C, Planas G. Visceral
leishmaniasis with cutaneous and rectal dissemination due
to Leishmania braziliensis in acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS). Int J Dermatol 1995; 34 : 114-5.
73. Romero HD, Taranto NJ, Malchiodi EL. American
tegumentary leishmaniasis associated with AIDS in
Argentina. Medicina (B Aires) 2004; 64 : 47-50.
74. Berhe N, Hailu A, Gemetchu T. Human immunodeficiency
virus and recurrence of cutaneous leishmaniasis long after
healed localized cutaneous leishmaniasis due to Leishmania
aethiopica. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1995; 89 : 400-1.
75. CDC (Centers for  Disease Control) .  Viscerotropic
leishmaniasis in persons returning from operation Desert
Storm 1990-1991. Morbid Mortal Wkly Rep 1992; 41 :
131-4.
76. Magill AJ, Grogl M, Fasser RA, Wellington S, Oster CN.
Viscerotropic leishmaniasis caused by Leishmania tropica
in soldiers returning from Operation Desert Storm.
N Engl J Med 1993; 328 : 1383-7.
77. Gillis D, Klaus S, Schnur LF, Piscopos P, Maayan S,
Okon E,  et  a l .  Di f fuse ly  d isseminated  cutaneous
Leishmania major infection in a child with acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome. Pediatr Infect Dis 1995;
514 : 247-9.
78. Jiménez M, Ferrer-Dufol M, Cañavate C, Gutiérrez-Solar
B, Molina R, Laguna F, et al. Variability of Leishmania
(Leishmania) infantum  among stocks from
immunocompromised, immunocompetent patients and dogs
in Spain. FEMS Microbiol Lett 1995; 131 : 197-204.
79. Chicharro C, Jiménez MI, Alvar J. Iso-enzymatic variability
of Leishmania infantum in Spain. Ann Trop Med Parasitol
2003; 97 : S57-64.
80. Barral A, Badaró R, Barral-Netto M, Grimaldi G Jr,
Momem H, Carvalho EM. Isolation of Leishmania
mexicana amazonensis from the bone marrow in a case
of American visceral leishmaniasis. Am J Trop Med Hyg
1986; 35 : 732-4.
81. Barral A, Pedral-Sampaio D, Grimaldi G Jr, Momen H,
McMahon-Pratt D, Ribeiro de Jesús A, et al. Leishmaniasis
in Bahia, Brazil: evidence that Leishmania amazonensis
produces a wide spectrum of clinical disease. Am J Trop
Med Hyg 1991; 44 : 536-46.
82. Ramos-Santos C, Hernández-Montes O, Sánchez-Tejeda G,
Monroy-Ostria A. Visceral leishmniosis caused by
Leishmania (L.) mexicana in a mexican patient with human
immunodeficiency virus infection. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz
2000; 95 : 733-7.
83. Silva ES, Pacheco RS, Gontijo CM, Carvalho IR, Brazil RP.
Visceral leishmaniasis caused by Leishmania (Viannia)
braziliensis  in a patient infected with human
immunodeficiency virus. Rev Inst Med Trop Sao Paulo
2002; 44 : 145-9.
84. Bosch RJ, Rodrigo AB, Sánchez P, de Gálvez MV. Presence
of Leishmania organisms in specific and non-specific skin
lesions in HIV-infected individuals with visceral
leishmaniasis. Int J Dermatol 2002; 41 : 670-5.
85. Ponce C, Ponce E, Morrison A, Cruz A, Kreutzer R,
McMahon-Pratt D, et al. Leishmania donovani chagasi : new
clinical variant of cutaneous leishmaniasis in Honduras.
Lancet 1991; 337 : 67-70.
86. Orsini M, Silva M, Luz ZM, Disch J, Fernandes O,
Moreira D, et al. Identification of Leishmania chagasi
from skin in Leishmania/HIV co-infection: a case report.
Rev Soc Bras Med Trop 2002; 35 : 259-62.
87. González-Beato MJ, Moyano B, Sánchez C,
González-Beato MT, Pérez-Molina JA, Miralles P, et al.
Kaposi’s sarcoma-like lesions and other nodules as
cutaneous involvement in AIDS-related visceral
leishmaniasis. Br J Dermatol 2000; 143 : 1316-8.
88. Mosier D, Sieburg H. Macrophage-tropic HIV: critical for
AIDS pathogenesis? Immunol Today 1994; 15 : 332-9.
89. Olivier M, Badaró R, Medrano FJ, Moreno J.  The
pathogenesis of Leishmania/HIV co-infection: cellular and
immunological mechanisms. Ann Trop Med Parasitol
2003; 97 : S79-98.
90. Tremblay M, Olivier M, Bernier R. Leishmania and the
pathogenesis of HIV infection. Parasitol Today 1996; 12 :
257-61.
91. Reiner SL, Locksley RM. The regulation of immunity to
Leishmania major. Annu Rev Immunol 1995; 13 : 151-77.
92. Wolday D, Akuffo H, Britton S, Hathaway A, Sander B.
HIV-1 inhibits Leishmania-induced cell proliferation but not
378 INDIAN J MED RES, MARCH 2006
production of interleukin-6 and tumour necrosis factor alpha.
Scand J Immunol 1994; 39 : 380-6.
93. Bhattacharyya S, Ghosh S, Dasgupta B, Mazumder D, Roy S,
Majumdar S. Chemokine-induced leishmanicidal activity in
murine macrophages via the generation of nitric oxide.
J Infect Dis 2002; 185 : 1704-8.
94. Haldar JP, Ghose S, Saha KC, Ghose AC. Cell-mediated
immune response in Indian kala-azar and post-kala-azar
dermal leishmaniasis. Infect Immun 1983; 42 : 702-7.
95. Gradoni L, Scalone A, Gramiccia M. HIV-Leishmania co-
infections in Italy: serological data as an indication of the
sequence of acquisition of the two infections. Trans R Soc
Trop Med Hyg 1993; 87 : 94-6.
96. Medrano FJ, Cañavate C, Leal M, Rey C, Lissen E, Alvar J.
The role of serology in the diagnosis and prognosis of
visceral leishmaniasis in patients coinfected with human
immunodeficiency virus type-1. Am J Trop Med Hyg
1998; 59 : 155-62.
97. Cacopardo B, Nigro L, Preiser W, Fama A, Satariano MI,
Braner J,  et al .  Prolonged Th2 cell  activation and
increased viral replication in HIV-Leishmania co-infected
patients despite treatment. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg
1996; 90 : 434-5.
98. Nigro L, Cacopardo B, Preiser W, Braner J, Cinatl J,
Palermo F, et al. In vitro production of type 1 and type 2
cytokines by peripheral blood mononuclear cells from
subjects coinfected with human immunodeficiency virus
and Leishmania infantum. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1999;
60 : 142-5.
99. Kalinkovich A, Weisman Z, Bentwich Z. Chemokines and
chemokine receptors: role in HIV infection. Immunol Lett
1999; 68 : 281-7.
100. Hailu A, Pater JM, Kager PA, Van der Poll T. Increased
expression of HIV co-receptor CXCR4 on CD4+ T-cells
in patients with active visceral leishmaniasis. Scand J
Infect Dis 2004; 36 : 56-8.
101. Srebel K, Bour S. Molecular interactions of HIV with
human factors. AIDS 1999; 13 : S13-24. 
102. Fahey JL. Cytokines, plasma immune activation markers,
and clinically relevant surrogate markers in human
immunodeficiency virus infection. Clin Diagn Lab
Immunol 1998; 5 : 597-603.
103. Cohen OJ, Fauci AS. Host factors that affect sexual
transmission of HIV. Int J Infect Dis 1998; 2 : 182-5.
104. Grossman Z, Feinberg MB, Paul WE. Multiple modes of
cellular activation and virus transmission in HIV infection:
a role for chronically and latently infected cells in
sustaining viral replication. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1998; 95 : 6314-9.
105. Bentwich Z, Kalinkovich A, Weisman Z, Grossman Z.
Immune activation in the context of HIV infection.
Clin Exp Immunol 1998; 111 : 1-2.
106. Anderson RW, Ascher MS, Sheppard HW. Direct HIV
cytopathicity cannot account for CD4 decline in AIDS in
the presence of homeostasis: a worst-case dynamic
analysis. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr Hum Retrovirol
1998; 17 : 245-52.
107. Gougeon ML, Montagnier L. Programmed cell death as a
mechanism of CD4 and CD8 T cell deletion in AIDS:
Molecular control and effect of highly active anti-retroviral
therapy. Ann NY Acad Sci 1999; 887 : 199-212.
108. Gea-Banacloche JC, Lane HC. Lymphocyte turnover in the
setting of HIV infection. Immunologist 1999 ; 7 : 124-31.
109. Hazenberg MD, Stuart JW, Otto SA, Borleffs JC,
Boucher CA, De Boer RJ, et al. T-cell division in human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 infection is mainly due
to immune activation: a longitudinal analysis in patients
before and during highly active antiretroviral therapy
(HAART). Blood 2000; 95 : 249-55.
110. Ribeiro-de-Jesús A, Almeida RP, Lessa H, Bacellar O,
Carvalho EM. Cytokine profile and pathology in human
leishmaniasis. Braz J Med Biol Res 1998; 31 : 143-8.
111. Bernier R, Turco SJ, Olivier M, Tremblay M. Activation
of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 in monocytoid
cells by the protozoan parasite Leishmania donovani.
J Virol 1995; 69 : 7282-5.
112. Folks TM, Justement J, Kinter A, Dinarello CA, Fauci AS.
Cytokine-induced expression of HIV-1 in a chronically
infected promonocyte cell line. Science 1987; 238 : 800-2.
113. Folks TM, Clouse KA, Justement J, Rabson A, Duh E,
Kehrl JH, et al. Tumor necrosis factor alpha induces
expression of human immunodeficiency virus in a
chronically infected T-cell clone. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1989; 86 : 2365-8.
CRUZ et al: LEISHMANIA/HIV, CO-INFECTIONS 379
114. Blackwell JM. Tumour necrosis factor alpha and
mucocutaneous leishmaniasis. Parasitol Today 1999;
15 : 73-5.
115. Montalbán C, Martínez-Fernández R, Calleja JL,
García-Díaz JD, Rubio R, Dronda F, et al. Visceral
leishmaniasis (kala-azar) as an opportunistic infection
in patients infected with the human immunodeficiency
virus in Spain. Rev Infect Dis 1989; 11 : 655-60.
116. Romeu J, Sirera G, Carreres A, Condom MJ, Clotet B.
Visceral leishmaniasis involving the lung and a cutaneous
Kaposi’s sarcoma lesion. AIDS 1991; 5 :1272.
117. González-Anglada MI, Pena JM, Barbado FJ, González
JJ, Redondo C, Galera C, et al. Two cases of laryngeal
leishmaniasis in patients infected with HIV. Eur J Clin
Microbiol Infect Dis 1994; 13 : 509-11.
118. Laguna F. Treatment of leishmaniasis in HIV-positive
patients. Ann Trop Med Parasitol 2003; 97 : S135-42.
119. Martínez P, De la Vega E, Laguna F, Soriano V, Puente S,
Moreno V, et al. Diagnosis of visceral leishmaniasis in
HIV-infected individuals using peripheral blood smears.
AIDS 1993; 7 : 227-30.
120. Ramos A, Portero JL, Gazapo T, Yebra M, Portero F,
Martín T. Visceral leishmaniasis in immunocompromised
patients. An Med Interna 1998; 15 : 301-4.
121. Reus S, Sánchez R, Portilla J, Boix V, Priego M,
Merino E, et al. Visceral leishmaniasis: a comparative
s tudy  o f  pa t i en t s  wi th  and  wi thou t  human
immunodeficiency virus infect ion.  Enferm Infec t
Microbiol Clin 1999; 17 : 515-20.
122. Evans TG. Leishmaniasis. Infect Dis Clin North Am
1993; 7 : 527-46.
123. Laguna F, López-Vélez R, Pulido F, Salas A, Torre-Cisneros
J, Torres E, et al. Treatment of visceral leishmaniasis in HIV-
infected patients: a randomized trial comparing meglumine
antimoniate with amphotericin B. Spanish HIV-Leishmania
Study Group. AIDS 1999; 13 : 1063-9.
124. Laguna F, Adrados M, Alvar J, Soriano V, Valencia ME,
Moreno V, et al. Visceral leishmaniasis in patients infected
with the human immunodeficiency virus. Eur J Clin
Microbiol Infect Dis 1997; 16 : 898-903.
125. Fernández-Guerrero ML, Aguado JM, Buzón L, Barros C,
Montalbán C, Martín T, et al. Visceral leishmaniasis in
immunocompromised hosts. Am J Med 1987; 83  :
1098-102.
126. Bissuel F, Leport C, Perronne C, Longuet P, Vilde JL.
Fever of unknown origin in HIV-infected patients: a critical
analysis of a retrospective series of 57 cases. J Intern Med
1994; 236 : 529-35.
127. Miralles P, Moreno S, Pérez-Tascón M, Cosin J, Díaz MD,
Bouza E. Fever of uncertain origin in patients infected with
the human immunodeficiency virus. Clin Infect Dis 1995;
20 : 872-5.
128. Malebranche R, Arnoux E, Guerin JM, Pierre GD,
Laroche AC, Pean-Guichard C, et al.  Acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome with severe gastrointestinal
manifestations in Haiti. Lancet 1983; 2 : 873-8.
129. Janoff EN, Smith PD. Perspectives on gastrointestinal
infections in AIDS. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1988;
17 : 451-63.
130. Muigai R, Gatei DG, Shaunak S, Wozniak A, Bryceson
AD. Jejunal function and pathology in visceral
leishmaniasis. Lancet 1983; 27 : 476-9.
131. Bryceson ADM. Visceral Leishmaniasis (kala-azar, ponos).
In: Wyngardeen JB, Smith LH Jr, editors. Textbook of
medicine. 16th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;  1982
p. 1731-4.
132. Serrao-Neto A, Neves-Sousa E, Valente HB,
Guimaraes R, Almeida-Ricardo J, Conceicao-Silva FM, et
al. An original case of visceral leishmaniasis. Presse Med
1986; 15 : 1286.
133. Betz P, Elsing C, Purrmann J, Frenzel H. Leishmaniasis
of the upper gastrointestinal tract in an HIV positive
patient. Pathologe 1990; 11 : 97-100.
134. Pesce A, Saint-Paul MC, Vinti H, Marty P, Taillan B,
Le Fichoux Y, et al. Gastric leishmaniasis in a patient with
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Presse Med 1990;
19 : 178.
135. Banerjee M, Pal A, Ghosh S, Maitra TK. Small intestinal
involvement in visceral leishmaniasis. Am J Gastrenterol
1990; 85 : 1433-4.
136. Sendino A, Barbado FJ, Mostaza JM, Fernández-Martín
J, Larrauri J, Vázquez-Rodríguez JJ. Visceral leishmaniasis
with malabsorption syndrome in a patient with acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome. Am J Med 1990; 87 : 673-5.
380 INDIAN J MED RES, MARCH 2006
137. Villanueva JL, Torre-Cisneros J, Jurado R, Villar A,
Montero M, López F, et al. Leishmania esophagitis in an
AIDS patient: an unusual form of visceral leishmaniasis.
Am J Gastroenterol 1994; 89 : 273-5.
138. McBride MO, Fisher M, Skinner CJ, Golden R, Main J.
An unusual gastrointestinal presentation of leishmaniasis.
Scand J Infect Dis 1995; 27 : 297-8.
139. Mondain-Miton V, Toussaint-Gari M, Hofman P, Marty
P, Carles M, De Salvador F, et al. Atypical leishmaniasis
in a patient infected with human immunodeficiency virus.
Clin Infect Dis 1995; 21 : 663-5.
140. Smith PD, Quinn TC, Strober W, Janoff EN, Masur H.
National Institute of Health Conference. Gastrointestinal
infections in AIDS. Ann Intern Med 1992; 116 : 63-77.
141. Laguna F, García-Samaniego J, Soriano V, Valencia E,
Redondo C, Alonso MJ, et al .  Gastrointestinal
leishmaniasis in human immunodeficiency virus-infected
patients: report of five cases and review. Clin Infect Dis
1994; 19 : 48-53.
142. Perrin C, Taillan B, Hofman P, Mondain V, Lefichoux Y,
Michiels JF. Atypical cutaneous histological features of
visceral leishmaniasis in acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome. Am J Dermatopathol 1995; 17 : 145-50.
143. Dauden E, Penas PF, Rios L, Jiménez M, Fraga J, Alvar J,
et al. Leishmaniasis presenting as a dermatomyositis-like
eruption in AIDS. J Am Acad Dermatol  1996; 35 : 316-9.
144. Puig L, Pradinaud R. Leishmania and HIV co-infection:
dermatological manifestations. Ann Trop Med Parasitol
2003; 97 : S107-14.
145. Calza L, D’Antuono A, Marinacci G, Manfredi R,
Colangeli V, Passarini B, et al. Disseminated cutaneous
leishmaniasis after visceral disease in a patient with AIDS.
J Am Acad Dermatol 2004; 50 : 461-5.
146. Alvar J, Ballesteros JA, Soler R, Benito A, van Eys GJ,
Schoone GJ, et al. Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis due to
Leishmania (Leishmania) infantum :  biochemical
characterzation. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1990; 43 : 614-8.
147. Miralles ES, Nuñez M, Hilara Y, Harto A, Moreno R,
Ledo A.  Mucocutaneous le ishmaniasis  and HIV.
Dermatology 1994; 189 : 275-7.
148. Duarte MIS, Matta VLR, Corbett CEP, Laurenti MD,
Chebabo R, Goto H. Interstitial pneumonitis in human
visceral leishmaniasis. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1989;
83 : 73-6.
149. Dutra M, Martinelli R, De Carvalho M, Rodrigues L,
Brito E, Rocha H. Renal involvement in visceral
leishmaniasis. Am J Kidney Dis 1985; 6 : 22-7.
150. Van Velthuysen ML, Florquin S. Glomerulopathy
associated with parasitic infections. Clin Microbiol Rev
2000; 13 : 55-6.
151. Clevenbergh P, Okome MN, Benoit S, Bendini JC,
De Salvador F, Elbeze M, et al. Acute renal failure as initial
presentation of visceral leishmaniasis in an HIV-1-infected
patient. Scand J Infect Dis 2002; 34 : 546-7.
152. López-Vélez R, Laguna F, Alvar J, Pérez-Molina JA,
Molina R, Martínez P, et al. Parasitic culture of buffy coat
for diagnosis of visceral leishmaniasis in human
immunodeficiency virus-infected patients. J Clin Microbiol
1995; 33 : 937-9.
153. Nigro L, Montineri A, La Rosa R, Zuccarello M, Iacobello
C, Iacobello C, et al. Visceral leishmaniasis and HIV co-
infection: a rare case of pulmonary and oral localization.
Infez Med 2003; 11 : 93-6.
154. Greder A, Malet M, Gautier P, Lassaigne D, Duhamel C,
Lamy C, et al . Pleurisy revealing leishmaniasis in
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Presse Med 1989 ;
18 : 1390-1.
155. Laguna F, García-Samaniego J,  Moreno V,
González-Lahoz JM. Prevalence of gastrointestinal
leishmaniasis in Spanish HIV-positive patients with
digestive symptoms.  Am J Gastroenterol 1994; 89 : 1606.
156. Olofinlade O, Cacciarelli, A. Treatment of the wrong
disease with the right medication: a case of generalized
leishmaniasis involving the liver and the gastrointestinal
tract. Am J Gastroenterol 2000; 95 : 1377.
157. Ramos CC, Duarte MI, Ramos AM. Fatal visceral
leishmaniasis associated with acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome: report of a case with necropsy findings and
immunohistochemical study. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop 1994;
27 : 245-50.
158. Vázquez-Piñeiro T, Fernández-Álvarez JM,
Gonzalo-Lafuente JC, Cano J, Gimeno M, Berenguer J.
Visceral leishmaniasis: a lingual presentation in a patient
with HIV infection. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral
Radiol Endod 1998; 86 : 179-82.
CRUZ et al: LEISHMANIA/HIV, CO-INFECTIONS 381
159. Rosenthal E, Marty P, Del Giudice P, Pradier C, Ceppi C,
Gastaut JA, et al. HIV and Leishmania coinfection: a
review of 91 cases with focus on atypical locations of
Leishmania. Clin Infect Dis 2000; 31 : 1093-5.
160. Mofredj A, Guerin JM, Leibinger F, Masmoudi R. Visceral
leishmaniasis with pericarditis in an HIV-infected patient.
Scand J Infect Dis 2002; 34 : 151-3.
161. Rosenthal E, Marty P, Le Fichoux Y, Cassuto JP. Clinical
manifestations of visceral leishmaniasis associated with
HIV infection: a retrospective study of 91 French cases.
Ann Trop Med Parasitol 2000; 94 : 37-42.
162. Navarro CM. Isolateral laryngeal Leishmania in an
immunocompetent patient: successful treatement with
surgery. J Laryngol Otol 1994; 108 : 249-51.
163. Bryceson ADM. Leishmaniasis. In:  Cook GC, editor.
Manson´s tropical diseases.  20th ed.  London: WB
Saunders Company Ltd.; 1996 p. 1213-45.
164. Hamour AA, Skelly R, Jowitt SN, Wilson GE, Curry A,
Wilkins EG, et al. Visceral leishmaniasis (Kala-azar) in
two patients with HIV-1 infection: atypical features and
response to therapy. J Infect 1998; 36 : 217-20.
165. Lachaud L,  Dereure  J ,  Chabber t  E ,  Reynes  J ,
Mauboussin JM, Oziol E, et al. Optimized PCR using
patient blood samples for diagnosis and follow-up of
visceral leishmaniasis, with special reference to AIDS
patients. J Clin Microbiol 2000; 38 : 236-40.
166. Altés J, Salas A, Riera M, Udina M, Galmes A, Balanzat
J, et al. Visceral leishmaniasis: another HIV-associated
opportunistic infection? Report of eight cases and review
of the literature. AIDS 1991; 5 : 201-7.
167. Dereure J, Reynes J, Pratlong F, Lamaury I, Rioux JA,
Janbon F, et al. Visceral leishmaniasis in HIV-infected
patients in the south of France. Bull World Health Organ
1995; 73 : 245-6.
168. Piarroux R, Gambarelli F, Dumon H, Fontes M, Dunan S,
Mary C, et al. Comparison of PCR with direct examination
of bone marrow aspiration, myeloculture, and serology for
diagnosis of visceral leishmaniasis in immunocompromised
patients.  J Clin Microbiol 1994; 32 : 746-9.
169. Medrano F J, Jiménez-Mejías E, Calderón E, Regordán,
C, Leal M. An easy and quick method for the diagnosis of
visceral leishmaniasis in HIV-1-infected individuals. AIDS
1993; 7 : 1399.
170. Delgado J, Pineda JA, Macías J, Regordan C, Gallardo
JA, Leal M, et al. Low sensitivity of peripheral blood smear
for diagnosis of subclinical visceral leishmaniasis in human
immunodeficiency virus type 1-infected patients. J Clin
Microbiol 1998; 36 : 315-6.
171. Mathis A, Deplazes P. PCR and in vitro cultivation for
detection of Leishmania spp. in diagnostic samples from
humans and dogs. J Clin Mic 1995; 33 : 1145-9.
172. Pintado V, López-Vélez R. HIV-associated visceral
leishmaniasis. Clin Microbiol Infect 2001; 7 : 291-300.
173. Lane HC, Masur H, Edgar LC, Whalen G, Rook AH,
Fauci AS. Abnormalities of B-cell activation and
immunoregulation in patients with the acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome. N Engl J Med 1983;
309 : 453-8.
174. Williams RO. Invasion of murine dendritic cells by
Leishmania major and L. mexicana mexicana. J Parasitol
1988; 74 : 186-7.
175. Mary C, Lamouroux D, Dunan S, Quilici M. Western blot
analysis of antibodies to Leishmania infantum antigens:
potential of the 14-kD and 16-kD antigens for diagnosis
and epidemiologic purposes. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1992;
47 : 764-71.
176. Gari-Toussaint M, Lelievre A, Marty P, Le Fichoux Y.
Contribution of serological tests to the diagnosis of visceral
leishmaniasis in patients infected with the human
immunodeficiency virus. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1994 ;
88 : 301-2.
177. Hviid L, Sorensen AL, Kharazmi A, Theander TG.
Functional and phenotypic changes in human lymphocytes
after coincubation with Leishmania donovani in vitro.
Infect Immun 1990; 58 : 3163-7.
178. Ho M, Koech DK, Iha DW, Bryceson AD.
Immunosuppression in Kenyan visceral leishmaniasis.
Clin Exp Immunol  1983; 51 : 207-14.
179. Sacks DL, Lal SL, Shrivastava SN, Blackwell J, Neva FA.
An analysis of T cell responsiveness in Indian kala-azar.
J Immunol 1987; 138 : 908-13.
180. Carvalho EM, Teixeira RS, Johnson WD Jr. Cell-mediated
immunity in American visceral leishmaniasis: reversible
immunosuppression during acute infection. Infect Immun
1981; 33 : 498-500.
382 INDIAN J MED RES, MARCH 2006
181. Ghose AC, Haldar JP, Pal SC, Mishra BP, Mishra KK.
Serological investigations on Indian kala-azar. Clin Exp
Immunol 1980; 40 : 318-26.
182. Murray HW, Oca MJ, Granger AM, Schreiber RD.
Requirement for T cells and effect of lymphokines in
successful chemotherapy for an intracellular infection.
Experimental visceral leishmaniasis. J Clin Invest 1989;
83 : 1253-7.
183. Leeuwenburg J, Bryceson AD, Mbugua GG, Siongok TK.
The use of the leishmanin skin-test to define transmission
of leishmaniasis in Baringo district, Kenya. East Afr
Med J 1983; 60 : 81-4.
184. Kurtzhals JA, Hey AS, Theander TG, Odera E,
Christensen CB, Githure JI, et al. Cellular and humoral
immune responses in a population from the Baringo
District,  Kenya to Leishmania promastigote
lipophosphoglycan. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1992; 46 : 480-
8.
185. Coutinho SG, Da-Cruz AM, de Oliveira MP,
Mendonca SC, Bertho AL, De Luca P. CD4+ and CD8+ T
cell immune responses of immunocompetent and
immunocompromised (AIDS) patients with American
tegumentary leishmaniasis. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz 1996;
91 : 381-4.
186. Moreno J, Cañavate C, Chamizo C, Laguna F, Alvar J.
HIV-Leishmania infantum co-infection: humoral and
cellular immune responses to the parasite after
chemotherapy. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2000; 94 : 328-32.
187. Badaró R, Benson D, Eulalio MC, Freire M, Cunha S,
Netto EM,  et al. rK39: a cloned antigen of Leishmania
chagasi that predicts active visceral leishmaniasis. J Infect
Dis 1996; 173 : 758-61.
188. Deniau M, Cañavate C, Faraut-Gambarelli F, Marty P.
The biological diagnosis of leishmaniasis in HIV-infected
patients.  Ann Trop Med Parasitol 2003; 97 :
S115-33.
189. Hailu A, Berhe N. The performance of direct agglutination
tests (DAT) in the diagnosis of visceral leishmaniasis in
Ethiopian patients with HIV co-infection. Ann Trop Med
Parasitol 2002; 96 : 25-30.
190. Vilaplana C, Blanco S, Domínguez J, Giménez M,
Ausina,V, Tural C, et al. Noninvasive method for diagnosis
of visceral leishmaniasis by a latex agglutination test for
detection of antigens in urine samples. J Clin Microbiol
2004; 42 : 1853-4.
191. Campino L, Cortes S, Pires R, Oskam L, Abranches P.
Detection of Leishmania in immunocompromised patients
using peripheral blood spots on filter paper and the
polymerase chain reaction. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis
2000; 19 : 396-8.
192. Pizzuto M, Piazza M, Senese D,  Scalamogna C,
Calattini S, Corsico L, et al. Role of PCR in diagnosis
and prognosis of visceral leishmaniasis in patients
coinfected with human immunodeficiency virus type 1.
J Clin Microbiol 2001; 39 : 357-61.
193. Bretagne S, Durand R, Olivi M, Garin JF, Sulahian A,
Rivollet D, et al. Real-time PCR as a new tool for
quantifying Leishmania infantum in liver in infected mice.
Clin Diagn Lab Immunol 2001; 8 : 828-31.
194. Nicolas L, Prina E, Lang T, Milon G. Real-time PCR for
detection and quantitation of Leishmania in mouse tissues.
J Clin Microbiol 2002; 40 : 1666-9.
195. Schulz A, Mellenthin K, Schonian G, Fleischer B,
Drosten C. Detection, differentiation, and quantitation
of pathogenic Leishmania organisms by a fluorescence
resonance energy transfer-based real-time PCR assay.
J Clin Microbiol 2003; 41 : 1529-35.
196. Bossolasco S,  Gaiera  G,  Olchini  D,  Gul le t ta  M,
Martello L, Bestetti A, et al. Real-time PCR assay for
clinical management of human immunodeficiency
virus-infected patients with visceral leishmaniasis.
J Clin Microbiol 2003; 41 : 5080-4.
197. Mary C, Faraut F, Lascombe L, Dumon H. Quantification
of Leishmania infantum DNA by Real-time PCR assay with
high sensitivity. J Clin Microbiol 2004; 42 : 5249-55.
198. Liew F, Millot S, Parkinson C, Palmer R, Moncada S.
Macrophage killing of Leishmania parasites in vivo is
mediated by nitric oxid from L-arginine. J Immunol 1990;
144 : 4794-7.
199. Barral-Neto M, Badaró B, Barral A. Tumor necrosis factor
(cachectin) in human visceral leishmaniasis. J Infect Dis
1991; 163 : 853-7.
200. Bacellar O, Barral-Neto M, Badaró R, Carvalho E. Gamma
interferon production by lymphocytes from children
infected with L. chagasi. Braz J Med Biol Res 1991;
24 : 791-5.
201. Carvalho E, Barral A, Pedral-Sampaio D. Immunological
markers of clinical evolution in children recently infected
CRUZ et al: LEISHMANIA/HIV, CO-INFECTIONS 383
with Leishmania dnovani chagasi. J Infect Dis 1992;
165 : 535-40.
202. Carvalho EM, Correia Filho D, Bacellar O, Almeida RP,
Lessa H, Rocha H. Characterization of the immune
response in subjects with self-healing cutaneous
leishmaniasis. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1995; 53 : 273-7.
203. Ghalib H, Wittle J, Kubin M. IL-12 enhances Th1-type
responses in human Leishmania donovani infections.
J Immunol 1995; 154 : 4623-9.
204. Sang D, Ouma J, John CC, Wholen CC, King CL,
Mahmond AA, et al .  Increased levels of soluble
interleukin-4 receptor in the sera of patients with visceral
leishmaniasis. J Infect Dis 1999; 179 : 743-6.
205. Awasthi A, Mathur RK, Saha B. Immune response to
Leishmania infection. Indian J Med Res 2004; 119 :
238-58.
206. Gama MEA, Costa JML, Pereira JCR, Gomes CMC,
Corbett CEP. Serum cytokine profile in the subclinical
form of visceral leishmaniasis. Braz J Med Biol Res 2004;
37 : 129-36.
207. Goto H, Lindoso JAL. Immunity and immunosupression
in experimental visceral leishmaniasis. Braz J Med Biol Res
2004; 37 : 615-23.
208. Holaday B, Pompeu M, Evans T, Braga DN, Texeira MJ,
Sousa A de Q, et al. Correlates of Leishmania-specific
immunity in the clinical spectrum of infection with
Leishmania chagasi. J Infect Dis 1993; 167 : 411-7.
209. Cella M, Scheidegger D, Palmer-Lehmann K, Lane P,
Lanzavecchia A, Alber G. Ligation of CD40 on denditric
cells triggers production of high levels of interleukin-12
and enhances T cell stimulatory capacity: T-T help via APC
activation. J Exp Med 1996; 184 : 742-52.
210. Stober D, Schirmbeck R, Reimann J. IL-12/IL-18-
dependent IFN-gamma release by murine dendritic cells.
J Immunol 2001; 167 : 957-65.
211. Qi H, Denning TL, Soong L. Differential induction of
interleukin-10 and interleukin-12 in denditric cells by
microbial toll-like receptor activators and skewing of
T-cell cytokine profiles. Infect Immun 2003; 71 : 3337-42.
212. Leishman W. Handbuch der Tropenkrankheiten. 2nd ed.
Leipzig, Germany.
213. Guerra M, Furtado T, Barros G, Sessa P, Daher V. InfecÇâo
sublínica na leishmaniose tegumentar. An Bras Dermatol
1985; 60 : 365-9.
214. D´Oliveira A Jr, Costa S, Barbosa A, Orge M, Carvalho
E. Asymptomatic Leishmania chagasi infection in relatives
and neighbors of patients with visceral leishmaniasis.
Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz 1997; 92 : 15-20.
215. Gama M. Perfil  clínico e laboratorial da forma
oligossintomática da leishmaniose visceral americana.
Tesis Doctoral, Departamento de Patologia, Faculdade
de Medicina, Universidade de Sâo Paulo, SP, Brasil 2001.
216. Croft SL, Coombs GH. Leishmaniasis - current
chemotherapy and recent advances in the search for novel
drugs. Trends Parasitol 2003; 19 : 502-8.
217. Williams JE. Leishmania and Trypanosoma. In: Gillespie
SH, Hawkey PM, editors.  Medical parasitology. A
practical approach. New York, USA: Oxford University
Press; 1995.
218. Karplus TM, Jeronimo SMB, Chang H, Helms BK,
Burns TL, Murray JC, et al. Association between the
tumor necrosis factor locus and the clinical outcome
of Leishmania chagasi infection. Infect Immun 2002;
70 : 6919-25.
219. Beutler BA. The role of tumor necrosis factor in health
and disease. J Rheumatol 1999; 26 : S16-21.
220. Parham P. Chapter 8: The Body’s defenses against
infection. In: The immune system. New York, USA:
Garland Publishing, Taylor & Francis Group; 2000
p. 214-6.
221. Grau GE, Kossodo S, Mazier D, Milon G. Chapter 7:
Cytokines and parasitic diseases. In: Oppenheim JJ,  Rossio
JL,  Gearing  AJH, editors. Clinical applications of
citokines. Role in pathogenesis, diagnosis and therapy.
New York, USA : Oxford University Press; 1993 p. 49-59.
222. Oppenheim J, Ruscetti F, Faltynek C. Citocinas. In: Stiles
D, Abba T. editors. Imunologia Básica. Brazil: Revinter,
Rio de Janeiro, RJ; 1991 p. 61-76.
223. Stevens D. Cytokines: an updated compendium. Curr Opin
Infect Dis 1995; 8 : 175-80.
224. Janeway C, Travers P. Imunologia: O Sistema Imunológico
na Saúde e na DoenÇa. RS, Brazil: Artes Médicas, Porto
Alegre; 1997.
384 INDIAN J MED RES, MARCH 2006
225. Mellors JW, Griffith BP, Ortiz MA, Landry ML, Ryan JL.
Tumor necrosis factor alpha/cachectin enhances human
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 replication in
primary macrophages. J Infect Dis 1991; 163 : 78-82.
226. Aukrust P, Liabakk NB, Muller F, Lien E, Espevik T,
Froland SS. Serum levels of tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-α) and soluble TNF receptors in human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection-correlations to
clinical, immunologic and virologic parameters. J Infect
Dis 1994; 169 : 420-4.
227. Cenini P, Berhe N, Hailu A, McGinnes K, Frommel D.
Mononuclear cell subpopulations and cytokine levels in
human visceral leishmaniasis before and after
chemotherapy. J Infect Dis 1993; 168 : 986-93.
228. Laguna F, López-Vélez R, Soriano V, Montilla P, Alvar J,
González-Lahoz JM. Assessment of allopurinol plus
meglumine antimoniate in the treatment of visceral
leishmaniasis in patients with HIV. J Infect  1994;
28 : 255-9.
229. Santos J, Rivero A, Marquez M. Acute pancreatitis with a
fatal evolution due to antimonials in patients with visceral
leishmaniasis and HIV infection. Ann Med Interna
2000; 7 : 562-3.
230. Delgado J,  Macías J,  Pineda JA, Corzo JA,
González-Moreno MP, de la Rosa R, et al. High frequency
of serious side effects from meglumine antimoniate given
without an upper limit dose for the treatment of visceral
leishmaniasis in human immunodeficiency virus type-1-
infected patients. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1999; 61 : 766-9.
231. Maddux MS, Barriere SL. A review of complications of
cmphotericin-B teraphy: Recomendations for prevention
and management. Drug Intell  Clin Pharm 1980;
14 : 177-95.
232. Gallis HA, Drew RH, Pickard WW. Amphotericin B:
30 years of clinical experience. Rev Infect Dis 1990;
12 : 308-23.
233. Moreau P, Milpied N, Fayette N, Ramée JF, Harousseau JL.
Reduced renal toxicity and improved clinical tolerance of
amphotericin B mixed with intralipid compared with
conventional amphotericin B in neutropenic patients.
J Antimicrob Chemother 1992; 30 : 535-41.
234. Butler WT, Bennett JE, Alling DW, Wertlake PI, Otz
Jr, Hill GJ III. Nephrotoxicity of amphotericin B: early
and late effects in 81 patients. Ann Intern Med 1964;
61 : 175-87.
235. Hiemenz JW, Walsh TJ. Lipid formulations of
amphptericin B: Recent progress and future directions. Clin
Infect Dis 1996; 22 : 133-44.
236. Hoeprich PD. Clinical use of amphotericin B and
derivatives: Lore, mystique, and Fact. Clin Infect Dis 1992;
14 : 114-9.
237. Hoeprich PD. Elimination half-life of amphotericin B.
Br J Infect 1990; 20 : 173-5.
238. Thakur CP. Comparison of glucose versus fat emulsion in
the preperation of anphotericine B for use in kala-azar.
Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1994; 88 : 698-9.
239. Mishra M, Biswas UK, Jha DN, Khan AB. Amphotericin
versus pentamidine in antimony-unresponsive kala-azar.
Lancet 1992; 340 : 1256-7.
240. Mishra M, Biswas UK, Jha DN, Khan AB. Amphotericin
versus sodium stibogluconate in first-line treatment of
indian kala-azar.  Lancet 1994; 344 : 1599-600.
241. Thakur CP, Sinha GP, Sharma V, Barat D. The treatment
of kala-azar during pregnancy. Natl Med J India 1993;
6 : 263-5.
242. Fielding RM. Liposomal drug delivery. Clin Pharmacokinet
1991; 21 : 155-64.
243. Davidson RN, Dimartino L, Gradoni L, Giacchino R,
Russo R, Gaeta GB, et al. Liposomal amphotericin B
(AmBisome) in mediterranean visceral leishmaniasis: a
multi-centre trial. Quaterly J Med 1994; 87 : 75-81.
244. Davidson RN, Di Martino L, Gradoni L, Giacchino R,
Gaeta GB, Pempinello R, et al. Short-course treatment of
visceral leishmaniasis with liposomal amphotericin B
(AmBisome). Clin Infect Dis 1996; 22 : 938-43.
245. Seaman J, Boer C, Wilkinson R, Jong J, Wilde E,
Sondorp E,  et  a l .  Liposomal  amphoter ic in  B
(AmBisome) in the treatment of complicated kala-azar
under field conditions. Clin Infect Dis 1995; 21  :
188-93.
246. Thakur CP, Pandey AK, Sinha GP, Roy S, Behbehani K,
Olliaro P. Comparison of three treatment regimens with
liposomal amphotericin B (AmBisome®) for visceral
leishmaniasis in India: a randomized dose-finding study.
Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1996; 90 : 319-22.
CRUZ et al: LEISHMANIA/HIV, CO-INFECTIONS 385
247. Dietze R, Milan EP, Berman JD, Grogl M, Falqueto A,
Feitosa TF, et al. Treatment of brazilian kala-azar with a
short course of Amphocil (Amphotericin B Cholesterol
Dispersion). Clin Infect Dis 1993; 17 : 981-6.
248. Sundar S, Murray HW. Cure of antimony-unresponsive
indian visceral leishmaniasis with amphotericin B lipid
complex. J Infect Dis 1996; 173 : 762-5.
249. Sundar S, Agrawal NK, Sinha PR, Horwith GS,
Murray HW. Short-course, low-dose amphotericin B lipid
complex therapy for visceral leishmaniasis unresponsive
to antimony. Ann Intern Med 1997; 127 : 133-7.
250. Herbrecht R, Sosa C, Himy R, Villard O. Successful
treatment of visceral leishmaniasis with high-dose
amohotericin B diluted in fat emulsion: a case report.
Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1996; 90 : 322-3.
251. Russo R, Nigro LC, Minniti S, Montineri A, Gradoni L,
Cladeira L, et al. Visceral leishmaniasis in HIV infected
patients with high dose liposomal amphotericin B
(AmBisome). J Infect 1996; 32 : 133-7.
252. Torre-Cisneros J, Villanueva JL, Kindellan JM, Jurado R,
Sánchez-Guijo P. Succesful treatment of antimony resistant
visceral leishmaniasis with liposomal amphotericin B in
patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus.
Clin Infect Dis 1993; 17 : 625-7.
253. Boletis JN, Pefanis A, Stathakis C, Helioti H, Kostakis A,
Giamarellou H. Visceral leishmaniasis in renal transplant
recipients: succesful treatment with liposomal
amphotericin B (Ambisome). Clin Infect Dis 1999; 28 :
1308-9.
254. Berman JD, Dawver DM, Wyler DJ. Multiplication of
Leishmania in human macrophages in vitro. Infect Immun
1979; 26 : 275-9.
255. Jha SN, Singh NK, Jha TK. Changing response to
diamidine compounds in cases of kala-azar unresponsives
to antimonials. J Assoc Physicians India 1991; 39 : 314-6.
256. Hentzer B, Kobayasi T. The ultrastructural changes of
Leishmania tropica after treatment with pentamidine.
Ann Trop Med Parasitol 1977; 71 : 157-66.
257. Murray HW, Hariprashad J, Fichtl RE. Treatment of
experimental visceral leishmaniasis in a T-cell-deficient
host response to amphotericin B and pentamidine.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1993; 37 : 1504-5.
258. Thakur CP, Kumar M, Pandey AK. Comparison of regimes
of treatment of antimony-resistant kala-azar patients: a
randomized study. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1991; 45 : 435-41.
259. Soto-Mancipe J, Grogl M, Berman JD. Evaluation of
pentamidine for the treatment of cutaneous leishmaniasis
in Colombia. Clin Infect Dis 1993; 16 : 417-25.
260. Neal RA. The effect of antibiotics of the neomycin group
on experimental cutaneous leishmaniasis. Ann Trop Med
Parasitol 1968; 62 : 54-62.
261. Maarouf M, Adeline MT, Solignac M, Vautrin D,
Robert-Gero M. Development and characterization of
paromomycin-resistant Leishmania donovani
promastigotes. Parasite 1998; 5 : 167-73.
262. Thakur CP, Bhowmick S, Dolfi L, Olliaro P. Aminosidine
plus sodium sitobgluconate for the treatment of Indian kala-
azar: a randomized dose-finding clinical trial. Trans R Soc
Trop Med Hyg 1995; 89 : 219-3.
263. Chunge CN, Owate J, Pamba HO, Donno L. Treatment of
visceral leishmaniasis in Kenia by aminosidine alone or
combined with sodium stibogluconate. Trans R Soc Trop
Med Hyg 1990; 84 : 221-5.
264. Thakur CP, Olliaro P, Gothoskar S, Bhowmick S,
Choudhury BK, Prasad S, et al. Treatment of visceral
leishmaniasis (kala-azar) with aminosidine
(=paramomicine)-antimonial combination, a pilot study in
Bihar, India. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1992; 86 : 615-6.
265. Seaman J, Pryce D, Sondorp HE, Moody A, Brycesson
AD, Davidson RN. Epidemic visceral leishmaniasis in
Sudan: A randomized trial of aminosidine plus sodium
stibogluconate versus sodium stibogluconate alone.
J Infect Dis 1993; 168 : 715-20.
266. Berman JD. Human leishmaniasis: Clinical, diagnostic, and
chemotherapeutic developments in the last 10 years. Clin
Infect Dis 1997 10-15 April, 2005; 24 : 684-703.
267. Jha TK, Sundar S, Bhattacharya SK, Sinha PK,
Thakur CP. Paramomicyn as a new cure for visceral
leishmaniasis: preliminary results of a phase III randomised
controlled trial of efficacy and safety. Third World
Congress on Leishmaniasis, Palermo-Terrasini, Sicily
(Italy) 10-15 April, 2005; 2205.33.
268. Urbina JA. Lipid biosynthesis pathways as
chemotherapeutic targets in kinetoplastid parasites.
Parasitology 1997; 114 : S91-9.
386 INDIAN J MED RES, MARCH 2006
269. Murray HW, Delph-Etienne S. Visceral leishmanicidal
activity of hexadecylphosphocoline (miltefosine) in mice
deficient in T cells and activated macrophage microbicidal
mechanisms. J Infect Dis 2000; 181 : 795-9.
270. Murray HW, Delph-Etienne S. Roles of endogenous
gamma interferon and macrophage microbicidal
mechanisms in host response to chemotherapy in
experimental visceral leishmaniasis. Infect Immun 2000;
68 : 288-93.
271. Murray HW. Suppression of posttreatment recurrence of
experimental visceral leishmaniasis in T-cell-deficient mice
by oral miltefosine. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2000;
44 : 3235-6.
272. Kuhlencord A, Maniera T, Eibl H, Unger C.
Hexadecylphophocholine: oral treatment of visceral
leishmaniasis in mice. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
1992 ; 36 : 1630-4.
273. Le Fichoux Y, Rousseau D, Ferrua B, Ruette S,
Lelievre A, Grousson D, et al. Short- and long-term
efficacy of hexadecylphophocholine against established
Leishmania infantum  infection in BALB/c mice.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1998; 42 : 654-8.
274. Schmidt-Ott R, Klenner T, Overath P, Aebischer T. Topical
treatment with hexadecylphophocholine (Miltex)
effiently reduces parasite burden in experimental cutaneous
leishmaniasis.  Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1999;
93 : 85-90.
275. Sundar S, Rosenkaimer F, Makharia MK, Goyal AK,
Mandal AK, Voss A, et al. Trial of oral miltefosine for
visceral leishmaniasis. Lancet 1998; 352 : 1821-3.
276. Sundar S, Gupta LB, Makharia MK, Singh MK, Voss A,
Rosenkaimer F, et al .  Oral treatment of visceral
leishmaniasis with miltefosine. Ann Trop Med Parasitol
1999; 93 : 589-97.
277. Jha TK, Sundar S, Thakur CP, Bachmann P, Karbwang J,
Fischer C, et al. Miltefosine, an oral agent, for the treatment
of Indian visceral leishmaniasis. N Engl J Med 1999;
341 : 1795-800.
278. Sundar S, Makharia A, More DK, Agrawal G, Voss A,
Fisher  C,  et  al .  Short-course of  oral  mil tefosine
treatment of visceral leishmaniasis. Clin Infect Dis 2000;
31 : 1110-3.
279. Sindermann H, Engel KR, Fischer C, Bommer W,
Miltefosine Compassionate Use Program. Oral miltefosine
for leishmaniasis in immunocompromised patients:
compassionate use in 39 patients with HIV infection.
Clin Infect Dis 2004; 39 : 1520-3.
280. Choi CM, Lerner EA. Leishmaniasis: recognition and
management with a focus on the immunocompromised
patient. Am J Clin Dermatol 2002; 3 : 91-105.
281. Kager PA, Rees PH, Wellde BT, Hockmeyer WT,
Lyerly WH. Allopurinol in the treatment of visceral
leishmaniasis. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1981; 75 :
556-9.
282. Jha TK. Evaluation of allopurinol in the treatment of
kala-azar occurring in North Bihar, India. Trans R Soc Trop
Med Hyg 1983; 77 : 204-7.
283. Halim MA, Alfurayh O, Kalin ME, Dammas S, al-Eisa A,
Damanhouri G. Successful treatment of visceral
leishmaniasis with allopurinol plus ketoconazole in a renal
transplant recipient after the occurrence of pancreatitis due
to stibogluconate. Clin Infect Dis 1993; 16 : 397-9.
284. Baum KF, Berens RL. Successful treatment of cutaneous
leishmaniasis with allopurinol after failure of treatment
with ketoconazole. Clin Infect Dis 1994; 18 : 813-5.
285. Chunge CN, Gachihi G, Muigai R, Wassuna A, Rachid
JR, Chulay JD, et al. Visceral leishmaniasis unresponsive
to antimonial drugs. III. Successful treatment useing a
combination of sodium stibogluconate plus allopurinol.
Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1985; 79 : 715-8.
286. Di Martino L, Mantovani MP, Gradoni L, Gramiccia M,
Guandalini S. Low dosage combination of meglumine
antimoniate plus allopurinol as first choice treatment of
infantile visceral leishmaniasis in Italy. Tans R Soc Trop
Med Hyg 1990; 84 : 534-5.
287. Gachihi GS, Were JBO, Coyne PE, Muigai RK,
Nyakundi PM, Wasunna KMA, et al. A prospective
randomized trial of sodium stibogluconate alone versus
sodium stibogluconate plus allopurinol in the treatment of
visceral leishmaniasis in Kenya. Proceedings XIIIth Int
Congress Trop Med Malaria. Jomlien. Pattaya. Thailand.
1992; Abstract no. TuP8-13.
288. Ribera E, Ocaña I, de Otero J, Cortes E, Gasser I,
Pahissa A. Prophylaxis of visceral leishmaniasis in human
immunodeficiency virus-infected patients. Am J Med 1996;
100 : 496-501.
CRUZ et al: LEISHMANIA/HIV, CO-INFECTIONS 387
289. Badaró R, Falcoff E, Badaro FS, Carvalho EM,
Pedral-Sampaio D, Barral A, et al. Treatment of visceral
leishmaniasis with pentavalent antimony and interferon-
γ. N Eng J Med 1990; 322 : 16-21.
290. Squires KE, Rosenkaimer F, Sherwood JA, Forni AL,
Were JB, Murray HW. Immunochemotherapy for visceral
leishmaniasis: a controlled pilot trial of antimony versus
antimony plus interferon-gamma. Am J Trop Med Hyg
1993; 48 : 666-9.
291. Sundar S, Rosenkaimer F, Lesser ML, Murray HW.
Immunochemotherapy for a systemic intracellular
infection: accelerated response using interferon-gamma in
visceral leishmaniasis. J Infect Dis 1995; 171 : 992-6.
292. Sundar S, Murray HW. Effect of treatment with interferon-
gamma alone in visceral leishmaniasis. J Infect Dis 1995;
172 : 1627-9.
293. Smith AC, Yardley V, Rhodes J, Croft SL. Activity of the
novel immunomodulatory compound tucaresol against
experimental visceral leishmaniasis. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 2000; 44 : 1494-8.
294. Badaró R, Nascimento C, Carvalho JS, Badaro F,
Russo D, Ho JL, et al. Recombinant human granulocyte-
macrophage colony-stimulating factor reverses neutropenia
and reduces secondary infections in visceral leishmaniasis.
J Infect Dis 1994; 170 : 413-8.
295. Scharton-Kersten T, Afonso LC, Wysocka M,
Trinchieri G, Scott P. IL-12 is required for natural killer
cell activation and subsequent T helper 1 cell development
in experimental leishmaniasis. J Immunol 1995; 154 :
5320-30.
296. Nabors GS, Afonso LC, Farrell JP, Scott P. Switch from a
type 2 to a type 1 T helper cell response and cure of
established Leishmania major infection in mice is induced
by combined therapy with IL-12 and Pentostam. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1995; 92 : 3142-6.
297. Soriano V, Dona C, Rodríguez-Rosado R, Barreiro P,
González-Lahoz J.  Discontinuation of secondary
prophylaxis for opportunistic infections in HIV-infected
patients receiving highly active antiretroviral therapy.
AIDS 2000; 14 : 383-6.
298. Berenguer J, Cosin J, Miralles P, López JC, Padilla B.
Discontinuation of secondary prophylaxis in HIV-infected
patients who have responded to highly active anti retroviral
therapy. AIDS 2000; 14 : 2946-58.
299. WHO. Leishmania/HIV co-infection, South-western Europe
1990-1998. Geneva: World Health Organization;
mimeographed document 2000 WHO/LEISH/2000.42 2000.
300. Rosenthal E, Marty P. Recent understanding in the
treatment of visceral leishmaniasis. J Postgrad Med
2003; 49 : 61-8.
301. López-Vélez R, Videla S, Márquez M, Boix V,
Jiménez-Mejías ME, Górgolas M, et al. Spanish HIV-
Leishmania Study Group. Amphotericin B lipid complex
versus no treatment in the secondary prophylaxis of
visceral leishmaniasis in HIV-infected patients.  J
Antimicrob Chemother 2004; 53 : 540-3.
302. Montana M, Chochoi N, Monges P, Ravaux I, Faraut F,
Gensollen S, et al. Liposomal amphotericin B in secondary
prophylaxis of visceral leishmaniasis in HIV-infected
patients: report of five clinical cases. Pathol Biol (Paris)
2004; 52 : 66-75.
303. Jha TK, Sundar S, Thakur CP, Bachmann P, Karbwang J,
Fischer C, et al. Miltefosine, an oral agent, for the treatment
of Indian visceral leishmaniasis. N Engl J Med 1999;
341 : 255-9.
388 INDIAN J MED RES, MARCH 2006
Reprint requests: Dr Philippe Desjeux, Senior Program Officer for Disease Control, Institute for One World Health (iOWH)
899 rue Jean de Gingins 01220 Divonne, France
e-mail: pdesjeux@oneworldhealth.org
