Functional Proteomics Approach to Investigate the Biological
Activities of cDNAs Implicated in Breast Cancer
Abigail E. Witt,†,‡ Lisa M. Hines,†,§,⊥ Nicole L. Collins,‡ Yanhui Hu,§ Ruwanthi N. Gunawardane,‡
Donna Moreira,§ Jacob Raphael,§ Daniel Jepson,§ Malvika Koundinya,§ Andreas Rolfs,§
Barbara Taron,§ Steven J. Isakoff,‡,| Joan S. Brugge,‡,* and Joshua LaBaer§,*
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston Massachusetts 02115, Harvard Institute of
Proteomics, Harvard Medical School, 320 Charles Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02141, and Department of
Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115
Received November 10, 2005
Functional proteomics approaches that comprehensively evaluate the biological activities of human
cDNAs may provide novel insights into disease pathogenesis. To systematically investigate the
functional activity of cDNAs that have been implicated in breast carcinogenesis, we generated a
collection of cDNAs relevant to breast cancer, the Breast Cancer 1000 (BC1000), and conducted screens
to identify proteins that induce phenotypic changes that resemble events which occur during tumor
initiation and progression. Genes were selected for this set using bioinformatics and data mining tools
that identify genes associated with breast cancer. Greater than 1000 cDNAs were assembled and
sequence verified with high-throughput recombination-based cloning. To our knowledge, the BC1000
represents the first publicly available sequence-validated human disease gene collection. The functional
activity of a subset of the BC1000 collection was evaluated in cell-based assays that monitor changes
in cell proliferation, migration, and morphogenesis in MCF-10A mammary epithelial cells expressing
a variant of ErbB2 that can be inducibly activated through dimerization. Using this approach, we
identified many cDNAs, encoding diverse classes of cellular proteins, that displayed activity in one or
more of the assays, thus providing insights into a large set of cellular proteins capable of inducing
functional alterations associated with breast cancer development.
Keywords: functional proteomics ¥ breast cancer ¥ cell-based assay ¥ cDNA expression ¥ proliferation ¥ migration
¥ invasion ¥ acinar morphogenesis ¥ BC1000 ¥ high-throughput
Introduction
The human adult breast is an organized, branch-like struc-
ture comprising ducts, lobes, and intervening stromal tissue.
Lobes are composed of multiple individual units termed acini,
which have hollow lumen encased by a single layer of polarized
epithelial cells that are surrounded by myoepithelial cells and
a basement membrane. Disruption of this well-ordered struc-
ture is a prerequisite for the initiation of carcinoma. Increased
proliferation of epithelial cells, loss of acinar structure, and
filling of luminal space are common characteristics of the
premalignant stages of breast cancer, such as ductal carcinoma
in situ (DCIS). The transformation from premalignant stages
to invasive disease is commonly associated with loss of anchor-
age dependence, invasion through the basement membrane
and metastasis. The genetic events that trigger the conversion
of normal breast acini to premalignant stages of breast cancer
and the subsequent progression to malignancy are only
partially understood. The loss of tumor suppressor function
or the gain of oncoprotein activity can induce some of these
changes. Since these proteins can act as master switches and
regulate many downstream pathways, their dysfunction can
lead to broad reaching consequences.
Although many tumor suppressors and oncoproteins have
been characterized with respect to their biological activities,
numerous genomic and proteomic studies have revealed
hundreds of alterations in uncharacterized proteins in breast
tumor cells.1-7 One limitation of such analyses is the inability
to distinguish whether the candidate cDNAs or proteins are
the cause or the effect of these oncogenic transitions.
One approach to identify cDNAs that control tumorigenic
transitions is to use phenotypic assays to screen for cDNAs that
can alter the behavior of cells in a defined manner. In this
context, a causal relationship can be established between
protein and phenotype, and with further testing, a role in
disease development can be further examined. The value of
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. Joshua LaBaer, Tel:
(617) 324-0827. Fax: (617) 324-0824. Email: josh@hms.harvard.edu. Joan S.
Brugge, Tel: (617) 432-3974. Fax: (617) 432-3969. E-mail: joan_brugge@
hms.harvard.edu.
† Contributed equally to this work.
‡ Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School.
§ Harvard Institute of Proteomics, Harvard Medical School.
| Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute.
⊥ Present address: Department of Preventive Medicine and Biometrics,
University of Colorado at Denver and Health Sciences Center, Aurora,
Colorado 80045.
10.1021/pr050395r CCC: $33.50  2006 American Chemical Society Journal of Proteome Research 2006, 5, 599-610 599
Published on Web 02/08/2006
phenotypic assays can be enhanced using cell culture systems
in which cells are allowed to organize into structures that
resemble the natural architecture of breast acini, such as three-
dimensional (3D) basement membrane cultures of MCF-10A
cells. MCF-10A cells are immortalized, nontransformed breast
epithelial cells that require epidermal growth factor (EGF) for
proliferation.8 In 3D basement membrane cultures, they form
hollow, growth-arrested structures that resemble normal hu-
man mammary acini.9-11 Using 3D basement membrane
cultures of MCF-10A cells, we have demonstrated that 3D
cultures provide a context to monitor a broad spectrum of
biological activities. Indeed, each of the cDNAs that we have
found to induce hyperproliferation provoke distinct changes
in the architecture of acinar structures.12,13 For example,
hyperproliferative structures induced by cyclin D are hollow
due to clearance of the proliferating, centrally localized cells
through programmed cell death; whereas the luminal space of
structures expressing activated ErbB2 homodimers or CSF-1
receptors are filled with cells as a consequence of the anti-
apoptotic activity of these activated receptor tyrosine ki-
nases.10,14,15 In addition, structures expressing activated CSF-
1R show distinct alterations in cell-cell adhesion, leading to
dissociation of cells within the structures.
The progression from premalignancy to malignancy is in part
marked by the appearance of cell migratory behavior. We
previously conducted a pilot screen of 30 candidate cDNAs to
identify proteins that cooperate with ErbB2 activation to induce
cell migration in MCF-10A cells in the absence of motogenic
factors such as EGF.16 Two members of the Transforming
Growth Factor â (TGFâ) family, TGFâ1 and TGFâ3, were
identified as pro-migratory. Furthermore, co-activation of
ErbB2 and TGFâ signaling pathways appeared to promote
invasive behavior in MCF-10A cells. Several reports have
provided supporting evidence that TGFâ can collaborate with
ErbB2 in mice to promote metastasis.17-19 These data suggest
that the TGF signaling pathway operates synergistically with
ErB2 signaling to promote both metastatic and invasive be-
havior in premalignant cells.
These pilot studies have illustrated the value of expanding
such phenotypic screens to much larger gene sets. Historically,
large-scale screening experiments in mammalian cells have
relied upon pooled cDNA libraries as the cDNA sources,
carrying with them a number of limitations.20-22 The methods
used to produce these libraries result in many incomplete or
out of frame cDNA products, missing cDNAs (not expressed
in the mRNA source tissues), and, most importantly, a vast
over-representation of proteins produced from abundant
mRNAs. Consequently, millions of clones (a large fraction
repetitive or aberrant) must be examined in order to ensure
broader coverage of the genome, ultimately limiting the types
of screens that can be implemented using pools of cDNAs, thus
requiring deconvolution and/or rescue of responsible cDNA.
Ideally, a functional screen of the proteome would entail
testing every distinct protein independently, requiring an
indexed collection of full length sequence verified clones
encompassing the entire proteome. The availability of such a
cataloged clone set would enable efficient proteomic screens
in which hits can be easily identified, information regarding
all clones (even those with no response) extracted and the
significance of each clone assimilated. With the caveat that not
all cDNAs identified by these screens would prove to be directly
related to the underlying biology, it is likely that their identi-
fication may contribute toward understanding the molecular
pathways involved.
To examine the feasibility and validity of this approach, we
sought to build and screen a moderately sized collection of
breast cancer-related cDNAs. Our screening strategy involved
assembling a ready-to-use clone collection of candidate cDNAs
and screening the first several hundred genes in this collection
in three well- characterized cell-based phenotypic assays to
identify cDNAs that induce cancer-like phenotypes. We have
assembled the Breast Cancer 1000 (BC1000), a sequence-
validated cDNA collection of 1000 breast cancer-related cDNAs
ranging from well-studied oncogenes to less conspicuous breast
cancer-associated cDNAs. A subset of cDNAs in this collection
was transferred to retroviral vectors, transduced into MCF-10A
cells, and assayed for their ability to induce phenotypic
characteristics associated with premalignancy and malignancy.
Specifically, we tested for EGF-independent proliferation,
disruption of acinar morphogenesis, and cell migratory behav-
ior independently or cooperatively with activated ErbB2.
Through this comprehensive approach, we identified poten-
tially novel functional activities for known breast cancer-
associated cDNAs.
Materials and Methods
Bioinformatics. MedGene, an advanced literature-mining
software developed in-house, was utilized to systematically
identify all breast cancer-related cDNAs (http://hipseq.med.har-
vard.edu/MEDGENE/).23 Various statistical methods were used
to estimate the strength of gene-disease relationships using
MedGene, including chi-square analysis, Fisher’s exact prob-
abilities, relative risk of gene, relative risk of disease and the
product of frequency. All statistical scores were log-transformed
to obtain a normal distribution. The validation of MedGene
was done using 3 different approaches: (1) a comparison of
MedGene results with manually annotated disease databases,
(2) a detailed analysis on the 1467 genes related to prostate
cancer, and (3) a global analysis of 1000 diseases.23 As previously
described, the results demonstrated that MedGene was more
comprehensive than manually annotated disease databases,
with an estimated 70-80% of identified gene-disease relation-
ships representing true relationships.
All aspects of clone production were tracked and managed
by our internally designed laboratory information management
system (LIMS), termed the FLEX database. This relational
database has a three-tier architecture: data storage (Oracle 8i),
business logic (Java, Java Servlets, Java Server Pages, the Struts
framework, Tomcat) and presentation layers (HTML). Oligo-
nucleotides incorporating the appropriate cloning recom-
bination sites and clone format were designed based on the
nearest-neighbor algorithm using our oligonucleotide generator
software. The FLEXGene database and the oligonucleo-
tide generator have web-based interfaces that users can query
(www.hip.harvard.edu>Informatics>Programs).
Cloning Strategy. Oligonucleotides specific for each target
cDNA that incorporated the appropriate cloning recombination
sites and clone format (closed or fusion) were generated based
on the nearest-neighbor algorithm. PCR products were gel
purified on 1% agarose gels in a size-based saw tooth pattern
to avoid cloning aberrant products such as primer-dimer,
alternative splice forms and cross-hybridizing sequences. Puri-
fied PCR products were captured into either pDONR201
(Gateway) or pDNR-dual (Creator) using the BP Clonase
(Invitrogen) or In-Fusion enzyme (Clontech), repectively.24 The
research articles Witt et al.
600 Journal of Proteome Research ¥ Vol. 5, No. 3, 2006
resulting intermediate was then transformed into DH5R bac-
teria, robotically plated onto custom-designed bioassay dishes
with 48 compartments and 4 independent colonies were picked
automatically using the MegaPix (Genetix) colony-picking
robot. Colonies were grown in liquid culture, which was then
allocated to produce archived glycerol stocks and prepped to
make DNA for sequencing and transfer to other vectors.
PCR Amplification of BC1000 cDNAs. PCR reactions, done
in 96-well format, consisted of 50uL reactions containing 0.1
uM oligonucleotides, 1 Platinum Pfx Amplification Buffer and
Enhancer (Invitrogen), 0.3 mM dNTPs, 1 mM MgSO4, 1U
Platinum Pfx DNA Polymerase, and 100 ng brain:placenta (1:
4) first-strand cDNA (prepared in-house) or 200 ng plasmid
template. For Gateway clones, a second PCR reaction with
similar conditions was done to add recombination sites and
to refresh enzyme. Annealing temperatures and times, as well
as cycle numbers varied depending on cloning strategy,
template, and gene size. The final PCR products were visualized
on 1% agarose gels and correctly sized bands were excised. DNA
was isolated through gel filtration.
Clone Capture Reactions. Capture of cDNAs into the entry
vector pDONR201 for Gateway or pDNR-dual for Creator was
performed by carrying out 10 íL reactions in 96-well format.
BD In-Fusion capture reactions contained 7 íL of gel-purified
and glass filtered PCR product, 1 In-Fusion reaction buffer,
0.1 ng/íL pDNR-dual, 1 BSA, and 0.5 íL of In-Fusion enzyme
concentrate diluted 1:10 in In-Fusion dilution buffer. Gateway
BP capture reactions contained 5 íL of gel-purified and glass
filtered PCR product, 1 BP Reaction Buffer, 1 ng/íL pDONR201,
and 2 íL BP Clonase. Reagents were thawed and mixed on ice,
and capture reactions were incubated at 25 °C overnight.
Transformation of DH5R Bacterial Cells and Isolation of
Clones. Transformations for Gateway clones were performed
with 5 íL BP reaction, 45 íL KCM (100 mM KCL, 30 mM CaCl2,
and 50 mM MgCl2), and 50 íL DH5R cells. Reactions were
incubated for 20 min on ice, followed by 10 min at room
temperature. Ninety microliters of TB was then added to each
well and plates were shaken (370 rpm) at 37 °C for 1 h. For
In-Fusion, 5 íL of capture reaction diluted in water (1:5) was
added to 45 íL KCM (100 mM KCL, 30 mM CaCl2, and 50 mM
MgCl2), and 50 íL DH5R cells. Reactions were incubated in
ice water for 30 min, placed in 42 °C for 45 s, and then
transferred back to ice water for 2 min. One-hundred twenty
microliters of SOC was then added to each well and plates were
shaken (370 rpm) at 37 °C for 1 h. Transformations were plated
on 48 well grid LB-Agar plates containing either 50 íg/mL
Kanamycin (Gateway) or 125 íg/mL Ampicillin and 40 íg/mL
X-gal (BD In-Fusion). Individual isolates were grown in 1 mL
LB containing the appropriate antibiotics. DNA preparations
were done with Millipore Montage (Qiagen).
Clone Validation. All clones were submitted for full-length
DNA sequence analysis. We utilized a primer walking strategy,
which encompassed end reads for all clones followed by
internal sequencing for clones that required further sequencing.
The sequencing reactions were done either in-house or by
Agencourt. We then assembled and aligned sequence reads for
each clone to the expected target sequence using either
Sequencher software or our own Automated Clone Evaluation
(ACE) software. Aligned sequences were manually scanned for
potential mismatches. All discrepancies were confirmed by
visual inspection of trace files.
Cell Culture and Materials. MCF-10A cells were cultured as
previously described11 in Growth medium (DMEM/F12 (Invit-
rogen) supplemented with 5% horse serum, 20 ng/mL epider-
mal growth factor (EGF), 10 íg/mL insulin or 100 ng/mL IGF-I
(R&D Biosystems), 0.5 íg/mL hydrocortisone, 100 ng/mL
cholera toxin, 50 U/mL penicillin, and 50 mg/mL streptomy-
cin.). Matrigel was purchased from Collaborative Biosciences;
the protein concentration of the lots used ranged between 9
and 11 mg mL-1. AP1510 was from ARIAD Pharmaceuticals.
Retroviral Transduction and Cell Lines. The generation of
MCF-10A cells expressing the chimeric receptor p75.B2 has
been described.10 cDNAs (with a STOP codon) captured in
pDONR-201 were transferred into a modified version of pBABE-
Puro, pBABE-puroATT, in which the Gateway cassette was
inserted into the EcoR1 site according to the manufacturer’s
protocol (Invitrogen). MCF-10As and MCF-10As with the in-
ducibly activated ErbB2 receptor (10A.B2) were plated and
infected with VSV-G pseudotyped retroviruses expressing cDNA
from the BC1000 collection then selected for vector expression
with Puromycin, as described.16 Control cells were generated
by transfection of the empty pBabe-puroATT vector alone and
simultaneous Puromycin selection.11
EGF-Independent Proliferation Assay. As mammary epi-
thelial cells require EGF to undergo normal cellular prolifera-
tion, 231 cDNAs were screened for the ability to confer EGF-
independent proliferation. Cells were virally transduced with
unique retroviral vectors encoding cDNAs from a subset of
the BC1000 collection and selected for vector expression 48 h
after completion of antibiotic selection. EGF-independent
proliferation assays were performed by plating 3  104
MCF-10A cells in 6.0 cm-diameter dishes in Assay media
(MCF-10A growth media containing 1% serum and no EGF).
Cultures were maintained for 12-14 days. Proliferation was
assessed after fixation and crystal violet staining. A cDNA was
scored as a hit if the induced cellular proliferation was
estimated to be more than 3-fold above the vector-transfected
MCF10A control.
Morphogenesis Assays. Acinar structures were generated by
plating individual 10A.B2 cells expressing each of 265 BC1000
cDNAs in the absence of dimerizer in 3D culture within a
reconstituted basement membrane (Matrigel). After 15-18 days
in culture, acini were stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylin-
dole (DAPI) to ascertain whether acinar units had basally
localized nuclei and a hollow lumen. Three-dimensional assays
were performed using the overlay method as described.16
cDNAs were scored as a hit if any abnormalities were observed
in acinar formation, morphology, or lumen formation or if
invasion into Matrigel was observed. In addition to the initial
screen, any validated migration hits were also examined with
10A.B2 cells in 3D basement membrane cultures in the pres-
ence of AP1510. Cells that were examined under these condi-
tions were initially plated in an identical manner, and then 4
days after seeding in 3D culture, EGF was withdrawn and Assay
media with 500 nM AP1510 was added. Similar assays were
performed with 10A.16 and 10A.21 cells without the addition
of AP1510 and were monitored over 24 h.
Transwell Migration Assay. MCF-10A cells as well as the
10A.B2 subtype (with or without dimerizer) will not migrate
without additional stimuli. 10A.B2 cells were transduced with
each of the 258 cDNAs from the BC1000 collection and were
starved overnight in Assay media. Cells (1  105) were added
to the top chambers of 24-well transwell plates (BD, 8 ím pore
size), and Assay media with 500 nM AP1510 was added to the
bottom chambers. After overnight incubation, top (nonmi-
grated) cells were removed with a cotton swab, and bottom
Biological Activities of cDNAs Implicated in Breast Cancer research articles
Journal of Proteome Research ¥ Vol. 5, No. 3, 2006 601
(migrated) cells were fixed and stained with crystal violet to
visualize cells. Addition of AP1510, the chimeric ErbB2 dimer-
izer, was utilized to activate ErbB2. cDNAs were scored as a
hit if they initially induced an estimated 2-fold increase in
migration over the vector-transduced control. Experiments
were repeated a minimum of three times for cDNAs that scored
as a hit, and considered a validated hit if a migratory phenotype
was observed at least twice. Validated hits were also tested
under similar conditions without the addition of 500 nM
AP1510.
Results
Selection of BC1000 cDNAs. To provide a useful resource
for studying the mechanisms involved in the development of
breast cancer, we built a clone collection of more than 1000
cDNAs with particular relevance to this disease. Selection of
the cDNAs for inclusion in the BC1000 was a collective effort:
roughly 200 genes were suggested by local experts in breast
cancer research, 50 genes were shown to be overexpressed in
ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) by SAGE analysis,4 and
the remainder were identified by MedGene (http://
hipseq.med.harvard.edu/MEDGENE/login.jsp). MedGene is a
literature-mining software application that searches all titles
and abstracts in the Medline database to identify cDNAs co-
cited with a particular disease and utilizes statistical methods
to rank the relative strengths of these gene-disease relationships
based on the frequency of total citation and co-citation.23 On
the basis of our previous evaluation and validation of MedGene,
we utilized the log of the product of frequency (LPF) to rank
the list of breast cancer genes.23 LPF represents the natural log
of the product of the proportion of disease/gene double hits
to disease single hits and the proportion of disease/gene double
hits to gene single hits.
Using MedGene, we identified approximately 2500 cDNAs
that were associated with breast cancer among all Medline
abstracts. As with all automated data mining tools, MedGene
has associated false positive and false negative rates. The false
negative rate, the frequency of omitting cDNAs related to breast
cancer in the literature, is approximately 9% and occurs with
cDNAs cited only rarely.23 The false positive rate (cDNAs
erroneously listed as related to the disease) is dependent on
the frequency of gene-disease co-citation, averaging approxi-
mately 26%.23 False positives usually result because other terms
such as the names of cell lines, restriction sites, plasmids,
medical terms, etc., share the same names as cDNAs. The
BC1000 cDNA list was assembled by favoring the highest ranked
cDNAs (most related to breast cancer) where the false positive
rate is lowest. When cloning attempts for some cDNAs failed,
additional cDNAs were taken from the list as needed to achieve
a final collection of 1000 breast cancer-related cDNA clones.
All relevant information for each cDNA was obtained from
NCBI and imported into the FLEXGene, our clone tracking
database.
Construction of the BC1000. To ensure that the BC1000
clones would be available for the broadest range of experi-
ments, the coding regions of the cDNAs were captured into
recombinational cloning vectors. The advantage of this cloning
strategy is the ability to transfer the coding sequences in frame
and without mutation into any protein expression vector in a
simple one-step reaction. The BC1000 gene collection was
assembled into the Gateway system (Invitrogen) (http://
www.invitrogen.com/content.cfm?pageid)4072) and/or the
Creator system (BD Biosciences)(http://www.clontech.com/
clontech/products/families/creator/index.shtml). Clones were
produced in two formats: one with a universal stop codon
(TAG) to allow expression of native protein (closed) and one
where the stop codon has been replaced with Leucine (TTG)
to allow carboxyl-terminal peptide fusions (fusion). Amino-
terminal peptide fusions can be added to both forms.
During clone production, we utilized an established auto-
mated clone production pipeline and laboratory information
management system (LIMS), achieving a final throughput of
four 96-well plates of cDNAs per week. Figure 1 illustrates a
complete schematic used in creating the BC1000 collection. All
processes were carried out in bar-coded containers and tracked
by the Oracle-based FLEXGene database at both sample and
plate level along with any relevant process results (gel images,
PCR success, colony count, etc.). The multistep process began
with selecting cDNAs for the production queue and completed
with the culture and DNA preparation of 8 total candidate
isolates for each cDNA (4 open isolates and 4 fusion isolates).
The clone production process occurred in two stages based
on PCR template, starting with clones in the NIH Mammalian
Gene Collection (MGC) and followed by first-strand cDNA. We
utilized the MGC clones for all BC1000 cDNAs that were
available in this collection, and all other BC1000 cDNAs were
obtained from first-strand cDNA produced from human brain
and placenta mRNA (1:4). MGC clones were preferred because
they provided a higher concentration of well-characterized
template, thereby reducing PCR cycle number and the muta-
tion rate. The PCR products were all gel purified to avoid
cloning contaminants or inappropriate splice forms and all
Figure 1. Schematic representation of workflow utilized to create
the BC1000 collection.
research articles Witt et al.
602 Journal of Proteome Research ¥ Vol. 5, No. 3, 2006
resulting clones were single colony purified to ensure that each
represents a single DNA species.
The ability to generate PCR product was the strongest
predictor of cloning success rate. Extensive testing and analysis
of various conditions revealed, not surprisingly, that the most
important PCR parameter was template. Overall, first-strand
cDNA was better than bacterially amplified library DNA. Brain,
placenta and testis tissues proved to be the best sources for
first-strand cDNA. PCR success rate dramatically improved
from approximately 60% to 95% when utilizing the MGC clones
as template. Furthermore, this method required substantially
fewer PCR cycles (12 versus 40 rounds), resulting in a lower
mutation rate and a reduction in cost and time for sequencing.
Other factors that contributed to unsuccessful cloning were
failed recombination reactions and the capture of incorrect
cDNAs or cDNAs with sequences that differed from the
expected wild-type sequence.
Clone Validation. For each gene format (closed or fusion),
one isolate was initially selected for full-length sequencing. We
utilized strict criteria for inclusion in the BC1000 collection.
Clones that contained any form of a truncation mutation, a
reading frame mutation or that differed by more than one
missense mutation from the wild-type sequence were not
included in the BC1000. Silent mutations and allelic variation
identified in GenBank were considered acceptable. Additional
isolates were sequenced when the first isolate was deemed
unacceptable.
In the NCBI GenBank database, many cDNAs have multiple
mRNA sequence entries, which often differ slightly from one
another presumably due to natural sequence variation. As the
“expected” sequence of the clones produced from first strand
cDNA was not known a priori, the reference target sequence
was arbitrarily selected from among the relevant entries for that
cDNA. Actual clone sequences that did not match the selected
reference sequence could represent allelic variation rather than
mutations. In this regard, MGC clones had the advantage that
there was no ambiguity about the expected sequence. We used
BLAST or our automated Polymorphism Finder25 to query all
relevant clone sequence discrepancies with the GenBank
database to determine whether they represented previously
described variants. If these discrepancies were previously
observed in GenBank, they were considered allelic variation,
not mutations. We observed a cumulative estimated mutation
rate of 1 base change per 1000 nucleotides. Roughly 40% of
observed base pair differences between the observed and
expected clone sequence were previously described in the
GenBank database, such as alternate splice forms and allelic
variants. Overall, the number of BC1000 clones with a potential
missense mutation was fewer than 15%, and many of these
will likely represent unidentified genetic variation as opposed
to mutation. A complete list of cDNAs in the BC1000 collection
can be viewed from the Harvard Institute of Proteomics website
(http://www.hip.harvard.edu/).
Phenotypic Screens. To assess the range of functional
consequences of overexpressing the BC1000 cDNAs, we intro-
duced the first 265 constructed cDNAs into a line of immortal-
ized breast epithelial cells (MCF-10A) and subjected these cells
to a single pass screen using a variety of phenotypic assays.
To enhance the sensitivity of the screens, we utilized a
derivative line of MCF-10A cells (10A.B2) expressing an induc-
ibly activated variant of ErbB2, which allowed us to analyze
the functional activities of the BC1000 cDNAs in the absence
or presence of a sensitized background. The 10A.B2 cells
express a chimeric receptor that can be activated by dimer-
ization mediated by the small molecule, AP1510.10 We initially
evaluated the ability of the expressed cDNAs to promote
cellular proliferation in the absence of EGF, to perturb mor-
phogenesis of acinar structures in 3D basement membrane
cultures, and to induce EGF-independent cell migration. The
proliferation and morphogenesis assays were performed in the
absence of dimerizer, whereas the migration assays were
executed in the presence of dimerizer. These distinct screen
formats were employed since dimerization of ErbB2 induces
phenotypic effects in control cells in the cell proliferation and
morphogenesis assays, whereas the dimerization of ErbB2
results in minimal, if any, activity in migration assays. Thus, it
was feasible to activate ErbB2 in the migration assays to
generate a sensitized background. Each cDNA was introduced
by retroviral transduction and assayed independently using a
medium-throughput parallel approach. A list of all screened
cDNAs and their corresponding LPF ranking score (for those
identified by MedGene) are included in Supporting Information
Table 1, and Supporting Information Table 2 shows the genes
that were identified as hits in any of the three first pass screens.
LPF ranking is the log of the product frequency score generated
by MedGene, for which a more negative value is indicative of
a lower ranking with respect to the strength of the gene-disease
relationship.
Given that our cloning strategy was to prioritize genes based
on MedGene ranking score (LPF), the average LPF score was
higher for those screened compared to the complete list of
breast cancer genes obtained from MedGene (-10.07 versus
-11.63, respectively; Mann-Whitney rank sum test, P-value
<0.001). The overall first-pass hit rate for each initial screen
ranged between 8 and 29% of the 239 to 265 cDNAs tested
(Table 1). The relatively high hit rate likely reflects the bias of
the genes that were selected for association with breast cancer.
In addition, the highest hit rate in the migration assay may
also be a consequence of the use of sensitization in that assay.
Interestingly, the genes that scored as hits in the three first pass
screens were not biased toward the well-studied genes in the
literature. They had nearly the same average statistical literature
ranking score (LPF) as that of the entire set of screened genes
(-10.07 versus -10.15, respectively; Mann-Whitney rank sum
test, P-value ) 0.77), indicating that the genes identified from
these screens represented a broad range of less- to well-studied
breast cancer genes. The identification of less-studied breast
cancer genes exemplifies the capability of using an unbiased
functional proteomics approach to identify novel genes related
to various aspects of disease biology. As expected, the majority
of genes that scored in all three assays were proto-oncogenes,
which included ARAF, BMP5, HGF, HRAS, RHOG, EDG2, RAF1,
Table 1. Percentage of Single-Pass Hits for Initial Screens
assay
% hit rate (no. hits/
no. cDNAs screened)
proliferationa 8.8% (21/239)
morphogenesisb 22.3% (59/265)
migrationc 29.1% (75/258)
a Proliferation was assayed after plating 10A.B2 cells on 6-well dishes in
Assay medium over 10 days. A cDNA was scored as a hit if it induced more
than a 3-fold increase compared with control. b Morphogenesis was assessed
in 3D Matrigel cultures of 10A.B2 cells and a cDNAs was scored as a hit if
any abnormalities were observed in acinar formation, morphology or lumen
formation or if invasion into Matrigel was observed. c Migration was evalu-
ated in a transwell chamber using 10A.B2 cells treated with dimerizer. A
cDNA was scored as a hit if migration was more than 2-fold greater than
control.
Biological Activities of cDNAs Implicated in Breast Cancer research articles
Journal of Proteome Research ¥ Vol. 5, No. 3, 2006 603
JUNB, and TGFR. The fact that these screens identified both
genes that functioned only in specific assays as well as known
proto-oncogenes that scored in all three assays, demonstrates
the validity and power of the functional proteomics approach.
The genes that displayed strong induction of EGF-indepen-
dent proliferation are predictable hits (HGF, TGFR, and HRAS).
In addition, ARAF induced a moderate induction of prolifera-
tion, most likely due to production of an EGFR ligand, since
we have found that Raf1 and MEK2DD, an activated variant of
MEK2,14,26 also induce EGF-independent proliferation due to
autocrine production of an EGFR ligand (Debnath et al.)27 (and
data not shown). Several genes induced a mild, 2-5-fold
increase in cell proliferation. Further studies are required to
validate these hits.
The morphogenesis and migration screens produced the
greatest number of hits from the BC1000 cDNAs. A few
examples of cDNAs that altered acinar morphogenesis of
10A.B2 cells are shown in Figure 2. Observed phenotypic
abnormalities in the morphogenesis assays ranged from subtle
differences [such as delayed lumen formation (BCL2L1 data
not shown) or small spike-like projections (ORC1L data not
shown)], to large, disorganized spherical structures (ARAF,
GRB2), and disorganized hyperproliferative structures (JUNB),
in some cases displaying protrusive branches or cords that
resembled features of invasive tumor cells (EDG2, BMP5). The
extent to which acinar structure was disorganized often pre-
vented the analysis of normal acinar features [such as polarity
or lumen formation (ARAF, GRB2, JUNB, BMP5, EDG2)]. Given
the variety of phenotypic alterations and the subjectivity
associated with scoring morphogenesis hits, further validation
and analysis of hits were performed using the transwell
migration assay.
cDNAs that Induce Migration of MCF-10A.B2 Cells. Of the
75 cDNAs that induced cellular migration in the preliminary,
single-pass screen, 66 were retested and 41 of these reproduc-
ibly scored as valid hits (Table 2 and Supporting Information
Table 3). These were then examined under nonsensitized
conditions to evaluate the ability of the cDNA to induce
migration without ErbB2 cooperation. Of these cDNAs, 14
induced migration in the absence of ErbB2 activation (shown
in red). Several genes that induced migration of 10A.B2 cells
in the absence of dimerizer did not induce migration of
parental MCF-10A cells (e.g., TGFâ1, TGFâ3, RAD23B and
EDG2)(Supporting Information Table 3 and Seton Rogers et
al.16), suggesting that these genes may require weak signals from
ligand-independent dimerization of ErbB2 to induce migration.
The 41 validated migration hits were also reassessed in the
morphogenesis assay using 10A.B2 cells, with and without
dimerization of ErbB2. Of these 41 migration hits, 19 induced
alterations in the morphology of 3D structures in absence of
dimerizer (Table 3 and Supporting Information Table 3). The
majority of these cDNAs induced the formation of disorganized
structures, many of which showed a mild protrusive behavior
(examples shown in Figures 2 and 3). Twelve of these 19 cDNAs
were also hits in the ErbB2-independent migration assay
discussed above (GRB2, HRAS, ELF3, FOS, RHOG, EDG2, HGF,
RAF1, JUNB, IBSP, IL13, and TGFR).
Activation of the chimeric ErbB2 receptor by dimerization
in acinar structures causes constitutive, EGF-independent
proliferation and the formation of multi-acinar structures that
display filling of the luminal space (ref 10 and Figure 3). Most
of the 19 cDNAs that displayed migratory activity in the absence
of activated ErbB2 provoked a more dramatic perturbation of
structure when ErbB2 was activated, frequently involving
disruption of the spheroid acinar structure and the formation
of spike-like protrusions, invasive cell cords, or branch-like
tubular extensions (examples in Figure. 3). This screen thus
identified genes that can cooperate with ErbB2 to convert a
noninvasive phenotype into one which displays features that
have been associated with invasive behavior in breast carci-
noma.
Cell Cycle Inhibitors p16 and p21 Induce Migration and
Abnormal Morphology. In independent studies in our lab, we
observed that the CDK inhibitors (CKIs) p16 and p21 (CDKN2A
and CDKN1A) induced interesting migration phenotypes in
Figure 2. Representative 3D structures of cells expressing cDNAs
that scored as hits in the morphogenesis assays. MCF-10A cells
expressing the pBABE control vector (pBABE) or EDG2, ARAF,
GRB2, JUNB, or BMP5 were cultured in morphogenesis assays
as described in Materials and Methods for at least 16 days. The
variability of morphogenic phenotypes among structures within
the same experimental well is demonstrated by the inset in the
BMP5 panel.
Table 2. Categories of Functional Proteinsa
a Categorization of the known functional activities of cDNAs determined
to be validated hits from sensitized migration screens using 10A.B2 cells with
activated ErbB2. cDNAs depicted in red confer migratory ability in both
sensitized and nonsensitized conditions. cDNAs were scored as a hit if they
induced at least a 3-fold increase in migration over the vector-transduced
control unless they are indicated as having a mild (2-fold) effect. b SGK and
INSL6 were only tested with activated with ErbB2.
research articles Witt et al.
604 Journal of Proteome Research ¥ Vol. 5, No. 3, 2006
MCF-10A cells. As neither of these CDKIs scored in our
preliminary screens, we hypothesized that ectopic expression
of these cell cycle inhibitors could inhibit cell division and be
lost upon cell passage. Therefore, these genes were then
reevaluated in both the migration and morphogenesis assays
without passaging the MCF-10A cells post transduction. Upon
infection of MCF-10As with retroviral constructs expressing p16
or p21 (referred to as 10A.p16 cells and 10A.p21 cells, respec-
tively), the cells showed a flattened, enlarged phenotype,
consistent with a growth arrested state. G1 growth arrest was
confirmed in 10A.p16 and 10A.p21 cells using propidium iodide
staining and FACS analysis for DNA content (data not shown).
Interestingly, in 3D morphogenesis assays, 10A.p16 or 10A.p21
cells exhibited a very striking motile network phenotype (Figure
4). Within 1 h of seeding on Matrigel, 10A.p16 and 10A.p21 cells
began to move. By 6 h post-seeding (Figure 4 B, C), both
10A.p16 and 10A.p21 cells had begun to form networks that
extended throughout the well. By 24 h these networks were
extensive and consisted of many cells (Figure 4 E, F). In
contrast, vector control (pBABE) cells showed neither motility
nor the ability to form networks (Figure 4 A, D).
Discussion
In model organisms, ectopic expression screens have proved
a powerful method for identifying genes that confer specific
behaviors or phenotypes on cells. This approach has not been
widely exploited in mammalian settings due to the lack of
available expression-ready gene collections and inadequate
high-throughput methodologies for introducing cDNAs into
mammalian cells. Recent advances in high-throughput molec-
ular cloning technologies present the opportunity to address
some of these challenges. For example, the availability of
recombinational cloning systems provides a method for readily
transferring cDNAs into virtually any expression vector without
Table 3. Phenotypes of Validated Hits from the Sensitized Migration Screen that Also Induced Abnormal Morphology in 3D
Culture, without AP1510 Stimulation [(-) ErbB2], or with the Addition of AP1510 [(+) ErbB2] to Induce ErbB2 Activation
gene symbols observed phenotype (-) ErbB2 observed phenotype (+) ErbB2
I. Growth Factors/Hormones
BMP5 moderate protrusive behavior enhanced protrusive behavior
HGF larger structures, disorganized enhanced protrusive behavior
TGFR disorganized, mild protrusive behavior enhanced protrusive behavior
TGFâ1 smaller structures, disorganized highly invasive16
TGFâ3 smaller structures, disorganized highly invasive16
IL13 smaller structures, disorganized no enhanced effect
INSL6 normal mild protrusive behavior
II. Signal Transduction
GRB2 larger structures, disorganized, mild protrusive behavior enhanced protrusive behavior
ARAF larger structures, disorganized no enhanced effect
EDG2 larger structures, disorganized, protrusive behavior no enhanced effect
HRAS highly invasive not screened
RAF1 very disorganized increased disorganization, mild protrusive behavior
RHOG disorganized, clumping together, protrusive behavior highly invasive
III. Transcription/Translation Factors
ELF3 some disorganized structures, mild protrusive behavior no enhanced effect
FOS disorganized, mild protrusive behavior enhanced protrusive behavior
JUNB multiacinar-like, mild protrusive behavior enhanced protrusive behavior
HOXB7 mild protrusive behavior enhanced protrusive behavior
IV. Extracellular Proteins
IBSP larger structures, disorganized no enhanced effect
SPP1 large structures, filled, disorganized no enhanced effect
V. Cell Cycle/DNA Repair
ORC1L mild protrusive spikes no enhanced effect
p16a (CDKN2A) motile networks not screened
p21a (CDKN1A) motile networks not screened
a Screened in experiments distinct from others in this Table. See text for details.
Figure 3. Representative 3D structures ( ErbB2 dimerization, of 10A.B2 cells expressing cDNAs that scored in the sensitized migration
assays. 10A.B2 cells were cultured with EGF in upper panels and with AP1510 in lower panels as described in Materials and Methods
for at least 16 days.
Biological Activities of cDNAs Implicated in Breast Cancer research articles
Journal of Proteome Research ¥ Vol. 5, No. 3, 2006 605
interfering with the reading frame or introducing mutations.
Applying this technology to create indexed clone sets contain-
ing unique, full length sequence-verified cDNAs will enable
efficient, high-throughput experimentation to examine the
function of each gene. Systematic screens of gene function
complemented with traditional methods for validation provide
a more comprehensive approach to studying human disease
development, which may ultimately impart valuable insight
into the underlying mechanisms.
To apply this functional proteomics approach in breast
cancer research, we created the BC1000, the first sequence-
validated and individually arrayed collection of 1300 cDNAs
associated with a specific disease. The availability of this
collection will enable pilot experimentation and accelerate the
development of high-throughput methodologies for studying
breast oncogenesis in a mammalian setting. There are several
advantages of using defined cDNA collections such as the
BC1000 compared to random cDNA libraries. First, the identity
of each clone is known. Thus, complex and inefficient capture
strategies are not required to recover and identify any potential
hits.20-22 Second, each clone is known to be of good quality,
i.e., full-length and lack mutations. Last, complex phenotypic
assays are feasible as it is not necessary to sample millions of
clones to compensate for redundancy and to ensure that rare
cDNAs are represented. While this set of genes covers a broad
spectrum of breast cancer-related genes, it is not all inclusive.
The addition of new genes to this collection, including genes
more recently linked to breast cancer and genes more difficult
to clone, is an ongoing effort. By coupling this and other
growing collections of human cDNAs with automation and data
tracking, it will soon be feasible to perform such screens at the
scale of the entire proteome.
To investigate the genetic events involved in the different
aspects of breast carcinogenesis, we conducted three pheno-
typic assays with a derivative of an immortalized mammary
epithelial cell line, MCF-10A, on a subset of the BC1000 gene
collection. The process of carcinogenesis is complex and
involves the activation of many different cellular programs
including: misregulated cell proliferation, apoptosis, differen-
tiation, motility, angiogenesis, invasion, and metastasis. Pro-
teins that regulate these various processes act at many different
levels; master regulators, which are often oncogenic, activate
many programs simultaneously, whereas other proteins act
downstream along specific defined pathways. To identify both
classes of proteins, we conducted screens to find proteins
whose overexpression induced premalignant phenotypes re-
sembling events that take place during tumor initiation and
progression, specifically uncontrolled cellular proliferation,
disruption of acinar morphogenesis, and cell migration, in the
presence or absence of activated ErbB2. All three assays yielded
well-studied proto-oncogenes expected to be involved in these
processes, such as RAF1, JUNB, FOS, and GRB2, validating our
cell-based screening approach. All of these assays were per-
formed in the same genetic background, highlighting the robust
and pleiotropic activities of these genes. Moreover, one of the
strengths of such a parallel screening approach is its ability to
identify genes that could contribute to the oncogenic process
in a more selective fashion by altering specific cellular pro-
cesses. While many such hits were validated in the migration
screens, further studies are required to validate and understand
the mechanisms of these the genes that produced the unpre-
dicted activities in the initial EGF independent proliferation
(EIF2AK2 and SPARC) and 3D morphogenesis assay (TACSTD2,
GNRH1, and ID2). The cDNAs used in these experiments were
selected because of a known or implicated connection to breast
cancer. Often, these associations are very weak and the roles
played by the genes, if any, in breast cancer development have
not been characterized. Systematic approaches such as this one
may facilitate the annotation of any novel function/s of these
proteins.
Characterization of Validated Migration Hits. Many differ-
ent classes of proteins were found to induce the migration of
the MCF-10A cells, including extracellular ligands, matrix
proteins, and transcription factors, all of which can stimulate
multiple regulatory programs. This is not unexpected because
the conversion from a nonmotile to a motile state would require
the activation and repression of numerous cellular pathways.
The best characterized motogen for MCF-10A cells is EGF. EGF
family ligands generate a complex array of signals by binding
to and activating ErbB receptors, specifically ErbB1 (EGFR/
HER1), ErbB2 (HER2/NEU), ErbB3 and ErbB4, via both homo-
and heterodimerization. In our screen, several known activators
and targets of ErbB family members were identified as pro-
migratory. Specifically, TGFR, GRB2, HRAS, RAF1, JUNB, FOS
induced migration of MCF-10A cells independent of ErbB2
activation, supporting the important role of EGFR pathways
in cell migration. Interestingly GRB2, HRAS, RAF1 all act
upstream of Erk and activate transcription of the Fos transcrip-
tion factor, which together with Jun forms the AP1 transcription
complex.28 The Erk pathway and AP1 complex has previously
been implicated in migration and invasion through direct
effects of Erk phosphorylation in the cytoplasm as well as AP-1
induced transcriptional changes.29-35 Figure 5 highlights the
involvement of some of the cDNAs identified in our screens in
various cellular pathways believed to be involved in motility
and migration.
Most of the migration hits (28) required activation of ErbB2,
indicating that induction of migration of these genes is de-
pendent on the activation of cellular pathways induced by
ErbB2 activation. It is likely that the Erk pathway may represent
a key ErbB2 pathway since many of the genes that induced
ErbB2-independent migration in our screens are activators of
the Erk pathway and since we previously found that constitutive
activation of the Erk kinase through ectopic expression of an
activated variant of MEK2 could substitute for ErbB2 in
promoting migration induced by TGFâ1 and TGFâ3.16 In
Figure 4. Motile network structure of p16 and p21. Images taken
six (upper) or 24 (lower) hours post-seeding on Matrigel, (A,D)
MCF-10As plus EGF expressing vector control, (B,E) MCF-10A
cells plus EGF expressing p16, and (C,F) MCF-10A cells plus EGF
expressing p21.
research articles Witt et al.
606 Journal of Proteome Research ¥ Vol. 5, No. 3, 2006
addition, we found that migration induced by ErbB2 and TGFâ
was dependent on the secretion of an EGFR-ligand released
by these cells. Indeed, conditioned medium from these cells
could replace ErbB2 in inducing cell migration. These results
suggest that Erk and EGFR pathways are key in mediating the
role of TGFâ as a pro-migratory factor with activated ErbB2.16
The cooperative ErbB2 migratory screen identified several
cDNAs that had been previously implicated in migration
although the mechanisms have not been fully elucidated. For
example, osteopontin (OPN, also known as SPP1) has been
shown to have pro-migratory effects on various mammary
epithelial cell lines, specifically 21PT, 21NT, and MDA-MB-435
cell lines.36 As with TGFâ family members, OPN induced
migration is also believed to be mediated by the EGFR pathway.
Integrin-binding sialoprotein (IBSP), another bone matrix
protein that cooperatively induced migration with ErbB2, has
been previously shown to enhance migration of MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cells in basement membrane.37 Furthermore,
IBSP-transfected clones injected into the mammary fat pad of
nude mice increased tumor growth rate.37,38 Our screen sup-
ports the existing data that these bone matrix proteins are
involved in migration. Interestingly, we also identified several
cytokines that stimulate migratory behavior in MCF-10A cells,
specifically, IL4, IL11, and IL13. Certain cytokines that promote
osteolysis have been previously implicated in breast cancer
metastasis to the bone.39 Endogenous expression of IL11, which
induced migration of MCF-10A cells irrespective of ErbB2
activation, has been documented in invasive primary breast
tumors and associated with a higher rate of bone metastases.39-41
In addition, soluble IL11 has been previously shown to have a
dose-dependent effect on migration of breast carcinoma cells,
MDA-MB-231 cells, in a biocoat matrigel invasion chamber
assay.42 The results of our screen support previous findings and
implications that cytokines involved in osteoclast formation
may be involved in bone metastases, and reflect the diverse
functional activities of proteins that contribute to migratory
behavior.
The identification of cDNAs already known to play a role in
cell migration validates this approach as a format to identify
relevant cDNAs. Furthermore, we also identified novel func-
tional activities for cDNAs known to be involved in other
aspects of carcinogenesis. Several unexpected cDNAs were
capable of inducing migration cooperatively with activated
ErbB2. For example, SGK (serum and glucocorticoid-regulated
kinase-1) and TNFRSF10B (tumor necrosis factor receptor, 10B)
were both identified as pro-migratory, however they were
previously recognized for their involvement in survival. The
finding that cDNAs known to be involved in other cellular
processes may also play a role in migration suggests that this
approach may help uncover unanticipated activities for previ-
ously identified proteins.
Validated Migration Hits that Induced Abnormal Morphol-
ogy. All of the confirmed migration hits were retested in the
3D Matrigel cultures of MCF-10A cells for their ability to perturb
acinar morphogenesis with and without activated ErbB2.
Approximately one-third of the genes that scored in the
transwell migration assay caused alterations in morphogenesis.
In the absence of ErbB2 activation, the majority of the these
cDNAs induced the formation of disorganized structures, some
that showed protrusive projections that emanated from cells
within disorganized masses or displayed cords of cells that
invaded through the Matrigel bed. For most genes, there was
a dramatic enhancement of the phenotype in the context of
Figure 5. Some of the genes identified in our screens in relation to various cellular pathways believed to be involved in motility,
invasion, and migration. Hits are in red.
Biological Activities of cDNAs Implicated in Breast Cancer research articles
Journal of Proteome Research ¥ Vol. 5, No. 3, 2006 607
activated ErbB2. Almost all cDNAs displayed significant pro-
trusive behavior when coexpressed with activated ErbB2.
Amplification or overexpression of ErbB2 (also known as
HER2/Neu) occurs in up to 85% of comedo-type ductal
carcinoma in situ (DCIS), an early noninvasive, yet high grade
breast carcinoma, suggesting that ErbB2 plays a role in the
induction of this specific histological variant of DCIS.43-45 It is
of interest to understand what types of genetic or epigenetic
alterations can contribute to the progression toward an invasive
tumor. Thus, one rationale for screening genes in combination
with ErbB2 was to identify genes that could be considered as
candidate “second hits” in the development of invasive breast
carcinomas. The genes that were found to promote significant
protrusive phenotypes in combination with ErbB2 in the 3D
Matrigel cultures could be considered as candidate genes that
might contribute to the conversion of noninvasive lesions that
carry amplified or overexpressed ErbB2 to invasive structures.
Several of the genes that induced significant protrusive/
invasive activity in these screens have been implicated in cell
migration or invasion. For example, RHOG, a Rac homologue
that also induced migration and disrupted morphogenesis, is
known to have a central role in regulating the actin cytoskeleton
during cell migration, as well as mediating several cellular
morphological processes. This small GTPase has been shown
to interact with Elmo and Dock180 to induce activation of Rac1
and cell spreading mediated by integrins.46 EDG2, another
identified pro-migratory gene that induced dramatic alterations
in MCF-10As in Matrigel, has also been shown to activate Rac
and induce cell spreading and cell migration.47 EDG2 is a
member of G-protein coupled receptors which binds lysophos-
phatidic acid (LPA) to activate a host of cellular responses.
Our results confirm recent data demonstrating that expres-
sion of ELF3 (also known as ESX), an epithelial-restricted
member of a large family of Ets transcription factors, confers
a transformed and invasive phenotype in MCF-12A cells.48
Similar to the MCF-10A cell line, MCF-12A is an immortalized,
but nontransformed mammary cell line that forms highly
organized duct-like structures in 3D membrane cultures. MCF-
12A cells expressing ESX formed solid, disorganized structures,
which invaded the surrounding matrix.48 It has been suggested
that the ESX promoter represents a transcriptional target of
ErbB2.
The CDK inhibitors (CKIs), p16 and p21 (CDKN2A and
CDKN1A, respectively), are two interesting migration and
morphogenesis hits that also appear to exert multiple biological
activities. Both of these CKIs inhibit the G1-S transition. p16
binds to CDK4 or CDK6 to inhibit cyclin D-CDK4/6 complexes,
while p21 binds and inhibits CDK2 complexes. Both CKIs
prevent downstream Rb phosphorylation and S phase gene
transcription in mid-G1. More recently, p21 has been shown
to play a growth-promoting role in early G1 by promoting cyclin
D-CDK4/6 complex assembly.69,70 The identification of cell cycle
inhibitors p16 and p21 as pro-migratory is consistent with
previously reported roles for p21 and for another CKI, p27, in
enhancing cell motility. Specifically, cytoplasmic p21 has been
shown to inhibit ROCK and therefore compromise stress fiber
formation by the Rho/ROCK/LIMK/cofilin pathway leading to
enhanced motility.70,71 In addition, p27 has been shown to bind
directly to RhoA, blocking interactions between Rho A and its
activators. Furthermore, p27-deficient fibroblasts display a
dramatic decrease in motility, suggesting that it may act as both
a tumor suppressor and an oncogene, depending on its
subcellular location.73
Interestingly, p16 and p21 did not score as hits in our initial
screens due to the design of the experimental screening
protocols which incorporated passaging of the MCF-10A cells
after transduction but before the assays. Other cDNAs that
cause a block in cell cycle or growth retardation may have also
been missed in our initial screens for this reason. Overall, our
screens were successful in identifying proto-oncogenes and
other cDNAs known to be involved in these specific aspects of
breast carcinogenesis.
In summary, we have built an arrayed and sequence verified
cDNA collection of human breast cancer- associated cDNAs,
known as the BC1000. To our knowledge, the BC1000 repre-
sents the first publicly available disease-based cDNA collection.
Here, we have used this resource in three complex cell-based
assays to investigate the genetic events involved in different
stages of breast carcinogenesis. Through this comprehensive
approach, we identified potentially novel functional activities
for known breast cancer-associated cDNAs, as well as provided
insight into the multiple biological effects of various candidate
oncogenes. Subsequent analyses of the mechanisms underlying
these findings may provide important insight into the process
of breast cancer development.
Acknowledgment. The authors would like to thank Ed
Harlow as well as past and present members of the Brugge and
LaBaer laboratories for stimulating discussions on the develop-
ment of the BC1000 and functional assays. We would also like
to thank ARIAD Pharmaceuticals for AP1510 dimerizer, R.
Mulligan for VSV-GPG viral packaging cells, Invitrogen Corpo-
ration for help with Gateway cloning vectors and Senthil
Muthuswamy for construction of the ErbB2 chimeric receptor.
This work was supported by grants from Breast Cancer
Research Foundation (J.S.B./J.L.), the Cell Migration Consor-
tium NIH/NIGMS U54 GM64346-04 (J.S.B.), and NCI SPORE
CA089393 (J.S.B./J.L.), NCI Program project grant CA080111
(J.S.B./J.L.) and NCI IMAT grant CA099191 (J.L.).
Supporting Information Available: A list of all
screened cDNAs and their corresponding LPF ranking score
(for those identified by MedGene) are included in Supporting
Information Table 1. Supporting Information Table 2 shows
the genes that were identified as hits in any of the three first
pass screens. cDNAs that induced cellular migration in the
preliminary, single-pass screen are found in Supporting Infor-
mation Table 3. This material is available free of charge via
the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.
References
(1) Nielsen, K. V.; Niebuhr, E.; Ejlertsen, B.; Holstebroe, S.; Madsen,
M. W.; Briand, P.; Mouridsen, H. T.; Bolund, L. Molecular
cytogenetic analysis of a nontumorigenic human breast epithelial
cell line that eventually turns tumorigenic: validation of an
analytical approach combining karyotyping, comparative ge-
nomic hybridization, chromosome painting, and single-locus
fluorescence in situ hybridization. Genes Chromosomes Cancer
1997, 20, 30-37.
(2) Nishizaki, T.; DeVries, S.; Chew, K.; Goodson, W. H., 3rd; Ljung,
B. M.; Thor, A.; Waldman, F. M. Genetic alterations in primary
breast cancers and their metastases: direct comparison using
modified comparative genomic hybridization. Genes Chromo-
somes Cancer 1997, 19, 267-272.
(3) Perou, C. M.; Jeffrey, S. S.; van de Rijn, M.; Rees, C. A.; Eisen, M.
B.; Ross, D. T.; Pergamenschikov, A.; Williams, C. F.; Zhu, S. X.;
Lee, J. C.; Lashkari, D.; Shalon, D.; Brown, P. O.; Botstein, D.
Distinctive gene expression patterns in human mammary epi-
thelial cells and breast cancers. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1999,
96, 9212-9217.
research articles Witt et al.
608 Journal of Proteome Research ¥ Vol. 5, No. 3, 2006
(4) Porter, D. A.; Krop, I. E.; Nasser, S.; Sgroi, D.; Kaelin, C. M.; Marks,
J. R.; Riggins, G.; Polyak, K. A SAGE (serial analysis of gene
expression) view of breast tumor progression. Cancer Res. 2001,
61, 5697-5702.
(5) Ma, X. J.; Salunga, R.; Tuggle, J. T.; Gaudet, J.; Enright, E.;
McQuary, P.; Payette, T.; Pistone, M.; Stecker, K.; Zhang, B. M.;
Zhou, Y. X.; Varnholt, H.; Smith, B.; Gadd, M.; Chatfield, E.;
Kessler, J.; Baer, T. M.; Erlander, M. G.; Sgroi, D. C. Gene
expression profiles of human breast cancer progression. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2003, 100, 5974-5979.
(6) Jacquemier, J.; Ginestier, C.; Rougemont, J.; Bardou, V. J.; Charafe-
Jauffret, E.; Geneix, J.; Adelaide, J.; Koki, A.; Houvenaeghel, G.;
Hassoun, J.; Maraninchi, D.; Viens, P.; Birnbaum, D.; Bertucci,
F. Protein expression profiling identifies subclasses of breast
cancer and predicts prognosis. Cancer Res. 2005, 65, 767-779.
(7) Somiari, R. I.; Somiari, S.; Russell, S.; Shriver, C. D. Proteomics
of breast carcinoma. J. Chromatogr. B Analyt. Technol. Biomed.
Life Sci. 2005, 815, 215-225.
(8) Soule, H. D.; Maloney, T. M.; Wolman, S. R.; Peterson, W. D., Jr.;
Brenz, R.; McGrath, C. M.; Russo, J.; Pauley, R. J.; Jones, R. F.;
Brooks, S. C. Isolation and characterization of a spontaneously
immortalized human breast epithelial cell line, MCF-10. Cancer
Res. 1990, 50, 6075-6086.
(9) Petersen, O. W.; Ronnov-Jessen, L.; Howlett, A. R.; Bissell, M. J.
Interaction with basement membrane serves to rapidly distin-
guish growth and differentiation pattern of normal and malignant
human breast epithelial cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1992,
89, 9064-9068.
(10) Muthuswamy, S. K.; Li, D.; Lelievre, S.; Bissell, M. J.; Brugge, J. S.
ErbB2, but not ErbB1, reinitiates proliferation and induces
luminal repopulation in epithelial acini. Nat. Cell Biol. 2001, 3,
785-792.
(11) Debnath, J.; Muthuswamy, S. K.; Brugge, J. S. Morphogenesis and
oncogenesis of MCF-10A mammary epithelial acini grown in
three-dimensional basement membrane cultures. Methods 2003,
30, 256-268.
(12) Shaw, K. R.; Wrobel, C. N.; Brugge, J. S. Use of three-dimensional
basement membrane cultures to model oncogene-induced changes
in mammary epithelial morphogenesis. J. Mammary Gland Biol.
Neoplasia 2004, 9, 297-310.
(13) Debnath, J.; Brugge, J. S. Modelling glandular epithelial cancers
in three-dimensional cultures. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2005, 5, 675-
688.
(14) Debnath, J.; Mills, K. R.; Collins, N. L.; Reginato, M. J.; Muth-
uswamy, S. K.; Brugge, J. S. The role of apoptosis in creating and
maintaining luminal space within normal and oncogene-express-
ing mammary acini. Cell 2002, 111, 29-40.
(15) Wrobel, C. N.; Debnath, J.; Lin, E.; Beausoleil, S.; Roussel, M. F.;
Brugge, J. S. Autocrine CSF-1R activation promotes Src-depend-
ent disruption of mammary epithelial architecture. J. Cell Biol.
2004, 165, 263-273.
(16) Seton-Rogers, S. E.; Lu, Y.; Hines, L. M.; Koundinya, M.; LaBaer,
J.; Muthuswamy, S. K.; Brugge, J. S. Cooperation of the ErbB2
receptor and transforming growth factor beta in induction of
migration and invasion in mammary epithelial cells. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2004, 101, 1257-1262.
(17) Yang, Y. A.; Dukhanina, O.; Tang, B.; Mamura, M.; Letterio, J. J.;
MacGregor, J.; Patel, S. C.; Khozin, S.; Liu, Z. Y.; Green, J.; Anver,
M. R.; Merlino, G.; Wakefield, L. M. Lifetime exposure to a soluble
TGF-beta antagonist protects mice against metastasis without
adverse side effects. J. Clin. Invest. 2002, 109, 1607-1615.
(18) Muraoka, R. S.; Koh, Y.; Roebuck, L. R.; Sanders, M. E.; Brantley-
Sieders, D.; Gorska, A. E.; Moses, H. L.; Arteaga, C. L. Increased
malignancy of Neu-induced mammary tumors overexpressing
active transforming growth factor beta1. Mol. Cell Biol. 2003, 23,
8691-8703.
(19) Siegel, P. M.; Shu, W.; Cardiff, R. D.; Muller, W. J.; Massague, J.
Transforming growth factor beta signaling impairs Neu-induced
mammary tumorigenesis while promoting pulmonary metastasis.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2003, 100, 8430-8435.
(20) Hannon, G. J.; Sun, P.; Carnero, A.; Xie, L. Y.; Maestro, R.; Conklin,
D. S.; Beach, D. MaRX: an approach to genetics in mammalian
cells. Science 1999, 283, 1129-1130.
(21) Randow, F.; Seed, B. Endoplasmic reticulum chaperone gp96 is
required for innate immunity but not cell viability. Nat. Cell Biol.
2001, 3, 891-896.
(22) Peeper, D. S.; Shvarts, A.; Brummelkamp, T.; Douma, S.; Koh, E.
Y.; Daley, G. Q.; Bernards, R. A functional screen identifies hDRIL1
as an oncogene that rescues RAS-induced senescence. Nat. Cell
Biol. 2002, 4, 148-153.
(23) Hu, Y.; Hines, L. M.; Weng, H.; Zuo, D.; Rivera, M.; Richardson,
A.; LaBaer, J. Analysis of genomic and proteomic data using
advanced literature mining. J. Proteome Res. 2003, 2, 405-412.
(24) Marsischky, G.; LaBaer, J. Many paths to many clones: a
comparative look at high-throughput cloning methods. Genome
Res. 2004, 14, 2020-2028.
(25) Chang, C. Y.; LaBaer, J. DNA polymorphism detector: an
automated tool that searches for allelic matches in public
databases for discrepancies found in clone or cDNA sequences.
Bioinformatics 2005, 21, 2133-2135.
(26) Gopalbhai, K.; Jansen, G.; Beauregard, G.; Whiteway, M.; Dumas,
F.; Wu, C.; Meloche, S. Negative regulation of MAPKK by
phosphorylation of a conserved serine residue equivalent to
Ser212 of MEK1. J. Biol. Chem. 2003, 278, 8118-8125.
(27) Debnath, J.; Walker, S. J.; Brugge, J. S. Akt activation disrupts
mammary acinar architecture and enhances proliferation in an
mTOR-dependent manner. J. Cell Biol. 2003, 163, 315-326.
(28) Karin, M. The regulation of AP-1 activity by mitogen-activated
protein kinases. J. Biol. Chem. 1995, 270, 16483-16486.
(29) Stupack, D. G.; Cho, S. Y.; Klemke, R. L. Molecular signaling
mechanisms of cell migration and invasion. Immunol. Res. 2000,
21, 83-88.
(30) Mulder, K. M. Role of Ras and Mapks in TGFbeta signaling.
Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2000, 11, 23-35.
(31) Reddy, K. B.; Nabha, S. M.; Atanaskova, N. Role of MAP kinase
in tumor progression and invasion. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2003,
22, 395-403.
(32) Xia, Y.; Karin, M. The control of cell motility and epithelial
morphogenesis by Jun kinases. Trends Cell Biol. 2004, 14, 94-
101.
(33) Hennigan, R. F.; Hawker, K. L.; Ozanne, B. W. Fos-transformation
activates genes associated with invasion. Oncogene 1994, 9, 3591-
3600.
(34) Milde-Langosch, K.; Roder, H.; Andritzky, B.; Aslan, B.; Hem-
minger, G.; Brinkmann, A.; Bamberger, C. M.; Loning, T.; Bam-
berger, A. M. The role of the AP-1 transcription factors c-Fos,
FosB, Fra-1 and Fra-2 in the invasion process of mammary
carcinomas. Breast Cancer Res. Treat 2004, 86, 139-152.
(35) Johnston, I. M.; Spence, H. J.; Winnie, J. N.; McGarry, L.; Vass, J.
K.; Meagher, L.; Stapleton, G.; Ozanne, B. W. Regulation of a
multigenic invasion programme by the transcription factor, AP-
1: re-expression of a down-regulated gene, TSC-36, inhibits
invasion. Oncogene 2000, 19, 5348-5358.
(36) Tuck, A. B.; Hota, C.; Wilson, S. M.; Chambers, A. F. Osteopontin-
induced migration of human mammary epithelial cells involves
activation of EGF receptor and multiple signal transduction
pathways. Oncogene 2003, 22, 1198-1205.
(37) Chen, J.; Rodriguez, J. A.; Barnett, B.; Hashimoto, N.; Tang, J.;
Yoneda, T. Bone sialoprotein promotes tumor cell migration in
both in vitro and in vivo models. Connect Tissue Res. 2003, 44
Suppl 1, 279-284.
(38) Sharp, J. A.; Waltham, M.; Williams, E. D.; Henderson, M. A.;
Thompson, E. W. Transfection of MDA-MB-231 human breast
carcinoma cells with bone sialoprotein (BSP) stimulates migration
and invasion in vitro and growth of primary and secondary
tumors in nude mice. Clin. Exp. Metastasis 2004, 21, 19-29.
(39) Sloan, E. K.; Anderson, R. L. Genes involved in breast cancer
metastasis to bone. Cell Mol. Life Sci. 2002, 59, 1491-1502.
(40) Sotiriou, C.; Lacroix, M.; Lespagnard, L.; Larsimont, D.; Paesmans,
M.; Body, J. J. Interleukins-6 and -11 expression in primary breast
cancer and subsequent development of bone metastases. Cancer
Lett. 2001, 169, 87-95.
(41) Kang, Y.; Siegel, P. M.; Shu, W.; Drobnjak, M.; Kakonen, S. M.;
Cordon-Cardo, C.; Guise, T. A.; Massague, J. A multigenic program
mediating breast cancer metastasis to bone. Cancer Cell 2003, 3,
537-549.
(42) Arihiro, K.; Oda, H.; Kaneko, M.; Inai, K. Cytokines facilitate
chemotactic motility of breast carcinoma cells. Breast Cancer
2000, 7, 221-230.
(43) Witton, C. J.; Reeves, J. R.; Going, J. J.; Cooke, T. G.; Bartlett, J. M.
Expression of the HER1-4 family of receptor tyrosine kinases in
breast cancer. J. Pathol. 2003, 200, 290-297.
(44) Weeks, B. H.; He, W.; Olson, K. L.; Wang, X. J. Inducible expression
of transforming growth factor beta1 in papillomas causes rapid
metastasis. Cancer Res. 2001, 61, 7435-7443.
(45) Harari, D.; Yarden, Y. Molecular mechanisms underlying ErbB2/
HER2 action in breast cancer. Oncogene 2000, 19, 6102-6114.
(46) Katoh, H.; Negishi, M. RhoG activates Rac1 by direct interaction
with the Dock180-binding protein Elmo. Nature 2003, 424, 461-
464.
Biological Activities of cDNAs Implicated in Breast Cancer research articles
Journal of Proteome Research ¥ Vol. 5, No. 3, 2006 609
(47) Van Leeuwen, F. N.; Olivo, C.; Grivell, S.; Giepmans, B. N.; Collard,
J. G.; Moolenaar, W. H. Rac activation by lysophosphatidic acid
LPA1 receptors through the guanine nucleotide exchange factor
Tiam1. J. Biol. Chem. 2003, 278, 400-406.
(48) Schedin, P. J.; Eckel-Mahan, K. L.; McDaniel, S. M.; Prescott, J.
D.; Brodsky, K. S.; Tentler, J. J.; Gutierrez-Hartmann, A. ESX
induces transformation and functional epithelial to mesenchymal
transition in MCF-12A mammary epithelial cells. Oncogene 2004,
23, 1766-1779.
(49) Serrano, M.; Hannon, G. J.; Beach, D. A new regulatory motif in
cell-cycle control causing specific inhibition of cyclin D/CDK4.
Nature 1993, 366, 704-707.
(50) Harper, J. W.; Adami, G. R.; Wei, N.; Keyomarsi, K.; Elledge, S. J.
The p21 Cdk-interacting protein Cip1 is a potent inhibitor of G1
cyclin-dependent kinases. Cell 1993, 75, 805-816.
(51) Gu, Y.; Turck, C. W.; Morgan, D. O. Inhibition of CDK2 activity
in vivo by an associated 20K regulatory subunit. Nature 1993,
366, 707-710.
(52) el-Deiry, W. S.; Tokino, T.; Velculescu, V. E.; Levy, D. B.; Parsons,
R.; Trent, J. M.; Lin, D.; Mercer, W. E.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein,
B. WAF1, a potential mediator of p53 tumor suppression. Cell
1993, 75, 817-825.
(53) Xiong, Y.; Hannon, G. J.; Zhang, H.; Casso, D.; Kobayashi, R.;
Beach, D. p21 is a universal inhibitor of cyclin kinases. Nature
1993, 366, 701-704.
(54) Dulic, V.; Kaufmann, W. K.; Wilson, S. J.; Tlsty, T. D.; Lees, E.;
Harper, J. W.; Elledge, S. J.; Reed, S. I. p53-dependent inhibition
of cyclin-dependent kinase activities in human fibroblasts during
radiation-induced G1 arrest. Cell 1994, 76, 1013-1023.
(55) Noda, A.; Ning, Y.; Venable, S. F.; Pereira-Smith, O. M.; Smith, J.
R. Cloning of senescent cell-derived inhibitors of DNA synthesis
using an expression screen. Exp. Cell Res. 1994, 211, 90-98.
(56) Matsushime, H.; Quelle, D. E.; Shurtleff, S. A.; Shibuya, M.; Sherr,
C. J.; Kato, J. Y. D-type cyclin-dependent kinase activity in
mammalian cells. Mol. Cell Biol. 1994, 14, 2066-2076.
(57) Meyerson, M.; Harlow, E. Identification of G1 kinase activity for
cdk6, a novel cyclin D partner. Mol. Cell Biol. 1994, 14, 2077-
2086.
(58) Hinds, P. W.; Mittnacht, S.; Dulic, V.; Arnold, A.; Reed, S. I.;
Weinberg, R. A. Regulation of retinoblastoma protein functions
by ectopic expression of human cyclins. Cell 1992, 70, 993-1006.
(59) Hatakeyama, M.; Brill, J. A.; Fink, G. R.; Weinberg, R. A. Col-
laboration of G1 cyclins in the functional inactivation of the
retinoblastoma protein. Genes Dev. 1994, 8, 1759-1771.
(60) Mittnacht, S.; Lees, J. A.; Desai, D.; Harlow, E.; Morgan, D. O.;
Weinberg, R. A. Distinct sub-populations of the retinoblastoma
protein show a distinct pattern of phosphorylation. Embo J. 1994,
13, 118-127.
(61) Kitagawa, M.; Higashi, H.; Jung, H. K.; Suzuki-Takahashi, I.; Ikeda,
M.; Tamai, K.; Kato, J.; Segawa, K.; Yoshida, E.; Nishimura, S.;
Taya, Y. The consensus motif for phosphorylation by cyclin D1-
Cdk4 is different from that for phosphorylation by cyclin A/E-
Cdk2. Embo J. 1996, 15, 7060-7069.
(62) Ezhevsky, S. A.; Nagahara, H.; Vocero-Akbani, A. M.; Gius, D. R.;
Wei, M. C.; Dowdy, S. F. Hypo-phosphorylation of the retino-
blastoma protein (pRb) by cyclin D: Cdk4/6 complexes results
in active pRb. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1997, 94, 10699-10704.
(63) Lundberg, A. S.; Weinberg, R. A. Functional inactivation of the
retinoblastoma protein requires sequential modification by at
least two distinct cyclin-cdk complexes. Mol. Cell Biol. 1998, 18,
753-761.
(64) Chen, J.; Saha, P.; Kornbluth, S.; Dynlacht, B. D.; Dutta, A. Cyclin-
binding motifs are essential for the function of p21CIP1. Mol.
Cell Biol. 1996, 16, 4673-4682.
(65) Chen, J.; Jackson, P. K.; Kirschner, M. W.; Dutta, A. Separate
domains of p21 involved in the inhibition of Cdk kinase and
PCNA. Nature 1995, 374, 386-388.
(66) Nakanishi, M.; Robetorye, R. S.; Pereira-Smith, O. M.; Smith, J.
R. The C-terminal region of p21SDI1/WAF1/CIP1 is involved in
proliferating cell nuclear antigen binding but does not appear to
be required for growth inhibition. J. Biol. Chem. 1995, 270,
17060-17063.
(67) Warbrick, E.; Lane, D. P.; Glover, D. M.; Cox, L. S. A small peptide
inhibitor of DNA replication defines the site of interaction
between the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21WAF1 and
proliferating cell nuclear antigen. Curr. Biol. 1995, 5, 275-282.
(68) Lin, J.; Reichner, C.; Wu, X.; Levine, A. J. Analysis of wild-type
and mutant p21WAF-1 gene activities. Mol. Cell Biol. 1996, 16,
1786-1793.
(69) LaBaer, J.; Garrett, M. D.; Stevenson, L. F.; Slingerland, J. M.;
Sandhu, C.; Chou, H. S.; Fattaey, A.; Harlow, E. New functional
activities for the p21 family of CDK inhibitors. Genes Dev. 1997,
11, 847-862.
(70) Cheng, M.; Olivier, P.; Diehl, J. A.; Fero, M.; Roussel, M. F.;
Roberts, J. M.; Sherr, C. J. The p21(Cip1) and p27(Kip1) CDK
‘inhibitors’ are essential activators of cyclin D-dependent kinases
in murine fibroblasts. Embo J. 1999, 18, 1571-1583.
(71) Lee, S.; Helfman, D. M. Cytoplasmic p21Cip1 is involved in Ras-
induced inhibition of the ROCK/LIMK/cofilin pathway. J. Biol.
Chem. 2004, 279, 1885-1891.
(72) McAllister, S. S.; Becker-Hapak, M.; Pintucci, G.; Pagano, M.;
Dowdy, S. F. Novel p27(kip1) C-terminal scatter domain mediates
Rac-dependent cell migration independent of cell cycle arrest
functions. Mol. Cell Biol. 2003, 23, 216-228.
(73) Besson, A.; Gurian-West, M.; Schmidt, A.; Hall, A.; Roberts, J. M.
p27Kip1 modulates cell migration through the regulation of RhoA
activation. Genes Dev. 2004, 18, 862-876.
PR050395R
research articles Witt et al.
610 Journal of Proteome Research ¥ Vol. 5, No. 3, 2006
