3Parallel Magnetic Resonance Imaging with Adaptive
Radius in k-Space (PARS): Constrained Image
Reconstruction using k-Space Locality in Radiofrequency
Coil Encoded Data
Ernest N. Yeh,1,2 Charles A. McKenzie,2 Michael A. Ohliger,1,2 and
Daniel K. Sodickson1,2,3*
A parallel image reconstruction algorithm is presented that
exploits the k-space locality in radiofrequency (RF) coil en-
coded data. In RF coil encoding, information relevant to recon-
structing an omitted datum rapidly diminishes as a function of
k-space separation between the omitted datum and the ac-
quired signal data. The proposed method, parallel magnetic
resonance imaging with adaptive radius in k-space (PARS),
harnesses this physical property of RF coil encoding via a
sliding-kernel approach. Unlike generalized parallel imaging
approaches that might typically involve inverting a prohibitively
large matrix for arbitrary sampling trajectories, the PARS slid-
ing-kernel approach creates manageable and distributable in-
dependent matrices to be inverted, achieving both computa-
tional efﬁciency and numerical stability. An empirical method
designed to measure total error power is described, and the
total error power of PARS reconstructions is studied over a
range of k-space radii and accelerations, revealing “minimal-
error” conditions at comparatively modest k-space radii. PARS
reconstructions of undersampled in vivo Cartesian and non-
Cartesian data sets are shown and are compared selectively
with traditional SENSE reconstructions. Various characteristics
of the PARS k-space locality constraint (such as the tradeoff
between signal-to-noise ratio and artifact power and the rela-
tionship with iterative parallel conjugate gradient approaches
or nonparallel gridding approaches) are discussed. Magn Re-
son Med 53:1383–1392, 2005. © 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
Key words: parallel imaging; image reconstruction; regulariza-
tion; RF coil arrays; rapid MRI
Parallel magnetic resonance (MR) imaging techniques uti-
lize arrays of radiofrequency (RF) coils to accelerate image
acquisitions. Images are reconstructed from undersampled
MR signal data sets by combining the spatial encoding
capabilities of RF coil arrays with those of magnetic ﬁeld
gradients. Generalized parallel imaging strategies reformu-
late the MR signal equation in terms of a large encoding
matrix (1–4), and parallel image reconstructions generally
involve an inversion of this matrix.
There are two practical challenges in the direct inver-
sion of the encoding matrix. First, this matrix inversion
can be memory- and computation-intensive, especially for
non-Cartesian MR signal data. Second, at high acceleration
factors, the encoding matrix becomes poorly conditioned,
making the inversion numerically unstable and therefore
leading to high noise ampliﬁcation.
In the special case when data sets are Cartesian sampled
in at least one direction, it is possible to reduce the mem-
ory and computational burden of the encoding matrix
inversion by applying a fast Fourier transform (FFT) in the
Cartesian sampled directions (1–3,5). For other more gen-
eral trajectories, a simple FFT cannot be applied; instead,
an iterative approach using conjugate gradient techniques
and gridding has been proposed (6).
In an effort to improve numerical stability, matrix regu-
larization methods are commonly used. However, many of
these methods—for example, truncation of unstable singu-
lar values in a singular value decomposition (SVD)—are
themselves memory- and computation-intensive, poten-
tially annulling the advantages provided by the iterative
approach.
Parallel magnetic resonance imaging with adaptive ra-
dius in k-space (PARS) (7), the technique to be described
in this work, provides a simultaneous solution to these
two challenges by efﬁciently inverting the encoding matrix
while ensuring numerical stability. In PARS, omitted sig-
nal data are reconstructed using only acquired signal data
that lie within a small (and adjustable) radius in k-space
from each omitted signal datum. A localized encoding
matrix is created and inverted, and the omitted data are
reconstructed locally. This process is repeated for each
missing k-space location until a complete data set is re-
constructed.
Instead of reconstructing the complete data set with a
direct matrix inversion, PARS performs point-by-point
data reconstruction by inverting many small matrices. As a
result, it eliminates the need to store and manipulate the
prohibitively large encoding matrix. The independent ma-
trix inversions allow the computation to be easily distrib-
uted across a parallel computing environment. More im-
portantly, PARS explicitly uses the physical principle of
k-space locality, which asserts that in the reconstruction of
an omitted datum, the contribution of other signal data
diminishes as a function of the k-space separation between
1Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Boston, Massa-
chusetts, USA.
2Department of Radiology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Har-
vard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
3Department of Medicine, Cardiovascular Division, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
Contract grant sponsor: Whitaker Foundation; Contract grant sponsor: Na-
tional Institutes of Health; Contract grant numbers: R29 HL60802 and R01
EB00447.
*Correspondence to: Daniel K. Sodickson, Laboratory for Biomedical Imaging
Research, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 330 Brookline Avenue,
Boston, MA 02215, USA. E-mail: dsodicks@bidmc.harvard.edu
Received 22 September 2004; revised 30 December 2004; accepted 5 Jan-
uary 2005.
DOI 10.1002/mrm.20490
Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).
Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 53:1383–1392 (2005)
© 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc. 1383
the omitted point and the signal data used in the recon-
struction. PARS efﬁciently eliminates the less relevant
data and their corresponding signal equations, thereby
improving the conditioning of the localized encoding ma-
trices. This matrix regularization, unlike mathematically
based approaches such as truncated SVD, is founded upon
a physical property of RF coils. While previous parallel
imaging techniques have either implicitly or explicitly
used k-space locality (3,4,8–10), the PARS implementa-
tion with an adaptive k-space radius allows an intuitive
and ﬂexible handle to harness k-space locality.
Preliminary implementations of PARS have been de-
scribed, with a minimum of methodological detail, in a
recent clinical comparative study (11). In this work, we
provide a full theoretical description of the PARS tech-
nique. We formulate the algorithm using the perspective of
k-space locality and propose an empiric approach to es-
tablish a suitable k-space radius. Next we report the results
of phantom and in vivo experiments using PARS on un-
dersampled Cartesian data sets. Images reconstructed us-
ing PARS are compared to those reconstructed with
SMASH and SENSE techniques. In addition, we use PARS
to reconstruct undersampled spiral data sets to illustrate
the versatility of the technique in handling multidimen-
sionally accelerated non-Cartesian data sets. Last, we dis-
cuss how PARS is related to other traditional and parallel
image reconstruction techniques in order to characterize
the associated tradeoffs between signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) and residual aliasing artifact.
THEORY
The MR signal data received in an RF detector coil can be
expressed as
sl(k)  eikrCl(r)(r)dr, [1]
where sl(k) is the signal received in the lth coil at k-space
position k, Cl is the coil sensitivity of the lth coil, and  is
the excited spin density at position-space vector r.
In parallel imaging, some of the k-space sampling loca-
tions are omitted in order to accelerate image acquisition.
PARS reconstructs these omitted data points by linearly
combining the acquired data in the k-space vicinity de-
ﬁned by the k-space radius kR.

k

l  1
L
wk,lsl(krecon  k)  sl (krecon), k  kR [2]
Here, wk,l are complex weights to be derived in Eqs.
[3–11]. l is the summation variable for the component
coils. sl(krecon k) are the data acquired at k-space offset
k with respect to krecon, and    denotes Euclidian dis-
tance.
Figure 1 illustrates the application of the k-space local-
ity constraint in 1-, 2- and 3D data acquisition schemes.
MR signal data are acquired at k-space locations repre-
sented by solid dots. The unit distance on the Cartesian
grid is conventionally deﬁned as 2/Field of View. In this
example, we select kR to be 4, or 8/Field of View. Sam-
pling points lying within the circle (or sphere) of radius kR
are drawn in black, and their corresponding signal data are
used in the reconstruction of sl(krecon). This process is
repeated for each krecon until a complete data set is recon-
structed. Here, krecon are set to coincide with the Cartesian
grid points, so that a component coil image for the lth coil
can be obtained by taking the FFT of the PARS recon-
structed signal set sl(krecon).
The complex weights wk,,l are computed by perform-
ing a least-squares ﬁt that satisﬁes the equation

k

l  1
L
wk,lei( k)rCl(r)  Cl(r), k  kR. [3]
Details of the least-squares ﬁtting procedure are presented
later in Eqs. [8–11].
By substituting Eq. [3] into the signal equation (Eq. [1]),
we obtain
sl(krecon)  eikreconrCl(r)(r)dr, k kR
eikreconr
k

l  1
L
wk,lei( k)rClr)(r)dr
FIG. 1. Schematic illustration of the PARS algorithm applied to 1-,
2-, and 3D non-Cartesian sampling patterns (a–c). k-space sam-
pling locations are represented by solid dots, colored black if lying
within the k-space radius (kR  4) and gray if lying outside. PARS
selects only proximal signal data (black dots) for the reconstruction
of the omitted data of interest (indicated by the star at the center).
The sliding kernel approach of PARS is illustrated in (d): after an
omitted datum is reconstructed, the circle (or sphere) is moved to
the next k-space location to be reconstructed. The process is
repeated until the data set is complete.
1384 Yeh et al.

k

l  1
L
wk,lei(krecon  krClr)(r)dr

k

l  1
L
wk,l ei(krecon  k)rClr)(r)dr

k

l  1
L
wk,lslkrecon  k). [4]
In the limit where kR is set to be minimal and if only one
term remains in the ﬁrst summation series k, i.e., only
the nearest neighbor point contributes to the reconstruc-
tion of a given missing point,
sl(krecon)  
l  1
L
wlslknearest  neighbor), [5]
then the PARS reconstruction converges to SMASH (Fig.
4b). However, this special convergence does not occur if
there are two or more equidistant nearest neighbors, which
is generally the case for undersampled Cartesian trajecto-
ries (Fig. 4a and c). In the opposite limit where kR is
inﬁnite, the reconstruction becomes a “strong” version of
SENSE in which a full complement of encoding functions
is transformed by least-squares ﬁtting to ideal voxel shape
functions. An analogous derivation showing these conver-
gences has been reported in Ref. (3). Another interesting
limit is when the number of coils L in the second summa-
tion series ¥
l  1
L becomes one (as in nonparallel imaging),
in which case PARS converges to a variant of the block
uniform resampling (BURS) reconstruction (12).
s (krecon)  
k
wks(krecon  k), k  kR [6]
In our current implementation of PARS, component im-
ages are ﬁrst reconstructed coil by coil and are then com-
bined as the sum-of-squares, a strategy that has been re-
ported in Refs. (9) and (13) and that serves to improve the
quality of the least-squares ﬁt. In a coil-by-coil reconstruc-
tion, a different set of weights is calculated for each coil
data set (Eq. [3]), yielding a weight matrix table W:
Wl,(k,l)  [wk,l]for the lth coil data set. [7]
With appropriate discretization of the continuous position
vector r to selected voxel locations r	, Eq. [3] can be
reformulated into the matrix representation
WE  C, [8]
where the entries of the encoding matrix E are
E(k,l),	  eik)r	 Clr	) [9]
and the entries of the coil sensitivity matrix C are
Cl,	  Cl(r	). [10]
The least-squares solution for W is derived by standard
linear algebraic operations,
WE  C
WEEH  CEH
W  CEH (EEH)1, [11]
in which   
H denotes Hermitian conjugate and   
1 de-
notes matrix inverse. The quantity EH (EEH)1 is commonly
known as the Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse of E.
METHODS
Two sets of experiments were performed with Cartesian
and non-Cartesian data acquisitions, respectively. Image
reconstruction algorithms in this work were implemented
using MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA) on a Win-
dows-based AMD Athlon XP 2500 system.
Cartesian Sampled Data
Data Acquisition
The ﬁrst set of experiments was performed on a 1.5-T
TwinSpeed System (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI,
U.S.A.). Data were acquired in a 14.8  15  37.2 cm
rectangular phantom using a coil array of eight indepen-
dently positionable elements (Model NMSC-010B-1.5TGE,
Nova Medical, Inc., Wakeﬁeld, MA, USA). Each coil ele-
ment measured 8  18 cm. The eight elements were di-
vided into two sets of four-element arrays each of 32 
18 cm total extent, positioned on the top and bottom of the
phantom. A 3D spoiled gradient echo pulse sequence was
used (TE 2.9 ms, TR 6.2 ms, RF excitation angle 15°,
380  380 mm ﬁeld of view (FOV), 256  256 matrix, 16
slices, 4-mm slice thickness). Data were acquired in an
axial volume with frequency encoding performed in the
foot–head direction. The data acquisitions were acceler-
ated one- to fourfold in the left–right direction. A low-
resolution coil sensitivity reference was acquired in a sep-
arate scan.
In vivo scans of a healthy adult volunteer were per-
formed on the same GE scanner, and the pulse sequence
parameters, coil conﬁguration, and acceleration factors
were set up to match those of the phantom experiment
(with the exception of a slightly smaller 340  340 mm
FOV).
Data Reconstruction and Analysis
PARS reconstructions using kR’s from 1 to 18 were per-
formed on the phantom data sets. The PARS reconstructed
sum-of-squares images were quantitatively compared to
unaccelerated fully sampled sum-of-squares reference im-
ages by calculating total error power as
Parallel MRI with Adaptive Radius in k-Space 1385
Total Error Power

x,y  FOVReference(x,y)  PARS(x,y)2
x,y  FOVReference(x,y)2 . [12]
Here, the summation ¥
x,y  FOV
spans the entire FOV. The
kR that yielded the least total error power at a particular
acceleration factor was designated the “minimal-error” kR.
This empirically determined minimal-error kR was then
used in the PARS reconstruction of the in vivo data sets.
PARS-reconstructed in vivo images were qualitatively
compared to SENSE-reconstructed images.
Non-Cartesian Sampled Data
Data Acquisition
The second set of experiments was performed on a 1.5-T
Gyroscan ACS-NT whole body MR system (Philips Medi-
cal Systems, Best, The Netherlands). In vivo data were
acquired in a volume containing the coronary arteries of
healthy adult volunteers with a commercial ﬁve-element
Synergy coil array (two ﬂexible circular elements placed
on the chest wall and three rectangular elements con-
toured to the table and arranged left-to-right at the sub-
ject’s back). Navigator gated and corrected ECG-triggered
3D spiral pulse sequences were used with conventional
phase encoding in the slice-selection direction (13 phase
encode steps, 30-mm slab thickness along the approxi-
mately superior–inferior direction) (14). One spiral inter-
leaf was acquired per R–R interval, using variable angular
speed spiral encoding in-plane (effective TE 1.5 ms, sam-
pling window 20 ms, RF excitation angle  90°, 360 
360 mm FOV, 512  512 matrix). A total of 42 spiral
interleaves were acquired in a fully sampled data set.
Threefold acceleration was achieved by acquiring only
every third of the spiral interleaves.
Data Reconstruction and Analysis
Low-resolution in vivo sensitivity maps were extracted
from the densely sampled k-space center using methods
described in Ref. (15). SVD conditioning (truncation of
singular values less than 0.01 of the maximum singular
value) was used to further enhance the stable inversion of
the localized encoding matrices. Three comparative PARS
reconstructions were performed with k-space radii kR  1,
2, 3.
RESULTS
Figure 2 illustrates the contribution of neighboring data in
the reconstruction of an omitted datum in a twofold un-
dersampled data set. Complex weights used by parallel
image reconstructions were calculated based on simulated
coil sensitivities (Fig. 2a–c), or acquired coil sensitivities
(Fig. 2d–f). Three reconstruction methods were used in
calculating the weights: Fig. 2a and d, SENSE; Fig. 2b and
e, PARS with kR  1; and Fig. 2c and f, PARS with kR  5.
The omitted datum to be reconstructed was located at k 
0, and MR data were acquired at k127,125,. . . , 125,
127 (a twofold accelerated acquisition). The magnitude of
the weights of one of eight coils is plotted. k-space locality
of RF coil encoded data is demonstrated by the diminish-
ing contribution of signal data as a function of k-space
separation from the omitted datum (Fig. 2a and d). PARS
effectively enforces this k-space locality by allowing a
ﬁnite number of nonzero values at the center but setting all
other weights to zero, as illustrated by the central spikes
FIG. 2. Illustration of the inherent k-space
locality in parallel MRI. Complex reconstruc-
tion weights were calculated based on (a–c)
simulated coil sensitivities and (d–e) ac-
quired coil sensitivities. Three reconstruc-
tion methods were used: (a,d) SENSE, (b,e)
PARS with kR  1, and (c,f) PARS with kR 
5. The omitted datum was located at k  0,
and MR data were acquired at k  127,
125,. . . , 125, 127 (a twofold undersam-
pling). The magnitude of the weights of one
of eight coils is plotted as a function of
k-space position.
1386 Yeh et al.
whose widths are equal to twice the chosen kR value (i.e.,
2 in Fig. 2b and e and 10 in Fig. 2c and f, respectively).
Figure 3 illustrates the effects of two types of noise
(noise in signal data and in coil sensitivities) for SENSE
and PARS image reconstructions of a simulated threefold
one-dimensionally accelerated data set. Signal data noise
was simulated with standard deviations equal to 0.01 (Fig.
3a), 0.02 (Fig. 3b), and 0.05 (Fig. 3c) of the maximum image
intensity. The square root of the total error power is plot-
ted on a log-log scale as a function of sensitivity noise with
standard deviations ranging from 104 to 101 of the max-
imum coil sensitivity.
Figure 4 plots the total error power as a function of the
k-space radius kR in the phantom experiments. The data
sets were regularly undersampled in the left–right direc-
tion by factors of 2 (Fig. 4a), 3 (Fig. 4b), and 4 (Fig. 4c).
PARS reconstructions with a range of kR were performed,
and the total error power was calculated as described by
Eq. [12]. Similarly, SMASH and SENSE reconstructions
were performed. The corresponding total error power is
plotted. Different acceleration factors yielded different
minimal-error kR’s. As shown in Figure 4, the total error
initially decreases and then increases as a function of
k-space radius. Relatively broad minima occur at some
mid-range k-space radii. The total error power of SMASH
and SENSE are consistently higher than those of the PARS
minima.
Figure 5 illustrates the PARS reconstructions of 1D ac-
celerated in vivo data. The empirically determined mini-
mal-error k-space radii were used. For twofold accelera-
tion, kR  3 (Fig. 5a); for threefold acceleration, kR  7
(Fig. 5b); and for fourfold acceleration, kR  9 (Fig. 5c).
SENSE image reconstructions (Fig. 5d–f) at the corre-
sponding acceleration factors are displayed for compari-
FIG. 3. Illustration of the effect of signal data noise
and sensitivity noise in SENSE and PARS image
reconstructions. Threefold one-dimensionally ac-
celerated data sets were simulated with signal data
noise standard deviations equal to 0.01 (a), 0.02
(b), and 0.05 (c) of the maximum image intensity,
and coil sensitivities were simulated with noise
standard deviations ranging from 104 to 101 of
the maximum coil sensitivity. The square root of
the total error power in the reconstructed images is
plotted on a log-log scale as a function of sensi-
tivity noise.
FIG. 4. Total error power as a function of the
k-space radius kR in PARS reconstructions. Phan-
tom data sets were undersampled in one dimen-
sion on a Cartesian grid, and image reconstruc-
tions were performed using PARS with a range of
k-space radii. The total error power of PARS,
SENSE, and SMASH reconstructions were calcu-
lated by a pixel-by-pixel subtraction against a fully
sampled reference image (see text). The minimal
total error power occurred at kR  3 for twofold
acceleration; at kR  7 for threefold acceleration;
and at kR  9 for fourfold acceleration.
Parallel MRI with Adaptive Radius in k-Space 1387
son. Corresponding computation times of different tech-
niques are shown in Table 1.
Figure 6 illustrates PARS reconstructions of 2D acceler-
ated non-Cartesian in vivo data. A fully sampled spiral
image (Fig. 6a) and PARS reconstructed images for three-
fold undersampled spiral trajectories (Fig. 6b–d) using
different kR’s are compared. kR’s used for the PARS recon-
structions were 1 (Fig. 6b), 2 (Fig. 6c), and 3 (Fig. 6d).
Corresponding computation times of different techniques
are shown in Table 2.
DISCUSSION
k-Space Locality and Computational Efﬁciency
By imposing the k-space locality constraint, PARS exploits
the physical characteristics of RF coil sensitivity encoding
to improve parallel image reconstruction. It has been
shown in Ref. (4) that RF surface coils of simple conductor
geometry have sensitivity proﬁles that are smooth in the
object domain and band-limited in k-space. The effect of
multiplication of the imaged object by these coil sensitiv-
ities (e.g., Eq. [1]) is therefore a ﬁnite-kernel convolution in
k-space. The original Fourier components of the object of
interest are locally spread in the acquired MR signal data.
Conversely, acquired signal data proximal to a given omit-
ted signal datum are expected to have the greatest contri-
bution in reconstructing that datum, as shown in Fig. 2.
Exploiting this physical property dramatically reduces the
computational burden associated with inverting the full
non-Cartesian encoding matrix while preserving the dom-
inant behavior of the full inverse. In addition, the PARS
sliding-kernel approach allows data to be directly recon-
FIG. 5. Comparison of parallel image reconstruc-
tions of in vivo data sets at various acceleration
factors. (a–c) PARS reconstructions using the
“minimal error” kR obtained from the phantom ex-
periment (kR  3 for twofold acceleration (a), kR 
7 for threefold acceleration (b), and kR  9 for
fourfold acceleration (c)). (d–f) SENSE reconstruc-
tions at the corresponding acceleration factors.
Table 1
Reconstruction Times (in Seconds) for 1D Undersampled
Cartesian Trajectories
Twofold Threefold Fourfold
SMASH 5.0 5.9 6.2
PARS (kR  3) 11.1 6.3 7.0
PARS (kR  7) 57.4 32.1 27.5
SENSE 5.1 4.0 3.6
1388 Yeh et al.
structed on a Cartesian grid, eliminating the need to regrid
the reconstructed data points.
Effect of Noise and Artifact on Total Error
In a noise-free scenario, the choice of kR is analogous to the
width of the convolution kernel in nonparallel image re-
construction approaches such as the gridding algorithm
(16). For a gridding reconstruction, increasing the kernel
width results in reducing the artifact power. The beneﬁt of
minimizing artifact comes at a cost in computation time
and memory. In the gridding algorithm, it has been shown
that an inﬁnite sinc function, i.e., kR  , is the ideal
kernel, despite the long computation time. The same may
be argued for kR in PARS, as long as the noise-free assump-
tion holds.
Once noise is introduced into coil sensitivities (as
shown in Figs. 2d–f and 3a–c); however, the k-space lo-
cality constraint imposed by PARS becomes a powerful
tool: a larger kR inevitably includes diminishingly smaller
coefﬁcients of the noise-corrupted sensitivities and leads
to a more inaccurate encoding matrix, counterbalancing
the beneﬁt of artifact reduction. Thus, the truncation of the
inverse problem at a modest kR not only improves compu-
tational tractability but also serves to regularize the inver-
sion. The accuracy of the inversion is improved in ex-
change for a moderate level of artifact, which can be tuned
to fall underneath the baseline noise level. In certain spe-
cial scenarios, as illustrated in Fig. 3c where PARS image
reconstructions achieve minimal error around sensitivity
noise  2  102, PARS performance may be paradoxi-
cally improved by injecting some low level of noise in the
coil sensitivity. The numerical conditioning effect of noise
has been previously reported in Ref. (17), and its overall
effect is analogous to that of numerical conditioning pro-
cedures that have begun to be applied in many current
parallel imaging algorithms (for example, Tikhonov regu-
larization, c.f. (18)).
Traditional conditioning methods also have the poten-
tial to complement the inherent PARS regularization.
When comparing the effects of conditioning between
PARS and other parallel imaging reconstructions, it is
important to note that the computational feasibility of
traditional conditioning methods is strictly dictated by the
size and structure of the encoding matrix. In Cartesian
sampling where the encoding matrix can be partitioned
simply by performing an FFT, traditional conditioning
methods can be easily implemented for most parallel im-
aging techniques. In non-Cartesian sampling where simple
block diagonalization by FFT is not available, however,
the k-space locality constraint in PARS provides an en-
abling advantage by allowing a different local partitioning
of the prohibitively large matrix, thereby facilitating addi-
tional numerical conditioning. Furthermore, the use of
independent matrix inverses provides a high degree of
ﬂexibility, including the ability to apply variable condi-
tioning thresholds for different k-space clusters.
FIG. 6. PARS reconstructions of data acquired with 2D
accelerated non-Cartesian trajectories. Unaccelerated ref-
erence image (a) and PARS reconstructed images of three-
fold accelerated spiral trajectories with k-space radii kR  1
(b), kR  2, (c), kR  3 (d).
Table 2
Reconstruction Times (in Minutes) for 2D Undersampled Spiral
Trajectories
Threefold
PARS (kR  1, using one processor) 13
PARS (kR  1, using two parallel processors) 7
PARS (kR  2, using one processor) 75
PARS (kR  2, using two parallel processors) 38
Iterative SENSE (using one processor) 3
Parallel MRI with Adaptive Radius in k-Space 1389
Total Error Power
The total error power calculation used in this work con-
stitutes a single integrated metric to quantify the overall
error in parallel image reconstruction. This metric mea-
sures the combined effect of artifact and noise ampliﬁca-
tion. The commonly used geometry factor (g-factor) only
accounts for noise ampliﬁcation and therefore is not ade-
quate to characterize parallel imaging techniques that
trade artifact for improved matrix inversion accuracy
and/or reduced noise ampliﬁcation.
PARS reconstructions using a very small k-space radius
are typically relatively immune to error in coil sensitivi-
ties, which can be advantageous for noise-prone coil sen-
sitivity calibrations (Fig. 3). However, because of the lim-
ited number of encoding functions, the least-squares ﬁt in
Eq. [3] may not be very good. Consequently, the artifact
term dominates in the total error calculation. As the k-
space radius increases, more equations are included in the
least-squares ﬁt, resulting in a better ﬁt with decreased
residual artifact. However, the ampliﬁcation of noise or
errors in coil sensitivities increases and becomes domi-
nant.
As expected, the SMASH reconstruction has a relatively
large artifact power due to the constraint of using only the
nearest neighbor. In the special case of kR  1 at threefold
acceleration (Fig. 4b), PARS converges to SMASH because
at any omitted data location, only one acquired MR signal
datum can be reached by a k-space radius of 1. The SENSE
reconstruction used in this work is a weak case of SENSE
which, unlike the strong version, has some degrees of
freedom to optimize SNR. Nonetheless, the total error
power of SENSE is higher than the minimal-error PARS
reconstruction in the phantom experiments.
Figure 3 illustrates the tradeoff between artifact power
and error ampliﬁcation at various simulated noise values.
SENSE is a so-called “exact” reconstruction such that in
the limit of inﬁnite SNR in both sensitivity and signal data,
the total error approaches zero (that is, ignoring the often
modest variances from any chosen target image associated
with reconstructed point spread functions). On the other
hand, since PARS (like other constrained parallel imaging
techniques) has a nonzero artifact power for limited k-
space radius, the total error in the limit of inﬁnite SNR
asymptotically approaches the value of that residual arti-
fact power. However, at typical in vivo operating SNR
(e.g., SNR  100), the total error power is dominated by
error resulting from noisy sensitivity and signal data, and
in this case, PARS can demonstrate deﬁnitive advantages
over an exact reconstruction.
Qualitative Image Comparisons
For in vivo data sets acquired on Cartesian trajectories,
PARS reconstructed images show reduced noise ampliﬁ-
cation and increased immunity to coil sensitivity error
compared with corresponding SENSE images. At higher
acceleration factor (e.g., three- and fourfold), the noise
reduction is more pronounced visually. Also, because the
sensitivity reference was acquired in a separate scan, im-
age registration is a particular problem at the edges of the
object. This calibration error results in conspicuous arti-
facts in the reconstructed images, in particular for the
fourfold SENSE reconstruction. This challenge has been
addressed for SENSE-like reconstructions by implement-
ing techniques for sensitivity extrapolation and smooth-
ing. On the other hand, PARS automatically accomplishes
the same effect through the k-space locality constraint.
For the in vivo spiral data sets, the PARS reconstructed
images demonstrate the principle of k-space locality in
two dimensions. The PARS threefold accelerated recon-
struction using kR  1 has the highest visible noise back-
ground whereas those of kR  2 and kR  3 show compa-
rable image quality. Also, the k-space radius can be made
adaptive in this example. As shown in Fig. 4, in the 1D
case, the minimal-error kR is different for different under-
sampling factors. Since the spiral trajectory (as well as
other non-Cartesian trajectories) has variable local sam-
pling density, it is possible to have an adaptive kR that
varies as a function of the local sampling density.
On the other hand, Fig. 4 also illustrates that at a given
acceleration factor, the total error power varies slowly
around the minimal-error kR. These broad minima suggest
that a “good-enough” kR can be coarsely determined, with
some tolerance to moderate variations in acceleration and
other scanning parameters (e.g., FOV and image plane
orientation). Once a good-enough kR has been determined
for a given coil array, the same kR can be routinely used for
PARS reconstructions, without the need for careful opti-
mization.
Characteristics of Magnitude Noise in Sum-of-Square
Combination
GRAPPA (9) and PARS share the feature that reconstruc-
tions are performed in a coil-by-coil fashion followed by
sum-of-squares combination. In this case, the noises across
the reconstructed component coil images are correlated
and have nonidentical variances (13). The effect of sum-
of-squares combination on nonwhite, nonidentical noises
has not been fully characterized, since existing work only
addresses the special case when the coil noises are uncor-
related and of identical variance (19,20). Preliminary work
on the development of a new generalized model for mag-
nitude noise analysis is in progress (21). This new analysis
is required to determine the theoretical effect of varying
k-space radius on the SNR of PARS reconstructions. In the
meantime, the total error power calculation proposed in
this work serves as a convenient and, in some ways more
relevant, metric to empirically determine the minimal-
error k-space radius.
PARS and BURS
PARS, in its application of k-space locality and choice of
kernel size, bears a close analogy with the BURS algo-
rithm, (12,22,23) a “regridding” algorithm for nonparallel
imaging. As shown in Eq. [6], PARS may be formulated as
a generalization of BURS that incorporates coil sensitivi-
ties in forming the coil-gradient modulated encoding func-
tions. The addition of the coil dimension in PARS expands
the number of encoding functions by a factor equal to the
number of coils. In the case of an accelerated acquisition,
the expanded encoding function set in PARS enables a
successful reconstruction of the undersampled data.
1390 Yeh et al.
Iterative and Noniterative Approaches to Non-Cartesian
Parallel Imaging
In addressing the computational burden of 2D non-Carte-
sian imaging, an iterative variant of SENSE has been pro-
posed to avoid the creation and manipulation of the gen-
eralized encoding matrix. This implementation of SENSE
(6) employs repeated gridding and ungridding procedures
within a conjugate gradient algorithm. In our implemen-
tations using MATLAB, iterative SENSE reconstructions
tended to have a shorter total run time than PARS recon-
structions. This is demonstrated in Table 2. (Computation
times in both Table 1 and Table 2 were benchmarked using
prototype Matlab code with little optimization—absolute
performances are typically many times faster when imple-
mented and optimized using low-level languages such as
C.) However, because PARS involves inverting many small
and independent matrices, the algorithm is massively par-
allelizable for a distributed computing environment (24).
This is also demonstrated in Table 2. In the 2D non-
Cartesian image reconstructions, PARS simply distributes
the point-by-point data reconstructions across parallel
processors with minimal overhead. Moreover, instead of
requiring complete acquisition of the full data set prior to
the initiation of image reconstruction, the PARS recon-
struction can begin as soon as a local cluster of acquired
signal data becomes available. This is expected to provide
advantages for low-latency reconstructions in real-time
applications of self-calibrating parallel imaging.
The advantage of only requiring a small subset of acquired
data to reconstruct any particular k-space point will become
increasingly important as parallel imaging expands to the
realm of three-dimensionally accelerated non-Cartesian tra-
jectories. For example, a 256 256 256 volumetric data set
acquired with a multielement coil array will occupy on the
order of gigabyte of storage space. Even simple operations
such as loading and storing the data set in a conventional
memory space will require special effort in system engineer-
ing. Algorithms such as PARS, which can judiciously parti-
tion the data set and distribute the computational burden to
parallel processors, will be much easier to implement. Last,
unlike the iterative conjugate gradient approach, PARS com-
putes the actual reconstruction weights that are responsible
for noise ampliﬁcations, permitting explicit g-factor maps to
be calculated accordingly (21). This property may prove use-
ful in verifying for non-Cartesian trajectories the SNR advan-
tages that are expected from two- and three-dimensional
acceleration (25). Appendix A describes a general strategy to
calculate the noise ampliﬁcation in PARS reconstruction.
CONCLUSIONS
We have outlined the theory and implementation of the
PARS algorithm, which exploits the common physical
characteristic of k-space locality that is inherent in RF coil
encoded data. Instead of inverting a prohibitively large
encoding matrix, the PARS algorithm partitions the inver-
sion burden into manageable and distributable indepen-
dent matrix inverses. These small inversions not only are
computationally efﬁcient, but also have a desirable regu-
larization effect, which is critical for parallel imaging at
high acceleration factors. As parallel imaging expands to
highly accelerated 3D trajectories with many-element coil
arrays, PARS promises an attractive solution to critical
issues such as data volume, computability, numerical sta-
bility, and the desirable balance of SNR and artifact power.
APPENDIX A
A General Strategy to Calculate g-Factor for PARS
Reconstructions
The PARS weight matrices, computed by independent in-
versions of localized encoding matrices (Eq. [11]), can be
collectively arranged to form a reconstruction matrix ,
such that
sl
recon  sacq. [13]
In a coil-by-coil reconstruction, sl
recon is the PARS recon-
structed signal vector of the lth component coil, and sacq is
the acquired signal vector from the coil array. The size of
 is potentially very large, as in the case of non-Cartesian
multidimensional trajectories. However,  is extremely
sparse because of the PARS k-space locality constraint,
with the degree of sparseness of  determined by the
k-space radius kR. A coil image is reconstructed by per-
forming an inverse Fourier transformation on sl
recon,
l  Fsl
recon  Fsacq. [14]
Here, l is the component coil image, and F is the inverse
Fourier transform matrix. PARS, the noise covariance ma-
trix for the component coil image, is expressed as
PARS  F (F)H, [15]
where  is the noise covariance matrix of the acquired
signal, and   
H is the Hermitian conjugate operator. When
a Cholesky factorization is performed,
  LLH [16]
to decorrelate and normalize noise in the acquired signal
(6), Eq. [15] simpliﬁes to
PARS  FˆˆHFH, [17]
where ˆ  L. The 	th diagonal element of PARS corre-
sponds to the noise power at the 	th voxel location and
can be computed as
PARS)	,	(FˆˆHFH)	,	
 
n
(Fˆ)	,n2
 
n

m
F	,mˆm,n2. [18]
Parallel MRI with Adaptive Radius in k-Space 1391
The double summations here can be implemented efﬁ-
ciently in computation and memory storage by taking ad-
vantage of the sparseness of ˆ and the FFT. Finally, g	, the
g-factor at the 	th voxel location, can be expressed as
g	 
(PARS)	,	
R(Ref)	,	 , [19]
where R is the acceleration factor and Ref is the noise
covariance matrix of the unaccelerated reference image.
While Eqs. [15–19] present a g-factor calculation strategy
for PARS reconstructed component coil images, the g-
factor for the ﬁnal PARS sum-of-squares image requires
additional calculations that are beyond the scope of this
article. The sum-of-squares combination of coil images,
performed at the very end of the PARS algoirthm, involves
nonlinear magnitude and square root operations that per-
turb the noise statistics. A strategy that accounts for these
additional effects has been outlined elsewehere (21).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Rene´ Botnar for his generous help and
guidance in the acquisition of non-Cartesian data sets used
in this work.
REFERENCES
1. Pruessmann KP, Weiger M, Scheidegger MB, Boesiger P. SENSE: sen-
sitivity encoding for fast MRI. Magn Reson Med 1999;42:952–962.
2. Kyriakos WE, Panych LP, Kacher DF, Westin CF, Bao SM, Mulkern RV,
Jolesz FA. Sensitivity proﬁles from an array of coils for encoding and
reconstruction in parallel (SPACE RIP). Magn Reson Med 2000;44:301–
308.
3. Sodickson DK, McKenzie C. A generalized approach to parallel mag-
netic resonance imaging. Med Phys 2001;28:1629–1643.
4. Bydder M, Larkman DJ, Hajnal JV. Generalized SMASH imaging. Magn
Reson Med 2002;47:160–170.
5. Ra JB, Rim CY. Fast imaging using subencoding data sets from multiple
detectors. Magn Reson Med 1993;30:142–145.
6. Pruessmann KP, Weiger M, Bornert P, Boesiger P. Advances in sensi-
tivity encoding with arbitrary k-space trajectories. Magn Reson Med
2001;46:638–651.
7. Yeh EN, McKenzie CA, Lim D, Ohliger MA, Grant AK, Willig J, Rofsky
NM, Sodickson DK. Parallel imaging with augmented radius in k-space
(PARS). In: Proceedings of the 10th Annual Meeting of ISMRM, Hono-
lulu, 2002. p 2399.
8. Sodickson DK, Manning WJ. Simultaneous acquisition of spatial har-
monics (SMASH): fast imaging with radiofrequency coil arrays. Magn
Reson Med 1997;38:591–603.
9. Griswold MA, Jakob PM, Heidemann RM, Nittka M, Jellus V, Wang J,
Kiefer B, Haase A. Generalized autocalibrating partially parallel acqui-
sitions (GRAPPA). Magn Reson Med 2002;47:1202–1210.
10. Wang Y. Description of parallel imaging in MRI using multiple coils.
Magn Reson Med 2000;44:495–499.
11. McKenzie CA, Lim D, Ransil BJ, Morrin M, Pedrosa I, Yeh EN, Sodick-
son DK, Rofsky NM. Shortening MR image acquisition time for volu-
metric interpolated breath-hold examination with a recently developed
parallel imaging reconstruction technique: clinical feasibility. Radiol-
ogy 2004;230:589–594.
12. Moriguchi H, Duerk JL. Modiﬁed block uniform resampling (BURS)
algorithm using truncated singular value decomposition: fast accurate
gridding with noise and artifact reduction. Magn Reson Med 2001;46:
1189–1201.
13. McKenzie CA, Ohliger MA, Yeh EN, Price MD, Sodickson DK. Coil-by-
coil image reconstruction with SMASH. Magn Reson Med 2001;46:
619–623.
14. Bornert P, Stuber M, Botnar RM, Kissinger KV, Koken P, Spuentrup E,
Manning WJ. Direct comparison of 3D spiral vs. Cartesian gradient-
echo coronary magnetic resonance angiography. Magn Reson Med
2001;46:789–794.
15. Yeh EN, Stuber M, McKenzie CA, Ohliger MA, Grant AK, Willig J,
Sodickson DK. Self-calibrated spiral parallel imaging. In: Proceedings
of the 10th Annual Meeting of ISMRM, Honolulu, 2002. p 2390.
16. Jackson JI, Meyer CH, Nishimura D, Macovski A. Selection of a convo-
lution function for Fourier inversion using gridding. IEEE Trans Med
Imaging 1991;10:473–478.
17. Sodickson DK. Tailored SMASH image reconstructions for robust in
vivo parallel MR imaging. Magn Reson Med 2000;44:243–251.
18. Lin FH, Kwong KK, Belliveau JW, Wald LL. Parallel imaging recon-
struction using automatic regularization. Magn Reson Med 2004;51:
559–567.
19. Gudbjartsson H, Patz S. The Rician distribution of noisy MRI data.
Magn Reson Med 1995;34:910–914.
20. Constantinides CD, Atalar E, McVeigh ER. Signal-to-noise measure-
ments in magnitude images from NMR phased arrays. Magn Reson Med
1997;38:852–857.
21. Yeh EN, McKenzie CA, Grant AK, Ohliger MA, Willig J, Sodickson DK.
Generalized noise analysis for magnitude image combinations in par-
allel MRI. In: Proceedings of the 11th Annual Meeting of ISMRM,
Toronto, Canada, 2003. p 21..
22. Rosenfeld D. An optimal and efﬁcient new gridding algorithm using
singular value decompostion. Magn Reson Med 1998;40:14–23.
23. Rosenfeld D. New approach to gridding using regularization and esti-
mation theory. Magn Reson Med 2002;48:193–202.
24. Cohen S, Grant AK, Yeh EN, Joshi S, Sodickson DK. A Parallel com-
puting solution for rapid reconstruction of highly accelerated volumet-
ric parallel MRI data. In: Proceedings of the 12th Annual Meeting of
ISMRM, Kyoto, Japan, 2004. p 2631
25. Weiger M, Pruessmann KP, Boesiger P. 2D SENSE for faster 3D MRI.
Magma 2002;14:10–19.
1392 Yeh et al.
