PROCEEDINGS, Thirtieth Workshop on Geothermal Reservoir Engineering 
Stanford University, Stanford, California, January 31-February 2, 2005 
SGP-TR-176 
 
 
 
SEISMIC IMAGING OF THE GEOTHERMAL FIELD AT KRAFLA, ICELAND 
 
Chuanhai Tang, Jose A. Rial, Jonathan Lees, and Eric Thompson 
 
Department of Geological Sciences, University of North Carolina 
Mitchell Hall, CB#3315 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA 
e-mail: chhtang@email.unc.edu 
 
ABSTRACT 
During the summer of 2004 we recorded the 
seismicity at the Krafla geothermal field for forty 
days with an array of twenty PASSCAL L-28 4.5-Hz 
sensors. The Krafla field is located approximately 60 
km East of Akureyri in northern Iceland. The array 
covered an area approximately 5 km N-S by 4 km E-
W. The field area is located on Holocene lava flows 
on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. The array recorded 
approximately 5 micro-earthquakes per day at a 
sampling rate of 500 Hz. This high sampling rate is 
required to exploit newly developed theories on the 
frequency-dependence of shear-wave splitting 
(SWS). During the experiment, the injection well was 
stopped for ten days to study the response of the 
subsurface crack system to changes in water pressure. 
SWS is an exploration method based on the analyses 
of polarizations and time delays of shear waves that 
have been distorted by the anisotropy of the medium 
through which the seismic waves have propagated. 
Epicenters roughly align along the E-W direction, 
while hypocenters are shallow around the injection 
well and appear to be related to the on-going 
injection. Observations of SWS at Krafla have 
provided evidence for at least two major crack 
systems oriented approximately N-S and E-W. This 
last, rather unexpected direction is consistent with 
results from a simultaneous MT (magneto-telluric) 
survey. Further SWS study will lead to a more 
detailed understanding of the fracture locations, sizes, 
and orientations in the geothermal field. 
Keywords: shear-wave splitting, the Krafla 
geothermal field, seismic imaging, fractured reservoir 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The Krafla volcanic system is made up of the Krafla 
central volcano and an approximately 100 km long, 
transecting fissure swarms in northeastern Iceland. 
The central volcano is a major eruptive center which 
is less than 500, 000 years old. The Krafla central 
volcano is approximately 21 km long by 17 km wide 
and encloses a 10 km by 7 km caldera that was 
formed 100,000 years ago during the last interglacial 
period. Two high-temperature geothermal areas occur 
within the Krafla volcanic system. One is located 5 
km south of the Krafla caldera and the other, the 
NW-SE aligned Krafla-Leirhnukur geothermal field, 
is located inside the Krafla caldera. The eastern part 
of the Krafla-Leirhnukur geothermal field is utilized 
by the Krafla power plant which started operation in 
1978. There is a shallow crustal magma reservoir 
with an upper boundary at a depth of approximately 3 
km, near the center of inflation in the caldera 
(Einarsson, 1978). This magma chamber is smaller 
than the caldera, about 2-3 km in the N-S direction 
and 8-10 km in the E-W direction, with a thickness of 
0.75-1.8 km (Brandsdottir et al., 1997). Geodetic 
measurements support the existence of a shallow 
magma chamber at a depth of 3 km within the caldera 
and have been used to argue for the existence of 
multiple magma reservoirs at depth (Tryggvason, 
1986). 
 
During the months of July and August 2004, a 20-
station, 3-component seismic array was deployed 
around the Krafla geothermal field. The field area is 
located on Holocene lava flows on the Mid-Atlantic 
Ridge, and the array covered an area approximately 5 
km in N-S by 4 km in E-W. Between July 5th and 
August 11th the array continuously recorded the 
seismic activity in the region surrounding the 
injection well K-26 located 1 km north of the power 
plant. The distribution of seismic stations, including 
both free-field and vault stations, is depicted in 
Figure 1. Vault stations (V) were deployed in cellars 
of abandoned wells. Each station in the seismic array 
consisted of a three-component short-period MARK4 
L28 (4 Hz) seismic sensor, a data-logger or DAS 
(Data Acquisition System), a GPS antenna, and a 
12V car battery.  The data were collected 
continuously at a rate of 500 sps (samples per 
second) and recorded on 1- or 2-GB flash cards and 
microdisks. Stations recorded an average of 170 MB 
of data per day. Though the total number of 
functioning stations was never greater than 20, 
identification numbers run up to 23 because three 
stations had to be either moved to avoid excessive 
seismic noise or entirely replaced, which required 
their old ID numbers to be changed. 
 
 
Figure 1. Distribution of the stations of PASSCAL 
seismic array in Krafla geothermal field, 
Iceland. The solid red dots represent free-
field stations and the red dots with “V” 
are vault stations deployed in cellars of 
abandoned wells. The solid blue dot is 
where the injection well is located. 
 
The seismic array is of the PASSCAL type, on loan 
from the Incorporation Research Institutions for 
Seismology (IRIS), which is underwritten by the US 
National Science Foundation. The main objective of 
this experiment is to use various seismic data 
processing techniques such as high precision 
earthquake location, shear-wave splitting (SWS), and 
tomographic inversion to detect the orientation, 
density and fluid content of the main subsurface 
fracture systems in Krafla. To further make use of the 
unique opportunity offered by Landsvirkjun to 
deploy the array, an experiment was conducted 
whereby injection in well K-26 was stopped on July 
15th and subsequently resumed on July 26th. The 
response of the subsurface crack system to these 
transient changes in water pressure can be detected 
with seismic waves and will provide invaluable 
information on the preferred directions of fluid 
migration in the reservoir, permeability, effects of 
pore pressure on seismicity and crack activation, and 
three-dimensional stress variations throughout the 
reservoir. 
OBSERVATIONS AND MEASUREMENTS OF 
SWS 
Seismicity 
Figure 2a shows the epicenters of seismic events 
located from July 5th to August 11th and Figure 2b 
shows the depth distribution of some selected events 
along E-W and N-S cross-sections respectively. The 
velocity model used in the locating is from 
Brandsdottir et al. (1997). Although these are 
preliminary locations, it is apparent that epicenters 
roughly align along the E-W direction, while 
hypocenters are shallow around the injection well. 
Most focal depths are shallower than 4 km. 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 2. The seismicity recorded by UNC array 
from July15th to August 11th is shown in 
(a). Totally 129 events are located and the 
depth distribution of the events located 
around the injection well K-26 (inside the 
rectangle) is shown in (b). 
 
Seismicity at Krafla is not very high. Most events 
appear to be related to the on-going injection, while a 
few deep ones appear independent on injection. 
However, so far no clear relationship has emerged 
between injection changes and seismicity rates. 
During the 35 days of operations the array detected 
an average of 5 to 6 well-recorded events per day 
(observed at 5 or more stations). These are very small 
earthquakes with magnitudes probably no greater 
than 2. 
 
Recording seismicity at Krafla is complicated by the 
high level of seismic noise in the area, most of it 
resulting from vibrations of the steam pipes, routine 
plant operations, tourists, and local traffic, etc. To 
avoid strong sources of noise, several stations were 
relocated to quieter sites. Stations deployed in well 
cellars had a mixed performance, some noisy and 
some not. In spite of occasional and instrumental 
interruptions the UNC array performed excellently, 
recording over 300 GB of data in 35 days. 
Shear-wave Splitting 
Shear-wave splitting (SWS) is an exploration method 
of proven reliability and unique imaging power based 
on the analysis of polarizations and time delays of 
shear waves distorted by the anisotropic properties of 
the propagating medium, since no other imaging 
method detects both the direction and intensity of 
cracking. The method is based on the fact that a 
shear-wave propagating through rocks with stress-
aligned micro-cracks (also known as extensive 
dilatancy anisotropy or EDA-cracks) will split into 
two waves, a fast one polarized parallel to the 
predominant crack direction, and a slow one, 
polarized perpendicular to it. The phenomenon is 
very similar to optical birefringence, whereby light 
transmitted through an anisotropic crystal undergoes 
analogous splitting and polarization parallel and 
perpendicular to the alignment of atoms in the crystal 
lattice. In the seismic case, the polarization direction 
of the fast split shear wave parallels the strike of the 
predominant cracks regardless of its initial 
polarization at the source (Crampin et al., 1986; 
Peacock et al., 1988). The differential time delay 
between the arrival of the fast and the slow shear 
waves (typically a few tens of milliseconds) is 
proportional to crack density, or number of cracks per 
unit volume within the rock body traversed by the 
seismic wave (Hudson, 1981; Crampin, 1987; 
Crampin and Lovell, 1991). In cracked reservoirs 
such as Krafla the anisotropy is likely caused by 
aligned systems of open, fluid-filled micro-fractures. 
Fortunately, the anisotropy effects on seismic waves 
induced by small, aligned open cracks in an 
otherwise isotropic rock are indistinguishable from 
those produced by an unfractured, but transversely 
isotropic medium. 
 
Shear-wave splitting is clearly recorded in Krafla. In 
fact, we have recorded unusually well developed 
splitting that strongly points to the prevalence of at 
least two major crack systems oriented approximately 
N-S and E-W. SWS detects the predominant ~N-S 
fabric related to the rifting, but also provides strong 
evidence for an equally pervasive ~E-W lineament of 
subsurface fractures roughly north and east of the 
injection well. 
Measuring the Polarization and Time Delay 
The polarization direction of the fast split shear-wave 
is parallel to the strike of the predominant cracks, 
regardless of its initial polarization at the source, and 
the time delay between the fast and the slow waves is 
proportional to the crack density. These split shear-
wave properties (fast shear-wave polarization 
direction φ and differential time delay δt) thus 
constitute valuable data set to invert for the 
subsurface fracture geometry and to estimate the 
crack density and permeability anisotropy within 
fractured geothermal reservoirs, such as Krafla 
geothermal field. An important limitation to shear-
wave splitting analysis is that seismic rays must be 
within the shear-wave window of the seismic 
stations. This window can be visualized as a right 
circular cone with vertex at the station and vertex 
angle iv = sin-1(β/α), where α and β are the P- and S-
wave surface velocities, respectively. For angles of 
incidence greater than iv, shear waves interactive 
strongly with the free surface, distorting the incoming 
waveform (Booth and Crampin, 1985). For a half 
space with a typical Poisson’s ratio of 0.25, the 
window’s vertex angle, as measured from the 
vertical, is equal to 35°. 
 
For the purpose of this study, we use φ and δt 
measurements from Krafla that correspond to high 
signal-to-noise ratio seismograms displaying linear 
horizontal particle motion and a clear well-defined 
shear-wave splitting event. Polarization diagrams 
(also known as particle motion plots) are used to 
accurately detect the marked switch in polarity of the 
two orthogonally polarized fast and slow shear-waves 
and to measure the split parameters (φ and δt). The 
polarity switch provides the clearest indication of 
splitting and thus of medium anisotropy. Time delays 
are measured after the seismogram is rotated to orient 
the fast and the slow waves along the instrument 
horizontal components. This operation cleanly 
decouples the two shear-wave arrivals allowing for 
direct and accurate measurement of the time delay. 
Time delays are normalized to the length of the 
raypath, presumed to be entirely fractured. This 
assumption is reasonable given that typical event 
depth does not exceed 4 km. 
 
So far the data from five selected stations (P03, P04, 
P10, P13, and P23) have been investigated to 
measure the fast shear-wave polarization and time 
delay. These stations are selected because they either 
recorded the data of best quality (P13, P23) or have a 
relatively good coverage of raypaths coming from 
different azimuths (P03, P04, P10, P23). Station P13 
had recorded the best data with highest signal-to-
noise ratio of all the stations in the array but 
unfortunately, its DAS (Data Acquisition System) 
was faulty and recorded no data from July 9 to 13 and 
was replaced with a new DAS on July 25. Station 
P23 was the previous P05 which was moved to the 
new location in order to avoid the high seismic noise 
there. Figure 3 shows the rose diagrams (polar 
histograms) of fast shear-wave polarization directions 
observed within the shear-wave window of the five 
stations. The bin size in the rose diagrams is 10° and 
the length of each bin is proportional to the number 
of polarizations within it. It can be seen from Figure 
3 that the predominant polarization directions 
observed for stations P13 and P23 are close to E-W 
and those for stations P04 and P10 are close to N-S 
direction, while P03 shows a distinct subset of 
polarizations striking N-S in addition to and almost 
perpendicular to the main polarization set in E-W 
direction. 
 
 
Figure 3. Rose diagrams of the fast shear-wave 
polarization directions observed at the 
five stations. 
 
To inspect the azimuthal distribution of polarization 
angles, equal-area projection plot of the observed 
polarizations at station P13, as an example, is shown 
in Figure 4a. For all the five stations most shear-wave 
splitting events within the shear-wave window come 
from the NE and SE quadrants and fewest from the 
SW quadrant, which can be compared with the 
distribution of located epicenters in Figure 2a. Shown 
in Figure 4b is the equal-area projection plot of the 
observed time delays which are already normalized to 
the length of the corresponding raypath. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 4. Observed fast shear-wave polarization 
angles (a) and differential time delays (b) 
at station P13 plotted in equal-area 
projection. The biggest circle corresponds 
to a time delay of 34 ms/km and the 
smallest to 1 ms/km. The shear-wave 
window is 35.2°. 
 
INVERSION METHOD AND RESULTS 
The pairs of anisotropy-related parameters, fast 
shear-wave polarization direction φ and differential 
time delay δt, read from many seismograms recorded 
at the five selected seismic stations at Krafla may 
provide a preliminary means of detecting the key 
subsurface fracture characteristics in the reservoir. 
Polarization orientations help delineate stress-aligned 
crack directions that represent potential conduits for 
subsurface fluid flow, while crack densities inferred 
from differential time delays may offer good 
prospects of depicting target-zones of increased 
cracking density and rock permeability within the 
reservoir rocks. To avoid potential ambiguity, it is 
worthwhile to mention that in an anisotropic medium, 
aligned fast shear-wave polarization orientations are 
independent of the initial polarization of the shear-
wave at the source and are mainly caused by the 
medium’s anisotropy (e.g. Crampin et al., 1986; 
Peacock et al., 1988; Crampin and Lovell, 1991). 
Methodology 
We use an inversion scheme employing both shear-
wave splitting parameters φ and δt (Yang, 2003). As 
previously discussed, φ mainly depends on the angle 
between the crack normal and the seismic ray while 
δt is proportional to the crack density along the 
raypath. Station-by-station inversion for subsurface 
crack strike, dip and density is performed through 
successive trial-and-error comparisons of observed 
and theoretical fast shear-wave polarizations and 
associated time delays plotted in equal-area 
projections as functions of ray azimuth and angle of 
incidence. The trial-and-error process is guided, in 
the sense that the fit of a given crack model is 
interactively optimized by displaying the history of 
all previous trial-and-error events, so that current 
results guide the next update trial until convergence 
to the best solution is achieved. Simultaneous 
minimization of both φ and δt residuals is 
accomplished by a non-linear least-squares algorithm 
whereby the goodness-of-fit of a given crack model 
is evaluated based on the root mean square (RMS) 
estimates given by 
2/1
1
2))()((
2
1)( ⎭⎬
⎫
⎩⎨
⎧
−
−
= ∑
=
N
n
ntnoN
RMS ϕϕϕ         (1) 
2/1
1
2))()((
2
1)( ⎭⎬
⎫
⎩⎨
⎧
−
−
= ∑
=
N
n
ntno ttN
tRMS δδδ         (2) 
where φo and φt are observed and theoretical fast 
shear-wave polarization angles respectively, δto and 
δtt are observed and theoretical differential time 
delays respectively, and N is the number of 
observations recorded at a given seismic station. 
 
Essentially, inversion efforts are expected to identify 
regions of different crack densities in Krafla 
geothermal field and invert for 3-D fracture geometry 
in the subsurface. Based on seismic ray coverage and 
depending on the spatial patterns and azimuthal 
distributions of observed polarizations and time 
delays in the equal-area projection plots, crack-
induced anisotropy is modeled by 1) a single system 
of vertical cracks, 2) a single system of non-vertically 
dipping cracks, or 3) two intersecting sets of 
vertically and/or non-vertically dipping cracks. Most 
of the stations we have analyzed so far showed just 
one chief polarization direction (Figure 3). The 
recording of a single prevalent polarization may in 
general be accounted for by anisotropic effects due to 
parallel vertical cracks. In this case, the chief 
polarization orientation is parallel to the strike of the 
main crack system in the neighborhood of the station. 
Station P03, however, showed two almost equally 
dominant polarization directions, which may provide 
important clues on the geometry of subsurface 
fractures and should not be regarded as scattering 
noise, especially if their distribution fits particular 
azimuthally dependent patterns. 
 
In addition to the trial-and-error process described 
above, a more self-consistent algorithm was 
developed for inverting the measurements of 
polarizations and time delays of split shear waves. 
Such a multi-response (φ and δt) inversion problem 
as above can be reduced to two connected single-
response processes due to the following three features 
of the shear-wave splitting data. 1) Either the 
polarization or the time delay dataset is 
mathematically adequate by itself to invert for 
fractures. 2) Polarization data are basically 
insensitive to the variations in crack density. 3) The 
measurement of time delays technically involves 
much more uncertainties than that of polarizations. 
More specifically, crack strike and dip are mainly 
modeled from polarizations while crack density is 
modeled from delay times. In order to implement the 
inversion scheme, a 2-D model plane is defined in 
which the x-axis represents the crack strike and the y-
axis the complement of the crack dip, both spanning 
the range from -90° to 90°. The root mean square of 
the residue functions (RMSRF) are computed at 
specific points in this plane (by default, these points 
lie on a 1°×1° resolution grid) and their distributions 
are visualized by contouring. According to the 
nonlinear least squares rule, the estimated crack 
model is inferred from the point where the absolute 
RMSRF minimum is located. 
Preliminary Inversion Results 
To model the effects of crack-related anisotropy (in 
terms of crack strike, dip and density) on shear-wave 
splitting behavior, the fractured medium is 
represented by an elastic continuum with anisotropic 
properties that reflect the crack’s configuration. This 
representation applies to wavelengths that are 
significantly longer than individual crack dimensions. 
We use the elastic stiffness proposed by MacBeth 
(1999) for Transverse Isotropic (TI) conditions, 
which includes a first order perturbation to the 
isotropic elastic constants, to simulate the general 3-
D mechanical properties of the fractured solid. By 
evaluating the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the 
corresponding Christoffel matrix, which depend on 
the medium stiffness and direction of wave 
propagation, synthetic fast shear-wave polarizations, 
shear-wave phase velocities, and associated 
differential time delays can be calculated for 
prescribed transversely isotropic models (Babuska 
and Cara, 1991; Tsvankin, 2001). 
 
The preliminary inversion results for crack strike, 
crack dip, and crack density using the measured fast 
shear-wave polarization directions and differential 
time delays from the five selected seismic stations in 
Krafla geothermal field are listed briefly in Table 1. 
Compared to the results of other stations, the shallow 
dip angle and high crack density inverted for P04 
may indicate that the fracture model of a single set of 
vertical or non-vertically dipping cracks is probably 
not appropriate in this case. All the other inversion 
results are generally consistent with the assumption 
of the single set model in terms of their steep dip 
angles and relatively low crack densities. The crack 
strikes for stations P13 and P23 are close to E-W 
direction while at station P10 the strike is almost in 
N-S direction. These results again show that there 
may exist two different systems of fractures in 
Krafla, which is not very surprising. The fitting 
between the observed and theoretical fast shear-wave 
polarizations for station P13 is plotted in equal-area 
projection and shown in Figure 5. The fitting is 
generally good although there are still some cases in 
which the observed and theoretical polarizations are 
nearly perpendicular to each other. These 
perpendicular cases may provide important clues to 
the possible relation between the subsurface crack 
systems and changes in water pressure as will be 
discussed in the following section. 
 
 
Figure 5. The fitting between the observed and 
theoretical fast shear-wave polarizations 
for station P13 plotted in equal-area 
projection. The red line segments are 
observed and blue ones are theoretical. 
 
Shown in Figure 6 are the residual contours 
computed for stations P13 and P23 for the purpose of 
determining the crack strike, crack dip and crack 
density corresponding to the minimum of residuals in 
fast shear-wave polarizations and/or differential time 
delays. It is anticipated that the resulting pairs of 
crack strike and crack dip inferred from the global 
RMSRF minima in both residual contours are the 
same or very close to each other as the case for 
station P23 is, but actually the results from the two 
contours may be quite different from each other, 
probably because, as stated before, the measurement 
of time delays technically involves much more 
uncertainties than that of polarizations. For this 
reason we have listed in Table 1 only the results 
inverted for using the trial-and-error method for each 
analyzed station. 
 
Table 1. Inversion results of crack parameters with 
trial-and-error method. 
Station 
ID 
Crack Strike 
(Degree) 
Crack Dip 
(Degree) 
Crack 
Density 
P03 82 -55 0.065 
P04 71 -16 0.072 
P10 -1 73 0.027 
P13 -55 80 0.024 
P23 -73 -74 0.027 
 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
A 20-station, 3-component digital seismic array was 
deployed around the Krafla geothermal field in 
Iceland in July and August of 2004,  and  the  seismic 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
 (d) 
Figure 6. Residual contours computed for stations 
P13 and P23 to invert for the crack strike, 
dip and density. (a) The global minimum 
of polarization residual for P13 is located 
at strike=-55° and dip=80°. (b) The 
global minimum of time delay residual for 
P13 is located somewhere else. (c) The 
global minimum of polarization residual 
for P23 is located at strike=-73° and 
dip=-74°. (d) The global minimum of time 
delay residual for P23 is located at the 
same pair of strike and dip as in (c). 
 
data set we have collected there is unique. We have 
also monitored the injection stoppage and resumption 
and collected data at a sampling rate of 500 sps 
which is high enough to allow detection of even the 
smallest variations in crack density and the possible 
flow of fluids through the crack system. The 
seismicity in the Krafla field is not very high (3-4 
usable events per day), with most epicenters located 
along an E-W oriented belt north of the injection well 
and typical focal depths shallower than 4 km. 
 
There is clear evidence of shear-wave splitting in the 
seismic data. In addition to the observed prevalence 
of a crack system oriented in approximately N-S 
direction which is consistent with the anticipated 
direction of major fractures in the area, fast shear-
wave polarization directions along a general E-W 
direction are also persistent, more than along any 
other direction as shown in stations P13 and P23. The 
highest intensity of cracking detected so far occurs 
along N70-80E directions (stations P03 and P04), and 
most cracks have a relatively deep dipping angle. 
 
In order to investigate the response of subsurface 
crack systems to changes in fluid pressure inside the 
medium, the injection in well K-26 was stopped for 
ten days before resumed on July 26. There is 
preliminary evidence that the injection modifies the 
observed crack polarizations in some areas. In Figure 
5 we can see that except for the prevalent nearly E-W 
polarizations, there are still a few cases whose 
polarizations are close to N-S. Two of these 
“irregular” events have been identified as shortly 
after the stoppage of injection and five as after the 
resumption. This may imply that changes in water 
pressure have to some extent changed the effects of 
the cracks on the polarization angles of the fast shear-
wave propagating through them. 
 
In hindsight it became clear that most of the 20 
stations of the array had been placed in optimal 
locations to retrieve seismic information for fracture 
characterization. We expect that with a permanent 
array at these locations the field can be accurately 
monitored. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
Babuska, V. and Cara, M. (1991), Seismic Anisotropy 
in the Earth, Modern Approaches in Geophysics, 
Vol. 10, pp. 217, Kluwer Academic Publishers, The 
Netherlands. 
 
Booth, D.C. and Crampin, S. (1985), “Shear-wave 
polarizations on a curved wavefront at an isotropic 
free-surface”, Geophys. J. Roy. Astr. Soc., 83, 31-45. 
 
Brandsdottir, B., Menke, W., Einarsson, P., White, 
R.S., and Staples, R.K. (1997), “Faroe-Iceland Ridge 
Experiment 2. Crustal structure of the Krafla central 
volcano”, J. Geophys. Res., 102, 7867-7886. 
 
Einarsson, P. (1978), “S-wave shadows in the Krafla 
caldera in NE-Iceland, evidence for a magma 
chamber in the crust”, Bull. Volcanol., 41, 1-9. 
 
Crampin, S. (1987), “Geological and industrial 
implications of extensive dilatancy anisotropy”, 
Nature, 328, 491-496. 
 
Crampin, S., Booth, D.C., Krasnova, M.A., 
Chesnokov, E.M., Maximov, A.B., and Tarasov, N.T. 
(1986), “Shear-wave polarizations in the Peter the 
First range indicating crack-induced anisotropy in a 
thrust-fault regime”, Geophys. J. Roy. Astr. Soc., 84, 
401-412. 
 
Crampin, S. and Lovell, J.H. (1991), “A decade of 
shear-wave splitting in the Earth’s crust: What does it 
mean? What use can we make of it? And what should 
we do next?” Geophys. J. Int., 107, 387-407. 
 
Hudson, J.A. (1981), “Wave speeds and attenuation 
of elastic waves in materials containing cracks”, 
Geophys. J. Roy. Astr. Soc., 64, 133-150. 
Peacock, S., Crampin, S., Booth, D.C., and Fletcher, 
J.B. (1988), “Shear-wave splitting in the Anza 
seismic gap, southern California: temporal variations 
as possible precursors”, J. Geophys. Res., 193, 3339-
3356. 
 
Tryggvason, E. (1986), “Multiple magma reservoirs 
in a rift zone volcano: Ground deformation and 
magma transport during the September 1984 eruption 
of Krafla, Iceland”, J. Volcanol. Geothermal Res., 28, 
1-44. 
 
Tsvankin (2001), Seismic Signature and Analysis of 
Reflection Data in Anisotropic Media, Handbook of 
Geophysical Exploration, Section I, Seismic 
Exploration, 1st edn, Vol. 29, pp. 436, Pergamon, 
Amsterdam, New York. 
 
Yang, M. (2003), Inversion of shear-wave splitting 
data in geothermal reservoirs, Master’s thesis, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC. 
 
 
