OBJECTIVES OF THE THORPEX WORKING GROUP ON DATA 
ASSIMILATION AND OBSERVING STRATEGIES FOR HIGH IMPACT 
WEATHER FORECAST IMPROVEMENTS 
Florence Rabier1, Pierre Gauthier2 , Carla Cardinali3, Ron Gelaro4, Ko Koizumi5,
Rolf Langland6, Andrew Lorenc7, Peter Steinle8, Mickael Tsyrulnikov9
[1] CNRM/GAME, Météo-France and CNRS, France
[2] Meteorological Research Division, Environment Canada, Canada
[3] European Centre for Medium-range Weather Forecasts, Reading, UK
[4]  NASA/Global Modelling and Assimilation Office, USA
[5] Japanese Meteorological Agency, Japan
[6] Naval Research Laboratory, USA
[7] The Met-Office, UK
[8] Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre, Australia
[9] Hydrometeorological Research Centre of Russia, Russia
Corresponding address: F. Rabier, CNRM, 42 Av Coriolis, 31057 Toulouse, France
Email: Florence.rabier@meteo.fr
Abstract
The international programme  “THORPEX: a Global Atmospheric Research Programme” is providing a 
framework in which to tackle  the challenge of  improving the skill  of  high-impact weather forecasts 
through international collaboration among academic institutions, operational forecast centres, and users 
of  forecast products.  The objectives of the THORPEX Data Assimilation and Observation Strategy 
Working Group (DAOS-WG) are two-fold. The primary goal is to assess the impact of observations and 
various  targeting  methods  in  order  to  provide  guidance for  observation campaigns and  for  the 
configuration of the Global Observing System. The secondary goal is to set-up an optimal framework for 
data  assimilation, including aspects  such as targeted observations, satellite  data,  background error 
covariances and quality control. The Atlantic THORPEX Regional campaign, ATReC, in 2003, has been 
very successful technically and has provided valuable datasets to test targeting issues. Various data 
impact experiments have been performed, showing a small but very slightly positive impact of targeted 
observations. Projects of the DAOS-WG include working on the AMMA field experiment, in the context of 
IPY and to prepare the future THORPEX-PARC field campaign in the Pacific by comparing sensitivity of 
the forecasts to observations between several groups.
INTRODUCTION
The  international  programme   “THORPEX:  a  Global  Atmospheric  Research  Programme”  was 
established in  2003  by  the  Fourteenth World Meteorological Congress as  a  ten-year  international 
research and development programme. It is now providing a framework in which to tackle the challenge 
of  improving  the  skill  of  high-impact weather  forecasts through  international  collaboration among 
academic  institutions,  operational  forecast  centres,  and  users  of  forecast  products.  Its  mission 
Statement is "Accelerating improvements in the accuracy of high-impact 1-14 day weather forecasts for 
the benefit of society and the economy". Information on this programme, and in particular the science 
plan and the implementation plan, can be found on the World Meteorological Organisation web page 
(www.wmo.int).   Among  the  core  objectives,  THORPEX  plans  to  contribute  to  the  design  and 
demonstration of  interactive  forecast systems  in  which the  uncertainty of  the  analysis  and future 
forecasts is  assessed.  Other main goals  are  to  perform  THORPEX Observing-System Tests  and 
Regional field  Campaigns to  test  and evaluate  experimental  remote-sensing and in-situ  observing 
systems, and when feasible, demonstrate their impact on weather forecasts.  Major field experiments 
have already been conducted and will continue to be organised, during which many ideas can be tested 
and new observations can be assimilated. The objectives of the Data Assimilation and Observation 
Strategy  Working Group  (DAOS-WG) are  two-fold. The  primary goal  is  to  assess  the  impact  of 
observations and various targeting methods in order to provide guidance for observation campaigns and 
for the configuration of the Global Observing System (GOS). The secondary goal is  to set-up an optimal 
framework for  data  assimilation,  including aspects  such  as  targeted  observations, satellite  data, 
background error covariances and quality control. This paper will give an overview of the objectives of 
the DAOS-WG, will  present the first results obtained by the WG and plans for future work, before 
concluding.
MAJOR GOALS
The main goal is to develop and test systematic and objective techniques for the design of observing 
networks. It can be sub-divided into various tasks.
Assessing the impact of observations and evaluating potential new data streams
Operational data used at Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) and research centres consist of various 
data types, provided by the GOS. An important question arises in the use of observations:  can the 
information provided by the observations be quantified?  A simple data count might be misleading as not 
all observations are equal in what they measure and in their accuracy. In the perspective of diagnosing 
the impact of observations on the data assimilation, diagnostics were developed which are presented 
here. To measure the impact of observations on the analysis, the Degrees of Freedom for Signal (DFS) 
can be used (Purser and Huang, 1993, Rodgers, 2000, Fisher, 2003, Cardinali et al, 2004, Chapnik et 
al., 2006). The DFS characterizes how the assimilation system uses the observations to pull the signal 
from the background. It corresponds to the partial derivative of the analysis in observation space to the 
observations. Although this measure of information is not necessarily translated into value in terms of 
forecast impact, some results about the relative importance of data actually correlate well with recent 
data-impact studies. Various methods exist to quantify data impact on the forecast. A traditional way of 
estimating data impact in a forecasting system is to perform Observing System Experiments (OSE) such 
as those illustrated in Bouttier and Kelly, 2001 or Kelly, 2007. OSEs can be performed in two ways: in 
one way, the performance of a baseline (reference) experiment which uses a minimum amount of 
observation types is compared with experiments that  uses at  least  one additional observation type 
(Kelly, 2007). The other way consists of removing one particular dataset or various datasets over a long 
assimilation period and compare the performance with respect the control experiment which assimilates 
the global observation network available. This procedure can be quite costly if one wants to perform a 
fine analysis of the various contributions of the elements of the GOS. Another important development 
has been the ability to compute the sensitivity of the forecast to the observations with the adjoint of the 
data assimilation process together with the adjoint of the forecast model (see Baker and Daley, 2000; 
Doerenbecher and Bergot, 2001,  Langland and Baker, 2004). This allows one further step in  the 
computation of the sensitivity with respect to observations and can prove quite valuable, for example in 
the context of field experiments. Following this work, it is possible to estimate the impact of observations 
on a 24-h forecast, say. Other methods are ensemble-based (Khare and Anderson, 2006 or Tan et al., 
2007) or simulate observations with OSSEs (Observing System Simulated Experiments, such as the one 
developed in the THORPEX context, www.emc.ncep.noaa.gov/research/osse/). OSSEs have been used 
for several years to try to measure the impact of proposed instruments before they are launched (eg 
Atlas, 1997; Masutani et al, 2007). OSSEs require an extensive validation and calibration. 
Evaluating and improving targeting strategies
The concept of  adaptive observing systems, also known as targeting, has been introduced in field 
experiments such as FASTEX, NORPEX at the end of the 90's to address the issue of improving 
individual forecasts  of  active  weather  events.  Targeting  will  be  briefly introduced in  the  following 
paragraph (for a more complete discussion,  see the paper by Langland, 2005). In the last decade, 
strategies were developed which identify locations where additional observations would provide maximal 
improvements in the expected accuracy of forecasts.  Targeting strategies are based on techniques that 
predict, prior to the actual measurements, the influence of an observation (or set of observations) on the 
uncertainty of a subsequent forecast. Different targeting techniques have been developed: some involve 
the adjoint of the linearized version of the forecast model and/or of the assimilation scheme, others 
manipulate ensembles of forecasts. This concept is currently operational in the US and is called the 
Winter  Storm Reconnaissance Program (WSRP, Szunyogh et  al,  2000).  The National Centers  for 
Environmental Prediction use the dispersion of the ensemble of forecasts run routinely and a set of pre-
defined flight plans to evaluate which of the flight scenario would bring the maximum reduction in the 
dispersion of the forecasts. Based on this flight scenario, a designated aircraft flies in the area and drops 
dropsondes at regular intervals to provide additional observations over the Pacific ocean.  Majumdar et 
al  (2002) provide a detailed comparison of various targeting techniques. Apart from being used for 
selecting additional observations, targeting observing systems can be extended to other applications 
such as the control of the sampling rate of satellite sensors or to conduct effective thinning of the 
observations.  An optimisation of the use of observations can be the selection of the most valuable 
subset of data. In particular, the sensitivity of the forecast to individual data can also help to select 
channels from hyperspectral sounders in an adaptive manner (Fourrié and Rabier, 2004).
DATA ASSIMILATION TASKS 
The goal is to optimize the data assimilation system, to make the best use of observations in an adaptive 
context. 
Improved use of observations
Estimation of observation-error statistics is necessary for efficient data assimilation. The only way to 
acquire observation-error  characteristics  is  to  compare  them  (in  one  form  or  another)  with  other 
observations or a numerical forecast (see Desroziers et al, 2005 for a recent development in this field). 
The main problem  is  that,  in  general,  it  is  very  difficult  to  distinguish between  the  errors of  the 
observation type in question, on one hand, and the observations/forecasts selected for comparison, on 
the other. Therefore, observation campaigns are welcomed in which the observations in question are to 
be compared with high-quality  observations, whose error  structure is  known. An important point to 
mention is that different observation types not only have different error structures but also differ in what 
they measure (e.g. substantial horizontal averaging in most remote observations as compared to in situ 
observations). Another significant error component, which should be accounted for in data assimilation 
and whose error structure is to be estimated, is the representativeness error associated with forward-
models. Developments specifiying the representativeness error characteristics such as those described 
in  Frehlich (2006)  are  needed. Observation error includes biases that  are estimated and removed 
through bias correction schemes that have limitations. As current assimilation systems are  bias-blind 
both for observation and background errors, the estimation of these biases is an element of crucial 
importance. Work on more advanced bias correction techniques such as variational bias correction 
(Dee, 2005, Auligné et al, 2007) has to be encouraged. The presence of observation error correlation is 
also a seriously limiting element that reduces considerably the volume of assimilated data. For instance, 
Bormann et al (2003) have shown a significant horizontal correlation for atmospheric motion vectors.  Liu 
and Rabier (2003) have shown, in an idealized context, that for correlated observation errors, increasing 
the observation density  beyond a threshold can be harmful  in a  sub-optimal scheme in  which no 
correlations are included in the observation error covariance matrix, as in current systems. Usually, there 
is a horizontal thinning of satellite data performed in a rather ad-hoc manner. More advanced methods 
are under consideration (Ochotta,  2005).  More general solutions could be preferable. In  particular, 
instead of performing a  thinning of the observations, one might prefer to  perform an averaging of 
neighboring observations as  this  is  performed  for  instance  for  geostationary  clear-sky radiances 
provided to NWP users. The advantage of this type of "super-obbing" is that more information is kept in 
the process, which translates into smaller errors in the resulting "super-obs" compared to an individual 
observation. The best theoretical framework might well be to model the correlations in the long term. 
Nonlinearity in the observation operator is another issue that has be to dealt with.  In particular, some 
observations are  indirect measurements of  atmospheric variables, such as  satellite  radiances and 
scatterometer data.  For  radiances,  nonlinearity is  particularly  severe  in  the  case  of  cloudy/rainy 
conditions. For  scatterometer data,  the  observed signal  is  a  back-scattered  cross-section,  which 
depends very nonlinearly on the surface wind over the ocean. This leads to ambiguous wind solutions, 
which the analysis has to handle. Quality control procedures also need to be improved. Interesting 
developments exist  in  the  context  of  quality  control, such as flow-dependent tolerances for  outlier 
observations for an adaptive "buddy check" (Dee et al, 2001).  Given that only a small fraction of all 
incoming data makes its way to assimilation, it is important to improve our ability to better use them. This 
requires that progress be made on the assimilation of cloudy and rainy radiances, which involves serious 
nonlinearities (infrared and microwave, e.g. Bauer et al, 2006) and the representation and inclusion of 
surface emissivity to use wavebands sensitive to the surface as this prevents the use of many channels 
that could potentially provide information on the troposphere (e.g. Karbou et al., 2006).
Adaptive data assimilation
Most operational centres have adopted 4D-Var but ensemble approaches are also considered by many 
(Hamill and Snyder, 2002, Lorenc, 2003, Houtekamer and Mitchell, 2005). Promising results have been 
obtained with quasi-operational systems which may lead to breakthroughs in data assimilation methods, 
particularly in the context when model error is present. Model error could also be inserted in a weak-
constraint  4D-Var  (Fisher  et  al.  2005).  The  combination of  variational  methods  and  ensemble 
approaches to provide the analysis with flow-dependent structure functions is also promising (Etherton 
and Bishop, 2004, Buehner, 2005) and has to continue to be evaluated. The strong constraint 4D-Var 
puts limitations on the length of the assimilation window. It is now believed that a weak-constraint 4D-
Var  would make it  possible to  extend the  assimilation  window over  longer periods. In  ensemble 
forecasting and data assimilation, several ad hoc approaches to account for model errors are common 
(stochastic physics, varied model, multi-model), but in 4D-Var, we have to explicitly specify model-error 
covariances. To do this in a consistent way, a model-error stochastic model is to be introduced. Results 
of a simulation study (Tsyrulnikov 2005) indicate that such a model should account for, firstly, the state-
dependent part of model errors, secondly, for temporal correlations, and thirdly, for the fact that model 
errors are largely advected with the velocity that resembles Rossby-wave phase velocity. In a model-
error model, model errors are flow-dependent in two respects: first, the state-dependent part of model 
errors is flow-dependent by definition, and second, all the parameters of the model can and should be 
made dependent on the local flow structure. Additional research to extend the results of Tsyrulnikov 
(2005) to physical (not just dynamical) errors (convection, clouds, precipitation etc.) is needed. With 
high-resolution forecast models and Kalman-filter or weak-constraint 4D-Var based data assimilation, an 
adequate model-error model is indispensable. Model error estimation techniques are to be devised. It is 
important to investigate the capability of forecast ensembles to serve as a tool for model-error model 
identification  and  estimation.  The  THORPEX  Interactive  Global  Grand  Ensemble  (TIGGE, 
tigge.ecmwf.int) in particular might provide an ideal framework to perform such studies. Independent 
observation-based techniques are also needed to complement the ensemble-based studies. 
FIRST RESULTS IN THE CONTEXT OF THE ATREC CAMPAIGN IN 2003    
The objective of the ATReC (Atlantic THORPEX Regional Campaign) was to test the hypothesis that 
short term forecast  errors over Europe and the Eastern seaboard of the USA can be reduced by 
targeting extra observations over sensitive areas determined each day by the forecast flow patterns 
using NWP techniques (Mansfield et al, 2004).  The field campaign took place in the autumn of 2003.  It 
was the first attempt at real time adaptive control of a full set of operational observing systems (in an 
international context) in addition to the deployment of research aircraft.  The observations available for 
targeting were Sixty-six European and Canadian radiosonde stations, the EUCOS (European Composite 
Observing System) ASAP Fleet (13 ships), the EUCOS AMDAR Fleet (550 aircraft, Dropsondes from 
the NOAA G-IV, the University of North Dakota ‘Citation’ aircraft, the DLR Falcon and a USA Air Force 
C130 aircraft, Super rapid scan winds from the GOES satellite. Once a case was chosen sensitive areas 
were computed independently using either Adjoint sensitivity, Singular Vectors techniques (SV) or an 
Ensemble Transform Kalman Filter (ETKF). Mansfield et al (2004) provides details of the websites. 
Several groups have carried out a series of assessments on the case studies to identify whether any 
improvement in the forecasts can be detected due to the addition of the targeted data (Langland, 2005; 
Fourrié et al, 2006; Kelly et al., 2007; Buizza et al., 2007; Cardinali et al., 2007; Petersen and Thorpe, 
2007; Song, Toth and Majumdar,    www.emc.ncep.noaa.gov/gmb/targobs/ATOST;  Weissmann and 
Cardinali, 2007). As a summary, the ATReC field campaign has been very successful technically and 
has provided valuable datasets to test targeting issues. Various data impact experiments have been 
performed, showing a small but very slightly positive impact of targeted observations. The impact is not 
always systematically positive on the verification area because of the statistical assumptions involved in 
the data assimilation procedure, and is not always consistent between centres. In general however, 
there are about twice as many cases when the forecast is improved as when it is degraded. Additional 
data  have  been  found  to  have  more  impact  during  the  last  part  of  the  field  campaign 
(November/December) when the  weather  has been more unsettled.  However,  the  overall forecast 
uncertainty during the campaign was small, thus a large RMSE reduction due to a small number of 
additional observations could not really be expected.  Furthermore, the observing system resources in 
ATReC were not able to fully sample the identified target regions. The degree of success in sampling the 
target areas varied greatly from case to case, from very poor observation coverage to partial coverage of 
target areas.  A general finding (by the two centres who performed the experiments) is that the cycling 
process in the data assimilation procedure enhances the results, compared to a pure targeting mode in 
which the data impact is computed independently on a case by case basis. Dropsondes are found to 
have  high  impact  per  observation,  but  low  total  impact  due  to  the  small  number  of  additional 
observations.   It  is  found that  the  various targeting  techniques gave  different sensitive  areas.  In 
particular the ETKF and SV results are noticeably different. Data denial experiments confirmed that the 
SV approach was relevant to find sensitive areas, but that removing data over a small portion of e.g. the 
Atlantic ocean only amounted on average to a 3.6% degradation of the forecast performance at the day-
2  range  over  Europe in  summer.  This  might  give  us  an  indirect  confirmation that  the  relatively 
disappointing results  obtained  during  this  campaign  are  actually  understandable based  on  the 
predictability of the flow and on the ability of data assimilation systems to cope well  with a slightly 
reduced number of observations.  However, it  should be kept  in mind that the forecast impact is a 
function of the quality of current observation coverage in the target region, the assimilation system used 
and the weather regimes occurring during targeted campaigns. The data denial study, here summarized, 
is based on the assumption that there are adequate current observations in the SV target region which 
being based over the oceans consists mainly of satellite data. Satellite observations can be a great 
potential and inexpensive target source but the limitation to observe sensitive cloud-covered regions 
must be further investigated. It is anticipated that adding satellite rapid-scan winds or lidar observations 
might be beneficial. There certainly is a potential for adding much larger amounts of observations on-
demand, that  could produce significant  forecast impacts.  As a  final  remark, the DA systems used 
operationally might  not  yet  be  able  to  make optimal use of  data  in  sensitive  regions where the 
characteristics  of  the  error  statistics  can  deviate  significantly  from the  averaged  values  used  in 
operational systems. More information content could probably be extracted from extra observations in a 
fully flow-dependent system. In addition, the forecasting model might also play a role in the propagation 
or not of the signal introduced by the data assimilation scheme.
FUTURE PLANS
AMMA and THORPEX
The  African  Monsoon  Multidisciplinary  Analyses,  AMMA  (www.amma-international.org)  is  an 
international project aiming at improving our understanding of the African monsoon on timescales of one 
day to inter-annual. A core research goal of  THORPEX is to increase knowledge of the global-to-
regional influences on the initiation, evolution and predictability of high impact weather. A collaboration 
that extends measurements and modelling efforts from over Africa to across the Atlantic will allow for 
greater understanding of initiation, evolution and predictability of tropical convection, hurricanes and so-
called ET (extratropical transition) storm systems and of tropical impacts on midlatitude predictability. 
Advances in our knowledge of factors that limit the predictability of these systems will also result from 
these efforts. In this arena, THORPEX and the downstream AMMA goals overlap.
A  joint  AMMA-THORPEX  working  group  (www.eol.ucar.edu/projects/amma-us/wg/wg5/)  has  been 
created with objectives to study sensitivities in Tropical regions and to perform a demonstration of using 
driftsondes. Other projects include optimizing satellite data usage over the region and finding an optimal 
radiosonde network. 
THORPEX-IPY
A  significant effort  is  taking  place  during the  International Polar  Year.  A  number of  observation 
campaigns will take place in the next few years under the umbrella of the THORPEX program. Joint 
activities with THORPEX in data assimilation  are organized in a THORPEX-IPY cluster, managed by 
T.E. Nordeng from Norway. It  focuses on the assimilation of satellite  data over polar regions. The 
emphasis is on polar-global interactions. Cases have been documented in which Tropical systems go 
through the extra-Tropical transition process to end up creating high impact weather over regions like 
Alaska.  The IPY coincides with  the launch of  the operational MetOp satellite  carrying an Infrared 
Atmospheric Sounding Interferometer (IASI), a high resolution interferometer providing measurements 
over thousands of wavelengths. The observations deployed during IPY in the Arctic and the Antarctic will 
be used to validate and assimilate IASI data and other existing infrared radiances (e.g., AIRS). This is 
for instance the case of the Concordiasi project (www.cnrm.meteo.fr/concordiasi/). The use of satellite 
infrared/microwave  radiances will benefit from ice analyses to better represent surface emissivity and to 
better parameterizations of emissivity. 
Figure 1. Information content, i.e. degrees of freedom for signal (DFS), for the main data types in the 
assimilation at the ECMWF centre. Three regions are represented: the global (blue bars), the North 
Pole, north of 65N (cyan bars) and the South Pole, south of  65S (white bars). Note that the DFS for 
AIRS globally is 40% (truncated in the picture).
(Courtesy C. Cardinali)
Figure 1 shows the information content, i.e. DFS, for the main data types in the assimilation for one 
particular assimilation cycle of the ECMWF system as an example. It is an updated version (dated 2007) 
of Fig. 5 from Cardinali et al (2004).  The DFS is presented for three areas: globally, and over the two 
polar areas. The conventional observations consist of surface observations (Synop from surface stations 
and Dribu from buoys) and altitude data. The latter come either from AIRcraft REPort (Airep), wind 
observations (Pilot) or radiosondes (Temp). In addition, satellite observations are atmospheric motion 
vectors from geostationary satellites (Satob), radiances from polar-orbiting satellite radiances (AMSU-A, 
AMSU-B, MHS, AIRS, HIRS and SSM/I) and from geostationary satellites (Goes and Meteosat), surface 
winds from scatterometer (QuikSCAT),  precipitable water content (PWC) from SSMI in cloudy/rainy 
areas, ozone observations (Ozone) and radio-occultation measurements (LIMB) from GPS receivers. 
One can see that AMSU-A and AIRS (advanced microwave and infra-red sounders respectively) are the 
most informative data types globally (a large part of the information comes from stratospheric levels). 
Among the conventional observations, radiosondes are the most informative. Over the polar areas, the 
analysis is even more controlled by satellite observations than globally, which justifies the effort put on 
satellite data assimilation in these areas.
 An intercomparison experiment for THORPEX-PARC
The Pacific Asian Regional Campaign 2008 (T-PARC) is a major international THORPEX field campaign 
developed as an outcome of the North American and Asian THORPEX planning process. T-PARC will 
take place between June and December of 2008 and will focus on advancing knowledge, improving 
prediction and society’s response to i) western Pacific and Asian typhoons from genesis to extratropical 
transition/decay, and ii) downstream high-impact weather events over North America, the Arctic and 
other locations whose dynamical roots and/or forecast errors are driven by aspects of the lifecycle of 
typhoons and other intense cyclogenesis events over east Asian and the western Pacific. It is suggested 
that a formal test could be performed for inter-comparison of sensitivities using different methods (adjoint 
and ensemble based) for some recent periods.  An agreement should be reached on the verification 
region(s), length of forecasts to be considered and other details. It is intended to be more of a diagnostic 
study, rather than a targeting study, because the goal would be to identify regions where observation 
coverage would be supplemented for an extended period of time (not just chasing targets of the day), 
such as might occur in T-PARC.    Below is an example of the sort of information which can be obtained 
with adjoint sensitivity of  the forecast to observations.
 
Figure 2:  Adjoint-based sensitivity  to  observations over the Southern Hemisphere in the  Canadian 
system’s  4D-Var.
The results presented in Figure 2 were obtained in Canada. This figure represents the total impact of 
observations on the 24-h forecast measured over a month (August 2004) in the 4D-Var assimilation 
system. The region represented here is the Southern Hemisphere. The impact is represented over the 6-
h assimilation window. The impact of surface pressure (green), radiosonde (blue) and AMSU-a (red) 
clearly stand out in Figure 1, the impact of the latter being independent of the time of the observations. 
The striking feature is that the impact of observations is more important for observations further down in 
the assimilation window. This shows that the impact of observations depends on the assimilation method 
employed and that 4D-Var is more sensitive to the cut-off time than 3D-Var for which there is no such 
dependence (not shown). The results of the proposed Forecast Sensitivity Inter-comparison would be 
provided  by  operational centres and  research  groups.  The  objective  is  to  identify  regions where 
supplemental observations and improved use of existing satellite / in-situ observations are most needed 
on a regular basis to improve forecast skill. The objective is mainly to extract synthetic results able to 
lead to practical recommendations for the evolution of the GOS.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
As described in this paper, there are a number of approaches that have recently been proposed to 
evaluate quantitatively the impact of observations on the quality of forecasts. These sensitivities with 
respect to observations complement the Observing System Experiments that evaluate the impact of 
specific sets of observations. OSEs are routinely used by operational centres to evaluate the quality of 
their analysis and forecast  systems. Intercomparison experiments based on OSEs are carried out to 
confirm the value of  observing systems in different systems. The new approaches offer possibilities to 
get more detailed information on the impact  of observations and this is actively being examined by 
several  operational  centres  as  a  promising  avenue  for  operational  use.  The  impact  of  added 
observations need to be investigated not only with respect to the forecasts but also with respect to the 
forecast of  their  variability  as measured from ensemble prediction systems. Results of  the ATReC 
campaign in 2003 are certainly proof that a lot of knowledge could be gained by having several centres 
to look at a given period with similar datasets and focus on specific scientific issues. From these results, 
it became clear that it is not appropriate to design campaigns based solely on having in-situ targeted 
observations. Although the value per observation is  greater,  the overall impact on the forecasts is 
marginal and  certainly  does  not  justify  the  cost  of  deploying targeted  observations  on  demand. 
Moreover, the operational management and coordination needed is often causing the observations to be 
deployed not quite in the way they should have been. However, adding satellite rapid-scan winds or lidar 
observations might  be  beneficial.  There  is  a  potential  there  for  adding much larger  amounts of 
observations on-demand, that  could produce significant  forecast impacts.  It  would be important  to 
estimate observation error statistics and correlation in particular. To achieve this, some thought must be 
given to the design of a relevant observation campaign. There may be Calibration/Validation (Cal/Val) 
campaigns being planned and it would be important to know about them and to link with them. It is 
important to  make it known what information is needed by the assimilation about the observation error 
to get more information out of satellite measurements. It should be noted that nonlinear processes are 
often associated with non-Gaussian error probability distributions. Finally, the objectives of observation 
campaigns could be focused on improving the models and parameterizations. Diagnostics based on 
observation departures are  useful  to  monitor the  observations  and  the  model.  There is  value in 
considering the assimilation of the collected measurements even if  only for that purpose.It remains 
important to make significant progress on the assimilation of satellite data as only a minute fraction of 
the  incoming  data  is  assimilated.  Progress on  the  assimilation  of  radiances in  cloudy and  rainy 
conditions  (which  lead  to  strong  nonlinearities  in  the  observation  operator)  and  also  a  better 
representation and estimation of observation error is needed.Whether it comes as biases or not, model 
error needs to be taken into account but it is not so obvious to know how to represent and estimate it. 
The use of multi-model ensembles as provided by the TIGGE database should be explored to estimate 
the much needed error statistics. 
The problems described above are complex and the academic community could certainly contribute 
significantly. Due to the complexity of data assimilation with real observations, such activities are greatly 
facilitated by having close collaborations between the academic community and research departments 
of operational centres. This is to be encouraged as much as possible. Several centres are poised to 
invest in large computational infrastructures to test  methods directly in a quasi-operational context. 
Exploring new avenues can be performed in a simpler and more controlled environment from which it is 
easier to understand what is going on. Finally, this working group seeks to reach out to the community 
and  researchers  are  invited  to  participate  to  a  newly  created  interest  group  (daos-
ig@internallists.ec.gc.ca). Proposing or encouraging specific activities is an approach which needs to be 
pursued. Whether those are observation campaigns or intercomparison experiments is irrelevant: the 
end result that is sought is to have several interested research groups to focus on key issues relevant for 
the THORPEX program. For instance, the intercomparison experiment discussed above in relation with 
T-PARC will bring together several groups with genuine interest in the issues raised. These would lead 
to specialized workshops and the results could then be reported to more general meeting like the 
THORPEX  Symposia  or  data  assimilation  conferences. The  important  involvement of  the  data 
assimilation  research departments of  the  operational  centres provides a  good insurance that  this 
knowledge will be transferred to operational systems.
REFERENCES 
Atlas,  R.  A.  1997: Atmospheric observations and experiments to  assess  their  usefulness in  data 
assimilation. J. Meteor. Soc. Japan, 75, 111-130.
Auligné, T., A. P. McNally and D.P. Dee, 2007: Adaptive bias correction for satellite data in a numerical 
weather prediction system. Q.J.R. Meteorol. Soc. , 133, 631-642.
Baker, N.  L.  and Daley,  R.,  2000:  Observation  and background  adjoint sensitivity  in  the  adaptive 
observation targeting problem. Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc., 126, 1431-1454.
Bauer, P.,  P. Lopez, D. Salmond, A. Benedetti, S. Saarinen, and M. Bonazzola, 2006: Implementation 
of  1D+4D-Var assimilation  of  precipitation-affected  microwave radiances at  ECMWF.  II:  4D-Var. 
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society. Volume 132, Issue 620, Date: October 2006 Part 
A, Pages: 2307-2332.
Bormann, N., Saarinen, S., Kelly, G. and Thépaut, J.-N., 2003: The spatial structure of observation error 
in atmospheric motion vectors from geostationary satellite data.Mon. Wea. Rev. 131, 706-718.
Bouttier, F., and Kelly, G., 2001: Observing-system experiments in the ECMWF 4D-Var data assimilation 
system. Quart. J. R. Meteorol. Soc., 127,1469-1488.
 Buehner, M., 2005: Ensemble-derived stationary and flow-dependent background error covariances: 
Evaluation in a quasi-operational NWP setting. Quart. J. R. Meteorol. Soc., 131,1013-1044.
Buizza, R., C. Cardinali, G. Kelly and J-N. Thépaut, 2007: The value of observations. Part II: The value 
of observations located in singular vector-based target areas. Q. J. Roy. Meteorol., accepted.
Cardinali C.,  and R.,  Buizza, 2003:  Forecast skill  of  targeted observations: a  singual-vector-based 
diagnostics. J. Atmos. Sci., 60, 1927-1940.
Cardinali C., Pezzuli S. and Andersson E., 2004: Influence matrix diagnostic of a data assimilation 
system. Quart. J. R. Meteorol. Soc., 130 , 2767-2786.
Cardinali, C. R. Buizza, G. Kelly, M. Shapiro and J-N. Thépaut, 2007: The value of observations. Part III: 
influence of weather regimes on targeting. Q. J. Roy. Meteorol., accepted. 
Chapnik, B., Desroziers, G., Rabier, F. and Talagrand O., 2006: Diagnosis and tuning of observational 
error statistics in a quasi operational data assimilation setting. Quart. J. R. Meteorol. Soc., 132,  543-
565.
Dee, D. P., Rukhovets, L., Todling, R., da Silva, A. M. and Larson J. W., 2001: An adaptive buddy check 
for observational quality control. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc., 127, 2451-247.
Dee, D. P., 2005: Bias and data assimilation. Q.J.R. Meteorol. Soc. , 131, 3323-3343.
Desroziers, G., L.  Berre, B. Chapnik and P.  Poli,  2005: Diagnosis of observation, background and 
analysis-error statistics in observation space. Q.J.R. Meteorol. Soc. , 131,  3385-3396.
Doerenbecher A., and Bergot T., 2001: Sensitivity to observations applied to FASTEX cases.
 Nonlinear Processes in Geophysics, 8(6), 467-481.
Doerenbecher, A., M. Leutbecher and D.S.Richardson,  2004:  Comparison of observation targeting 
predictions during the ATReC. Proceedings of the first International THORPEX Science Symposium, 6-
10 Dec. 2004, Montreal, Canada.
Etherton, B. J., and Bishop, C. H., 2004: Resilience of hybrid ensemble/3DVAR analysis schemes to 
model error and ensemble covariance error. Mon. Wea. Rev., 132, 1065-1080.
Fisher, M, 2003, Estimation of entropy reduction and degrees of freedom for signal for large variational 
analysis systems. ECMWF Tech. Memo. 397, 18p.
Fisher, M., Leutbecher, M. and Kelly, G. A., 2005: On the Equivalence between Kalman Smoothing and 
Weak-Constraint Four-dimensional Variational Data Assimilation. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc.,131, 3235-3246.
Fourrié, N., and Rabier, F., 2004: Cloud characteristics and channel selection for IASI radiances in 
meteorologically sensitive areas. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc.,130, 1839-1856.
Fourrié, N., D. Marchal, F. Rabier, B. Chapnik and G. Desroziers, 2006:  Impact study of the 2003 North 
Atlantic THORPEX Regional Campaign.  Q.J.R. Meteorol. Soc. , 132, 275-295.
Frehlich, R., 2006: Adaptive data assimilation including the effect of spatial variations in observation 
error. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc.,132, 1225-1257.
Hamill, T. M. and Snyder, C., 2002: Using improved background-error covariances from an ensemble 
Kalman filter for adaptive observations. Mon. Wea. Rev., 130, 1552-1572.
Houtekamer, P. L. and Mitchell H. L., 2005: Ensemble Kalman Filtering. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc., 131, 
3269-3289.
Karbou, F., E. Gérard, and F. Rabier, 2006: Microwave land emissivity and skin temperature for AMSU-
A and -B assimilation over land. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society. Volume 132, 
Issue 620, Date: October 2006 Part A, Pages: 2333-2355.
Kelly, G., J-N. Thépaut; R. Buizza and C. Cardinali, 2007: The value of observations. Part I: the value of 
observations taken over the oceans. Q. J. Roy. Meteorol., accepted. 
Kelly, G., 2007: Evaluation of the impact of the space component of the Global Observation System 
through Observing System Experiments. ECMWF Newsletter Autumn.
Khare, S. P. and J. L. Anderson, 2006: A methodology for fixed observational network design: theory 
and application to a simulated global prediction system. Tellus, 58A, 523-537.
Langland, R.H. and Baker, N.L., 2004: Estimation of observation impact using the NRL atmospheric 
variational data assimilation adjoint system. Tellus, 56A,189-201. 
Langland, R., 2005: Issues in targeted observing. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc., 131, 3409-3425.
Langland, R., 2005: Observation impact during the North Atlantic TreC-2003. MWR, 133, 2297-2309.
Liu,Z.-Q.  and  Rabier,F.,  2003:  The  potential  of  high-density  observations for  numerical  weather 
prediction: A study with simulated observations. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society. 
Volume 129, Issue 594, Date: October 2003 Part A, Pages: 3013-3035.
Lorenc, A. C., 2003: The potential of the ensemble Kalman filter for NWP- a comparison with 4D-Var. Q. 
J. R. Meteorol. Soc., 129, 383-3202.
Majumdar, S.J. ,Bishop, C.H., Buizza, R. and Gelaro, R., 2002: A comparison of ensemble-transform 
Kalman-filter targeting guidance with ECMWF and NRL total energy singular vector guidance. Quart. J. 
R. Met. Soc., 128, 2527-2549. 
Mansfield, D., Richardson, D. and Truscott, B. 2005: An overview of the Atlantic THORPEX Regional 
Campaign, ATReC. In Proceedings of the THORPEX Science Symposium, 6 to 10 December 2004, 
Montreal, Canada. World Meteorological Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
Masutani, M.,  Andersson,  E.,   Terry,  J.,   Reale,  O.,   Jusem, JC,  Riishojgaard, LP,  Schlatter,  T, 
Stoffelen,  A,  Woollen, J,   Lord,  L,  Toth, Z,  Son,Y,   Kleist, D, Xie, Y, Prive, N,   Liu, E, Sun, H, 
Emmitt, D,  Greco, S,  Wood, SA,  Marseille, GJ, Errico, R,  Yang, R, McConaughy, G,  Devenyi, D, 
Weygandt, S, Anantharaj, V, Hill,C,  Fitzpatrick, P, Weng, F,  Zhu, T and  Boukabara, S,  2007: Joint 
Observing System Simulation Experiments. Proc. “18th Conf. on Numerical Weather Prediction”, 25-29 
June 2007, Park City, Utah. Available from the American Meteorological Society.
Ochotta,  T.,  C.  Gerhardt,  D.  Saupe  and  W.  Wergen,  2005:  Adaptive  thinning  of  atmospheric 
observations in data assimilation with vector quantization and filtering methods. Q.J.R. Meteorol. Soc. , 
131,  3427-3437.
Petersen, G. N., and A. J. Thorpe, 2007: The impact on weather forecasts of targeted observations 
during A-TreC. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society
Volume 133, Issue 623, Date: January 2007 Part B, Pages: 417-431
Purser R.J.,  and H.L. Huang,  1993: Estimating effective data  density  in  a  satellite  retrieval  or  an 
objective analysis. J. Appl. Meteorol., 32, 1092-1107.
Rodgers, C. D., 2000: Inverse methods for Atmospheres: Theories and practice. World Scientific Publ., 
Singapore, 238pp.
Szunyogh, I., Toth, Z., Morss, R., Majumdar, S. Etherton, B.J. and Bishop, C.H., 2000: The effect of 
targeted dropsonde observation during the 1999 Winter Storm Reconnaissance Program. Mon. Weather 
Rev, 128, 3520—3537.
Tan, D.G. H., E. Andersson, M. Fisher and L. Isaksen, 2007: Observing system impact assessment 
using a data assimilation ensemble technique: Application to the ADM-Aeolus wind profiling mission. To 
appear in the Q.J.R. Meteorol. Soc.
Tsyrulnikov, M. D.,  2005: Stochastic modelling of model errors: a simulation study. Q.J.R. Meteorol. 
Soc. , 131, 3345-3371.
Weissmann, M. And C. Cardinali, 2007:  Impact of  airborne Doppler lidar observations on ECMWF 
forecasts. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, Volume 133, Issue 622, Date: January 
2007 Part A, Pages: 107-116
