Healing of Articular Cartilage Defects. An Experimental Study
of Vascular and Minimal Vascular Microenvironment
Asbjørn A˚røen,1,3,4 Stig Heir,1,3,5 Sverre Løken,3,6 Lars Engebretsen,3,6 Finn P. Reinholt2
1Institute of Surgical Research, Rikshospitalet University Hospital, Oslo, Norway
2Institute and Department of Pathology, University of Oslo and Rikshospitalet University Hospital, NO-0027 Oslo, Norway
3Oslo Sports Trauma Center, Norwegian University of Sport & Physical Education, Oslo, Norway
4Akershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway
5Martina Hansen Hospital, Baerum, Norway
6Ulleva˚l University Hospital, Oslo, Norway
Received 19 October 2004; accepted 4 October 2005
Published online 31 March 2006 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI 10.1002/jor.20104
ABSTRACT: The repair potential in a chondral defect with (treatment A) or without access to bone
marrow elements (treatment B) at the basis of the defect sealed by a rim-sutured periosteal ﬂap was
studied using adult New Zealand rabbits (22 weeks) as an experimental model. At sacriﬁce,
macroscopical changes, synovial ﬂuid contents, degree of ﬁlling, thickness of the cartilage rim, and
the subchondral bonewere evaluated. Histomorphometricmeasurements of extent of ﬁlling (mainly
ﬁbrous tissue) of the defect at 36weeks postoperatively, showed 50%ﬁlling in treatmentA compared
with 33% in treatment B (p¼ 0.011). A difference in height of the cartilage rim between the
experimental groups and sham-control was measured (p¼ 0.005). Cartilage degeneration was
observed at the cartilage rim of the original defect, and included loss of chondrocytes and disruption
of surface continuity inbothexperimental groups. Inaddition, treatmentAresulted in a signiﬁcantly
increased thickness of the subchondral bone in the defect in comparison to treatment B at 2 weeks
and at 36 weeks (p¼0.021). The increased thickness of the subchondral bone may be of concern for
the bone marrow stimulation techniques regarding the long-term outcome.  2006 Orthopaedic
Research Society. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Orthop Res 24:1069–1077, 2006
Keywords: subchondral bone plate thickness; cartilage repair; periosteal ﬂap; bone
marrow stimulation; chondral defect
INTRODUCTION
Articular cartilage injury is relatively common. Of
all knees subjected to arthroscopy 5–7% show a
cartilage lesion larger than 1 cm2 that is graded as
ICRS grade 3 or 4.1,2 One of the established
treatment modalities to restore this cartilage
defect is to use a periosteal coverage over multiple
perforations of the subchondral bone plate in an
attempt to create a biologically favorable micro-
environment.3,4 In this microfracture technique,
multiple microperforations of the subchondral
bone plate are used to create hemorrhage and
access to the bone marrow.5 Alternatively, when
using the procedure of autologous chondrocyte
transplantation, it is considered important to
preserve the subchondral bone plate because it is
believed that the deposition of blood elements in
the defect will interfere with the growth of the
transplanted chondrocytes.5,6 The importance of
the vascular microenvironment in the defect in
contrast to no or only minimal vascular environ-
ment has been discussed but not investigated.5
Thus, the present study was conducted to evaluate
the impact of vascular microenvironment on the
healing process using periosteal ﬂap coverage of a
well-deﬁned cartilage defect in an established
animal model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animal Care
Forty-one New Zealand rabbits of both sexes were used.
They were kept in cages under standard laboratory
conditions and feed standard diet with free access to
water. At the initial surgery the experimental rabbits
JOURNAL OF ORTHOPAEDIC RESEARCH MAY 2006 1069
Correspondence to: Asbjørn A˚røen (Telephone: (þ47) 67 92
94 03; Fax: (þ47) 23 07 13 97; E-mail: asben@online.no)
 2006 Orthopaedic Research Society. Published by Wiley Periodicals,
Inc.
were 22 weeks of age weighing 3.6 kg (SD 0.42 kg). At
sacriﬁce at 36 weeks the mean weight of animals was
5.2 kg (SD 0.6 kg). From the end of the ﬁrst week after
the ﬁnal surgical procedure and until sacriﬁce the
rabbits were allowed free activity in a 10 m2 room. The
experiment was performed according to the guidelines
for animal research at the University of Oslo and
approved by the Norwegian Government Committee
for Experimental Animal Care.
Experimental Groups
The rabbits were allocated into one experimental group
(34 rabbits) with a chondral lesion made in both knees.
Access to bone marrow was establish at the base of the
defect in one knee (treatment A, vascular microenviron-
ment), whereas in the other knee the base was left
untreated (treatment B, minimal vascular microenvir-
onment) (Fig. 1A and B). After ﬁnal surgery with repair
of the defect 6 of these 34 rabbits were observed for
1 week, 12 rabbits for 2 weeks, and 16 rabbits for
36 weeks. In addition to these 34 rabbits in the experi-
mental group 7 animals had an arthrotomy performed to
one knee only with no cartilage intervention (sham-
operated) and the contralateral knee was left untouched
serving as normal control. These seven animals were
observed for 36 weeks after surgery until sacriﬁce.
Surgical Technique
A defect (}¼ 4 mm) was created in patella of both knees
in the 34 experimental rabbits (Fig. 1A). The defect in
the patella corresponds to 30% of the total articular
cartilage area of the patella. Minimal vascular micro-
environment was deﬁned as a chondral lesion where all
cartilage including the calciﬁed layer was removed. The
designation is used as no or only minimal communica-
tion between subchondral vessel and the base of the
lesion may occur. Cover of the defect with a periosteal
graft further reduces the inﬂuence of blood elements
released into the joint immediately after surgery. In
treatment A, four drillholes at the base of the defect
supply bonemarrow elements from the base of the defect
into the chamber, thus representing the vascular
microenvironment (Fig. 1A).
The surgery was performed under general anesthesia
composed of a mixture of Hypnorm1 and Dormicum,1
with dosages adjusted according to weight. Before each
surgical intervention 2mL of NaCl 0.9%were injected in
the joint, and after the joint had been subjected to 50
repeated full range of motion one aliquot of this washout
sample of minimum 0.75 mL was retrieved for analyses
of proteoglycan concentration. In addition, local anesthe-
sia (Marcain1) with epinephrine was injected locally
at the wound edges at the start of surgery. An anti-
biotic (Vibramycin1) was given per orally as prophylaxis
pre- and postoperatively for 5 days together with
Temgesic1 subcutaneously as pain relief. Medial para-
patellar incisions were made in the skin, and the patella
was dislocated laterally and inverted. A biopsy punch
(f¼ 4 mm) was used to induce the cartilage lesions.
Three experienced surgeons specially trained in the
procedure of harvesting periosteum and performing
cartilage repair procedures in rabbits performed all the
surgery. Dental instruments and a stereomicroscope
(magniﬁcation 14) were used to secure removal of all
the cartilage in the defect. Care was taken to avoid any
damage of the subchondral bone plate. Two weeks later
the defects were repaired during rearthrotomy. Once
again, the defects were debrided with the use of a
stereomicroscope and dental instruments. Figure 1B
shows the histology after this procedure demonstrating
an intact subchondral bone plate in the defect with all or
nearly all cartilage removed. In the experimental group
of the defect in one of the knees underwent drilling of the
subchondral bone plate. Four drill holes (}¼ 0.6 mm)
were made by a hand-driven drill to a depth of 3 mm. In
the contralateral knee the subchondral bone plate in the
defect was left intact (treatment B). A periosteal ﬂap was
harvested from the medial part of proximal tibia in both
knees and placed over the defect with the cambium layer
facing the defect. Subsequently, the ﬂaps were sutured
with four or ﬁve 9.0 sutures to the rim of the defect, and
the rim was covered with Tisseal1 glue. The surgical
procedure of treatment A and treatment B were con-
secutively changed between the right and left knee from
one animal to the next without the surgeon changing
position. Thus, difference between surgeons could not
interfere systematically with the results. Furthermore,
all three surgeons performed a similar number of
treatment A and B.
In the control group consisting of seven rabbits only a
unilateral procedure was performed consisting of an
arthrotomy and inversion of the patella to air 20 min
before closure of joint incision as described. The uni-
lateral procedure was repeated 2 weeks after the initial
surgery, ensuring a similar overall setup as the experi-
mental group. The other knee was left untouched until
sacriﬁce 36 weeks after surgery. Postoperatively, no
harmful effectswere observed on gait among the animals
subjected to bilateral surgery compared with rabbits
undergoing a unilateral procedure only. By visual
observations no difference in level of activity or locomo-
tion pattern between the two groups was detected.
Furthermore, the experimental group and the control
group showeda similar degree ofweight gain through the
experiment until sacriﬁce.
Macroscopical Evaluation
The knees were evaluated macroscopically at sacriﬁce.
Signs of degeneration on the opposing articular surface
in the patellar groove were examined to evaluate the
long-term effects of containing such an articular
cartilage defect in the joint.
Histology
After sacriﬁce the patellas were dissected free and ﬁxed
in phosphate-bufferd 4% paraformaldehyde for 48 h, and
1070 A˚RØEN ET AL.
JOURNAL OF ORTHOPAEDIC RESEARCH MAY 2006 DOI 10.1002/jor
Figure 1. (A) Illustration of the surgical procedure to create the biological chamber in
treatment group A. Photo A illustrates the creation step of the defect, following by step B
showing penetration of the subchondral bone plate; step C is suturing the periosteal ﬂap;
and ﬁnally, step D is covering this repair with Tissel1 glue sealing off the biological
chamber. Treatment group B is similar except that step B is omitted to keep the
subchondral bone plate intact. (B) Empty defect with removed calciﬁed layer. The
micrograph illustrates also the bone marrow elements below the subchondral bone
plate in patella. This is 1week after repair, and demonstrates somewear of the edges and
loss of the periosteal ﬂap (HE, original magniﬁcation 1.25).
HEALING OF ARTICULAR CARTILAGE DEFECTS 1071
DOI 10.1002/jor JOURNAL OF ORTHOPAEDIC RESEARCH MAY 2006
decalciﬁed in 7% EDTA with phosphate-buffered 0.5%
paraformaldehyde. Subsequently, the patellas were
divided in two through the center of the defect and
embedded in parafﬁn wax according to a routine proto-
col. From each of these two parts ﬁve sections of 4–5 mm
thickness were made and the four sections that gave the
best overview over the defect from each sample were
subjected to morphometric measurements. For measur-
ing ﬁlling of the defect micrographs of each of the four
best sections of the defect from each sample were
subjected to point counting according to the guidelines
described by Romppanen and Collan in 1983.7 The
median value of these four measurements represented
the value for each animal and served as basis for group
mean values used for further statistical analysis. As was
obvious, histologically which samples that had been
subjected to perforation of the subchondral bone plate a
blinded histological analysis was not possible to per-
form. Criteria according to previous described methods
were used to quantitate the changes observed by
histology.7,8
The proportion of the repair tissue in contact with the
basis of the lesion was measured in four sections of each
sample. Detachment was noted if there was a cleft
between the repair tissue and the subchondral bone
plate.Bindingwasdeﬁnedas the distance of repair tissue
in contact with basis of the lesion divided on the distance
of repair tissue in the defect. The method for quantifying
this binding is illustrated in Figure 2.
The thickness of subchondral bone plate was esti-
mated using a semiautomatic interactive image analysis
system (Analyses Soft Imaging System, Mu¨nster, Ger-
many). Thus, the distance between the most advanced
bone tissue islands (facing the defect/repair tissue in the
experimental group and the calciﬁed cartilage in the
control group) and the most proximal parts of the bone
marrow cavity8 was measured. The identiﬁcation of the
borders was facilitated by the use of polarized light. The
thickness of the subchondral bone plate was the median
value of ﬁve measurements in each defect. Themeasure-
ments were performed with the center of the defect as a
starting point. In the control sham group this would be
corresponding to the area with the thickest cartilage.
From this center point two other measurements were
performed 200 and 400 mm lateral to the center point,
respectively. A similar approach was also used to
measure the articular cartilage thickness from tidemark
to the surface in the center of the defect and 2.0 mm
lateral from the center point at one side of the cartilage
defect in the experimental group. In the control and
sham-operated knees corresponding measured points
from the center of the patella were made to enable
comparison of articular cartilage thickness between the
experimental group and the control-sham group.
Analysis of Synovial Fluid
In the long-term observation group of 36 weeks and in
the sham-operated knees of the control-sham group, a
wash out sample of the synovial ﬂuid was aspirated
before each surgical procedure as previously described.
Synovial ﬂuid was analyzed for proteoglycan concentra-
tion using standard ELISA technique.9
Statistics
According to previous experimental studies a ﬁlling
percent difference of more than 25% was considered as a
proper level to disregard the H01-hypothesis of no
difference between treatment A and B. Because all
animals in the experimental group underwent both
treatment A and B, a paired Student t-test could be
applied for statistical analyses. Preexperimental analy-
sis using power of 0.80 and a signiﬁcance level of 0.05 to
detect sample size indicated a need of nine animals in
the experimental group. The long observation period
and the risk of loosing experimental animals were the
reasons for the decision to use 16 experimental rabbits
for the long-term observation. To test the H02-hypoth-
esis with no difference between the experimental group
and the sham-control group the need of animals would
be more than 12 due to the unpaired experimental
situation. However, our results did show a ﬁlling
percent difference of almost 50%, which means that
the number of experimental animals in the control-sham
group was sufﬁcient. Standard Student t-test was used
according to pairwise or unpaired comparison using. To
check for reproducibility repeated morphometric mea-
surements were performed on the same sections for the
different evaluated parameters and the range difference
between the measurements were 5–8%.
RESULTS
At sacriﬁce at 36 weeks after repair the mean
weight of the experimental rabbits was 5.1 kg
(range 4.6–6.0 kg) and of the control sham group
5.0 kg (range 4.7–6 kg). Two animals were lost
during surgery due to problems with anesthesia
and two in the follow-up period. The postmortem
Figure 2. Drawing of the method to evaluate sub-
chondral binding of the repair tissue. Binding is deﬁned
as the distance between the white arrows (b) divided on
the distance between the blue arrows (a). Tidemark is the
upper border of the black broad line representing the
calciﬁed cartilage separating bone and uncalciﬁed
articular cartilage.
1072 A˚RØEN ET AL.
JOURNAL OF ORTHOPAEDIC RESEARCH MAY 2006 DOI 10.1002/jor
investigation at the Norwegian School of Veter-
inary Science did not detect the reason for death of
these two last rabbits. Supplementary animals
replaced the four lost during the experiment to
avoid skewed groups.
Macroscopical Evaluation
All knees showed full range of motion. The main
ﬁnding was incomplete ﬁlling of the defect and the
poor quality of the repair tissue in the defect
compared to normal cartilage. No free bodies were
observed. In the 2-week observation group the
periosteal ﬂap was delaminated in several cases
and found incorporated in the synovial tissue. At
36 weeks no sign of the periosteal ﬂap was seen
either in the defect or in the synovium. Macroscopic
signs of cartilage degeneration were not observed.
Histomorphology
Histologic analysis of the defects veriﬁed that the
defects were only partly ﬁlled. The repair tissue
was ﬁbrous tissue except close to the drill holes
were some areas of unorganized cartilage was
observed (Fig. 3). Clusters of chondrocytes em-
bedded in the ﬁbrous tissue with an incomplete
binding to the subchondral bone indicative of a
failed repair were evident even in the best cases.
None of the experimental cases showed normal
articular cartilage although some of the defects
were almost ﬁlled. At 36 weeks wear of cartilage
rim and loss of chondrocytes at the edges were
evident in the experimental groups (Fig. 4).
Histomorphometry
One week after repair a mean ﬁlling as high as
40% was measured in treatment A (vascular
microenvironment) and 30% in treatment B
(minimal vascular microenvironment) (Table 1).
This apparently high degree of ﬁlling was due to
remnants or attached periosteal ﬂaps. At 2 weeks
after repair the ﬁlling had decreased to 14%
in treatment A and 12% with treatment B. At
36 weeks after repair there was a statistical
signiﬁcant difference in ﬁlling between treatment
A and treatment B (p¼ 0.011). There was a
considerable variation within the groups: the ﬁlling
was up to 92% in the best cases of the vascular
group and 89% in the minimal vascular group.
At 36weeks the repair tissuedetachment from to
the subchondral bone plate in the defect was
apparently more pronounced in treatment group
B [43% binding, CI 95% (25–60%)] in comparison
with treatment A [58% binding, CI 95% (44–72%)],
but the difference did not reach statistical signiﬁ-
cance (p¼ 0.20) (Table 1). Subchondral bone plate
thickness was signiﬁcantly increased in treatment
A both at 2 weeks and after 36 weeks (p¼ 0.021)
(Table 1). Articular cartilage thickness was sig-
niﬁcantly thinner in all experimental groups
compared with control-sham at both measured
timepoints.Comparedwith the correspondingarea
in control and sham-operated knees, the cartilage
rim showed signiﬁcantly lower values in both
treatment groups (p< 0.05). Micrographs of the
cartilage defect during the experiment are illu-
strated in Figure 5.
Figure 3. Micrographs of specimens after 36 weeks showing vascular microenviron-
ment to the left including a drill hole with repair plug. Minimal vascular microenviron-
ment is illustrated to the right from the contralateral knee in the same animal (trichrome
staining, 2.5). Evident in the micrograph to the right is the degeneration of the defect
edge as a result of the improper ﬁlling of the defect.
HEALING OF ARTICULAR CARTILAGE DEFECTS 1073
DOI 10.1002/jor JOURNAL OF ORTHOPAEDIC RESEARCH MAY 2006
Synovial Fluid Analysis
The proteoglycan content was not signiﬁcantly
different in the experimental group between
treatment A and B (p¼ 0.22) (Table 2). Neither
could any signiﬁcant changes in proteoglycan
levels be recorded in any of the two treatment
groups from the start of the experiment until
sacriﬁce at 36 weeks later (pA¼ 0.11 and pB¼
0.52). Comparison between the control and sham
knees at 36 weeks also turned out without
signiﬁcant difference (p¼ 0.74). At sacriﬁce none
of the treatment groups were different from the
untouched control knees regarding proteoglycan
level (pA¼ 0.75 and pB¼ 0.56).
DISCUSSION
The vascular environment (treatment A) resulted
in higher ﬁlling percentage than the minimal
vascular group (treatment B). Thus, it appears
that vascular microenvironment is beneﬁcial to
the repair process. However, the repair tissue in
both groups was ﬁbrous tissue, although small
islands of cartilage tissue could be observed close
to the drillholes in treatment A. Furthermore,
inferior binding to the subchondral bone of the
repair tissue was evident with both treatment A
and B, although most profound in treatment B
where only 44% of the repair tissue demonstrated
binding to the subchondral bone. Similar experi-
ence has also been reported in clinical cases where
delamination of the repair tissue has been
observed after autologous chondrocyte transplan-
tation.10 The chondrocyte transplantation pro-
cedure is a minimal vascular method as the
subchondral bone plate is not perforated.6,11 In
terms of ﬁlling our result in the minimal vascular
group (treatment B) is comparable to those of other
authors using the same experimental model.6
Brittberg et al. (1996) found in his experimental
study using only periosteal ﬂap coverage of the
defect with 52-week observation a ﬁlling of the
defect of 30.9%. Our results show a ﬁlling of 33%
36 weeks after repair. Our study adds further
information in showing that creating access to the
Figure 4. Illustration of the wear and degeneration at the cartilage rim in the
experimental group to the right in comparison to the control-sham group to the left
(HE, 10).
Table 1. Basic Evaluation Parameters of the Groups
Group No of Knees
Mean Filling
% of Defect
Subchondral Bone Cartilage Thickness
Binding % Thickness mm Center mm Rim mm
Control 36 w 7 622 23 652 27 495 37
Sham 36 w 7 652 59 805 35 555 48
T.A 1 w 6 40 9 24 10 580 93 288 87 356 17
T.B 1 w 6 30 8 12 9 534 86 156 43 398 43
T.A 2 w 12 16 2 46 11 706 44 49 16 366 26
T.B 2 w 12 14 3 34 12 540 22 26 8 336 24
T.A 36 w 16 50 6 58 6 687 67 225 41 351 34
T.B 36 w 16 33 6 43 8 544 34 175 57 333 48
The results are presented as meanSEM of median values in each group.
T. A¼ treatment A with drillholes through the subchondral bone plate (vascular microenvironment). T. B¼ treatment B without
drill holes (minimal vascular microenvironment).
1074 A˚RØEN ET AL.
JOURNAL OF ORTHOPAEDIC RESEARCH MAY 2006 DOI 10.1002/jor
Figure 5. Micrographs of the cartilage defect at different time points illustrating the
measured increased subchondral thickness as a result of the cartilage repair procedure.
The increased thickness is most pronounced in treatment A, where a signiﬁcant
difference was noted at the 36 weeks interval (Table 1). At the time point of 1 week the
periosteum sutured to the defect is still visible. The tendency towards loosening of the
repair cartilage is illustrated at the time point of 36 weeks after repair (HE, original
magniﬁcation 1.25).
HEALING OF ARTICULAR CARTILAGE DEFECTS 1075
DOI 10.1002/jor JOURNAL OF ORTHOPAEDIC RESEARCH MAY 2006
bone marrow under a periosteal ﬂap also results a
somewhat higher degree of ﬁlling. Even though
the increase is signiﬁcant the quality of the repair
tissue remains low. The procedure with perforat-
ing the subchondral bone under a periosteal ﬂap
coverage is in clinical use,4 but based on our
experimental results the prospects of restoring
cartilage integrity must be low. Our results
following microfracture are in accordance with
another animal study using the same size and type
of cartilage lesion.6
A new ﬁnding relevant to the treatment of focal
cartilage defects is the observation that the
subchondral bone plate over time increased in
thickness following the penetration of the subchon-
dral boneplate to access thebonemarrowelements.
Increased subchondral bone thickness may repre-
sent a risk factor for later development of cartilage
degeneration. However, the fact that the macro-
scopic evaluation did not show degenerative
changes in the joint supported by unchanged
proteoglycan concentration in the synovial ﬂuid
suggest that the lesions did not induce major
osteoarthritis during the observation period of the
current study.
Another new aspect observed in the current
study is that the incomplete ﬁlling appears to
initiate a degenerative process at the microscopic
level. The observation of reduced height of the
neighboring cartilage of the patella in the experi-
mental group may indicate that the adjacent
cartilage was subjected to an extra wear. Alterna-
tively, the procedure of suturing the periosteal ﬂap
to the rim of the cartilage might be responsible for
the initiation of the degenerative process especially
when the reparative procedure failed.
In clinical studies a cartilage defect with size of
more than 2 cm2 (14% of the cartilage area of
human femoral condyle12), is used as inclusion
criteria for surgical repair of the lesion. In compar-
ison, in our model 30% of the articular joint surface
of patella is removed and as it is not likely to obtain
natural healing of a lesion of this size, such an
injury would be eligible for cartilage repair treat-
ment in the human knee joint.
As control we used the knees that were not
subjected to surgery. This was done because a
successful cartilage repair procedure means
restoration of the anatomical structure of the
cartilage and therefore normal cartilage is the
‘‘gold standard’’ control of all cartilage repair
procedures. From this point of view the results in
our study with incomplete ﬁlling of the chondral
lesion inboth treatmentmodalities represent failed
procedures.
CONCLUSION
Creating a vascular microenvironment in healing
of a focal cartilage defect with a periosteal ﬂap
increases the ﬁlling of the defect signiﬁcantly in
comparison to a minimal vascular microenviron-
ment. However, both approaches end up with
incomplete ﬁlling of the defect and mostly in
ﬁbrous tissue instead of hyaline cartilage.
Furthermore, a reduced thickness of adjacent
cartilage in the experimental group compared to
the control sham group was noted. Additionally,
the increased thickness of the subchondral bone in
treatment A may be of concern for the bone
marrow stimulation techniques for the long-term
fate of the repair tissue obtained as indicated
previously.13
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported from grants from the
University of Oslo, Norwegian Research Council and
Oslo Sports Trauma Center. The Oslo Sports Trauma
Research Center has been established at the Norwegian
University of Sport & Physical Education through
generous grants from the Eastern Norway Regional
Health Authority, the Royal Norwegian Ministry of
Culture and Church Affairs, the Norwegian Olympic
Committee & Confederation of Sport, Norsk Tipping AS,
and Pﬁzer AS.
REFERENCES
1. Aroen A, Loken S, Heir S, et al. 2004. Articular cartilage
lesions in 993 consecutive knee arthroscopies. Am J Sports
Med 32:211–215.
Table 2. Proteoglycan Concentrations Measured at
the Different Time Points in the Experiment
Group-Timepoint
Mean
(mg/ml)
CI-95 %
(mg/ml)
No of
Missing
Values
T.A 0 w 6,4 4,7–8,0 0
T.A 2 w 41,2 3,4–78,9 0
T.A 36 w 10,4 7,7–13,1 1
T.B 0 w 8,5 5,8–11,3 1
T.B 2 w 23,3 5,1–41,4 0
T.B 36 w 13,2 7,1–19,2 3
Control-36 w 11,0 8,4–13,6 0
Sham-0 w 4,0 1,1–6,8 0
Sham-2 w 5,6 2,5–8,7 0
Sham 36 w 10,3 6,7–13,7 0
1076 A˚RØEN ET AL.
JOURNAL OF ORTHOPAEDIC RESEARCH MAY 2006 DOI 10.1002/jor
2. Hjelle K, Solheim E, Strand T, et al. 2002. Articular
cartilage defects in 1,000 knee arthroscopies. Arthroscopy
18:730–734.
3. Alfredson H, Lorentzon R. 1999. Superior results with
continuous passive motion compared to active motion after
periosteal transplantation—a retrospective study of
human patella cartilage defect treatment. Knee Surg
Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 7:232–238.
4. Siebold R, Lichtenberg S, Habermeyer P. 2003. Combina-
tion of microfracture and periostal-ﬂap for the treatment of
focal full thickness articular cartilage lesions of the
shoulder: a prospective study. Knee Surg Sports Trauma-
tol Arthrosc 11:183–189.
5. Aroen A, Jones DG, Fu FH. 1998. Arthroscopic diagnosis
and treatment of cartilage injuries. Sports Med Arthrosc
Rev 6:31–40.
6. Breinan HA, Martin SD, Hsu HP, et al. 2000. Healing of
canine articular cartilage defects treated with microfrac-
ture, a type-II collagen matrix, or cultured autologous
chondrocytes. J Orthop Res 18:781–789.
7. Romppanen T, Collan Y. 1983. Pratical guidelines for a
morphometric study. Acta Stereol 2:274–297.
8. Fahlgren A, Messner K, Aspenberg P. 2003. Meniscectomy
leads to an early increase in subchondral bone plate
thickness in the rabbit knee. Acta Orthop Scand 74:
437–441.
9. Messner K, Gillquist J, Bjornsson S, et al. 1993. Proteo-
glycan fragments in rabbit joint ﬂuid correlated to
arthrosis stage. Acta Orthop Scand 64:312–316.
10. Muellner T, Knopp A, Ludvigsen TC, et al. 2001. Failed
autologous chondrocyte implantation—complete atrau-
matic graft delamination after two years. Am J Sports
Med 29:516–519.
11. Brittberg M, Nilsson A, Lindahl A, et al. 1996. Rabbit
articular cartilage defects treated with autologous cultured
chondrocytes. Clin Orthop Relat Res 326:270–283.
12. Mow CV, Ateshian GA, Ratcliffe A. 1993. Anatomic form
and biomechanical properties of articular cartilage of the
knee joint. In: Finerman GAM, Noyes FR, editors. Biology
and biomechanics of the traumatized synovial joint: the
knee as a model. Rosemont: AAOS; p 55–81.
13. Buckwalter JA, Mankin HJ. 1997. Articular cartilage. 2.
Degeneration and osteoarthrosis, repair, regeneration,
and transplantation. J Bone Joint Surg 79A:612–632.
HEALING OF ARTICULAR CARTILAGE DEFECTS 1077
DOI 10.1002/jor JOURNAL OF ORTHOPAEDIC RESEARCH MAY 2006
