Research Paper
A Novel in Vitro and Numerical Analysis of Shear-Induced Drug Release
from Extended-Release Tablets in the Fed Stomach
Bertil Abrahamsson,1,3 Anupam Pal,2 Marie Sjo¨berg,1 Maria Carlsson,1
Emma Laurell,1 and James G. Brasseur2
Received December 22, 2004; accepted March 25, 2005
Purpose. To design an in vitro apparatus that could simulate the in vivo range of surface shear stresses
relevant for the human stomach under fed conditions.
Methods. Computer simulations were combined with in vitro experiments to quantify tablet erosion rate
vs. surface shear stress. From two separate computer models, of tablets in the fed stomach and of tablets
in vitro, we first estimated the intragastric range of surface stress and Reynolds number (Re), and then
designed a dissolution apparatus and parameter space to replicate the in vivo conditions. The in vitro
tablet erosion was determined by a new rotating beaker apparatus that provided predictable surface
shear on tablets. Tablet mass erosion rates were measured for two different extended-release tablets at a
range of in vivo relevant surface shear stresses obtained by varying viscosity of test media and rotation
rate of the beaker.
Results. Mass erosion rate and surface shear were found to be highly correlated. Erosion rate increased
with surface shear more rapidly at ‘‘low’’ stresses (<35 dyne/cm2) independent of tablet material. At
higher surface stress, erosion was strongly material dependent.
Conclusions. Shear force effects on drug release from matrix tablets relevant for fed state are for the
first time possible to predict by in vitro dissolution testing.
KEY WORDS: dissolution apparatus; extended release; stomach.
INTRODUCTION
In vitro drug dissolution testing is a key tool for product
development and batch quality control. The value of such
investigations is greatly enhanced when the tests provide
physiologically relevant data, necessitating in vitro replica-
tion of the mechanical and chemical environment of the
human gastrointestinal (GI) tract at a level relevant to the
dissolution process under consideration. Whereas the chem-
ical environments of the GI tract (e.g., pH profiles, bile acids,
and ions) have been well characterized (1,2), the hydrody-
namic and mechanical environments of the GI tract have
received little attention. In the present study, we coupled
fluid dynamics computer simulations and experimental data
obtained by use of a new in vitro method to establish tablet
surface shear stress levels relevant for the fed stomach in
human. We also determined the effect of surface shear stress
on drug release from hydrophilic matrix tablets, a commonly
used extended-release (ER) formulation principle. The rela-
tionship between gastric fluid motion and drug release is of
special relevance to hydrophilic matrix tablets. When such
formulations are exposed to the gastric environment, a gel
layer forms at the surface by hydration of the hydrophilic
polymers. Erosion of this gel layer, and consequent drug
release, is susceptible to the details of the hydrodynamic en-
vironment. Drug release of poorly soluble compounds from
such formulations is fully controlled by surface erosion from
hydrodynamic stress and dissolution of the polymer (3,4).
Furthermore, the erosion rate and drug release from hydro-
philic matrix ER tablets in the stomach has for certain for-
mulations shown to be higher in the fed vs. fasting conditions,
an effect attributed to differences in hydrodynamic shearing
forces acting on the tablet surface (5). These types of tablets
were therefore used as model formulations in the present
study.
Gastric muscle contraction creates fluid motions that
generate forces on tablets tangent (‘‘shear stresses’’) and per-
pendicular (‘‘normal stresses’’) to the tablet surface. Whereas
the consequences of the normal stresses have been charac-
terized in humans by using different formulations with dif-
ferent sensitivities to normal forces (6,7), it has not been
possible to measure the gastric shear stresses experienced by
tablets in vivo. Some attempts have been made to indirectly
1215 0724-8741/05/0800-1215/0 # 2005 Springer Science + Business Media, Inc.
Pharmaceutical Research, Vol. 22, No. 8, August 2005 (# 2005)
DOI: 10.1007/s11095-005-5272-x
1 Preformulation & Biopharmaceutics, AstraZeneca, S-431 83, Mo¨ln-
dal, Sweden.
2 Department of Mechanical Engineering, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA.
3 To whom correspondence should be addressed. (e-mail: Bertil.
Abrahamsson@astrazeneca.com)
ABBREVIATIONS: ER, extended-release; GI, gastrointestinal;
MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; Re, Reynolds number.
model gastric forces by correlating in vitro dissolution and
in vivo bioavailability data, for example, by varying stirring
velocity in a USP apparatus I or II to mimic release profiles
measured in vivo (8,9). However, these results are very
difficult to generalize owing to formulation-specific hydrody-
namic effects in vitro as well in vivo, for example, as a result
of density and shape. Thus, understanding of shear forces in
vivo as well as in vitro test methods that approximates phy-
siological hydrodynamics is still lacking.
Preliminary to designing an experimental apparatus and
our present experimental protocol, we determined the range
of surface shear stresses that an ER tablet is likely to ex-
perience in vivo in the fed stomach. This was done with
computer simulations of the fluid motions and fluid forces in
the fed stomach as described by Pal et al. (10). The ‘‘lattice-
Boltzmann’’ numerical algorithm described in (10) was sub-
sequently advanced to allow the calculation of the motions of
finite size ER tablets, and the shear stress on a tablet surface
as it moved within a ‘‘virtual stomach’’ during the propa-
gation of contraction waves in the distal stomach (antrum)
(11). The computer stomach model (geometry, emptying
rate, contraction-wave characteristics, etc.) was parameter-
ized using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data of the
human stomach in the fed state. From a series of simulations,
average shear stress on tablet surfaces was in the range 0Y200
dynes/cm2, with local surface values as high as 500 dynes/cm2
(11). The computer simulations show that the tablet surface
is exposed to a wide range of shear stresses as it moves within
the stomach. The tablets undergo high stresses while moving
within the antrum and especially when encountering the
gastric mucosa. The highest surface stresses occurred when
tablets were forced retrograde through advancing antral
contraction waves; however, these are rare events and the
most probable shear stress values were in the range 10Y70
dynes/cm2.
Knowing the expected range of shear stresses experi-
enced by ER tablets in vivo, an aim of the present work was
to design a new in vitro apparatus with the help of computer
simulation with which the experimental parameters could be
varied to produce the in vivo range of surface shear stresses
in the human stomach under fed conditions. To quantify the
required experimental parameters, each in vitro experiment
was replicated precisely on the computer using three-
dimensional numerical methods. Once done, the flow around
the tablet and the tablet surface shear stress was quantified
for each experimental configuration from computer simula-
tion, and the rate of mass loss was quantified from the in vitro
experiment. A second aim was to quantify the relationship
between the in vivo relevant shear stress levels and the rate
of tablet mass loss for hydrophilic matrix tablets, and to
compare these data with a standard pharmacopeial dissolu-
tion method.
Hydrodynamics: In Vivo vs. in Vitro
Peristaltic contraction waves in the antrum stimulate
repetitive gastric flow patterns that, in turn, generate stresses
on the tablet surface. The integrated effect of these stresses
both transport the tablet within the stomach and degrade the
tablet surface (3). The magnitude and distribution of surface
shear stress, however, depends on the details of the flow
patterns around the tablet including, for example, the exist-
ence or nonexistence of a ‘‘wake’’ behind the tablet.
The details of the flow pattern around any moving object
are related to a fundamental nondimensional parameter in
fluid dynamics called the ‘‘Reynolds number.’’ The Reynolds
number for the flow of a fluid with density > and viscosity 2
approaching a tablet with characteristic diameter D with
velocity U is given by Re = >UD/2. Reynolds number (Re) is
a global, rough order-of-magnitude estimate of the ratio of
fluid inertia (flow accelerations) to frictional force in the flow
around the object, so that at very small Reynolds numbers
(Re ¡ 1) frictional forces greatly overpower fluid accelera-
tion, and there is no wake behind the tablet. With increasing
Re the role of inertia increases and the flow pattern changes.
In particular, a steady wake (containing fluid inertia) begins
to form behind the tablet and increases in length with in-
creasing Reynolds number. When Re  102 another change
in flow pattern takes place: the flow around the tablet starts
oscillating back and forth with time. These oscillations become
progressively more chaotic with increasing Reynolds number
until, and at very high Reynolds numbers, the flow around the
tablet becomes turbulent. At Re d 1, frictional effects are
generally confined to narrow ‘‘boundary layers’’ adjacent to
surfaces, and the wake trailing the objects in the flow (12).
Because the changes in flow pattern are accompanied by
corresponding changes in shear stress distribution over the
tablet surface, it is important to match in vivo tablet Reynolds
numbers when designing in vitro tablet dissolution experi-
ments in order to obtain physiologically relevant results.
Typical gastric meal in the fed stomach is viscous liquid with
viscosity roughly in the range 10Y2000 cP and density not too
different from the density of water, often mixed with
particulates and semisolids. The characteristic flow velocity is
established by the propagation speed of the antral contraction
waves, 2Y3 mm/s (13,14). Thus, Reynolds numbers of the flow
around tablets 1 cm in diameter within the stomach are of
order 0.01Y30, most likely with occasional short periods of
more rapid tablet motion and higher Reynolds numbers. In all
cases, however, in vivo Reynolds numbers are orders of mag-
nitude below those required for the existence of turbulence.
Therefore, to be physiologically relevant, in vitro test methods
should be designed to produce tablet Reynolds number not too
far from the physiological range 0.01Y30, and never turbulent.
Conventional in vitro measurements of tablet dissolution
using the USP II apparatus, for example, are made with
water (1 cP) at high stirring rates (50Y100 rpm), resulting in a
Reynolds numbers of the flow in the beaker itself in the
thousands, not only orders of magnitude larger than physio-
logical Reynolds numbers but often large enough to create a
highly nonphysiological turbulent flow environment (15,16).
Furthermore, the USP II apparatus with rotating paddle
generates highly nonuniform eddying flow (15,16) so that a
freely moving tablet within can experience high variations in
surface shear in an uncontrolled manner. Thus, the flow
within the apparatus is physiologically unrealistic, and var-
iability in results can result from unpredictable tablet mo-
tions that depend on tablet density and shape, and surface
interactions. To obtain predictable and physiologically rel-
evant hydrodynamic conditions it is necessary to fix the
tablet position in a well-defined laminar flow at physiolo-
gical Reynolds numbers.
1216 Abrahamsson et al.
In this work we combined in vitro model data with
computer model data to correlate mass erosion rate (from
in vitro experiment) with tablet surface shear stress (from
computer simulations of the equivalent flow). The coupled in
vitro-computer experiment was designed to cover the range
of shear stresses experienced by an ER tablet with a roughly
similar flow Reynolds number.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study Tablets
The present study was performed with hydrophilic
matrix extended-release (ER) tablets known to have a sen-
sitive relationship between hydrodynamic conditions and
tablet erosion/drug release (3,17). Tablet X was used in most
of the experiments. It was ellipsoidal in shape with circular
plan form of diameter D1 = D2 = 11 mm (see Fig. 1A) and
aspect ratio D1/D3 = 1.79, formulated with hydroxypropyl-
methyl cellulose (HPMC) as the matrix forming agent, con-
taining 10 mg of felodipine. Total initial dry mass was 473
mg. Tablet X was previously studied in vitro using standard
methods under different conditions, as well as in vivo using
scintigraphy to estimate tablet erosion (3,18). Another tablet
(Y) was also used to investigate the discriminatory power of
our new approach of combining in vitro with numerical ex-
periments. Tablet Y was also ellipsoidal with planform dia-
meter D1 = D2 = 10 mm and aspect ratio D1/D3 = 1.69 and
initial total dry mass of 339 mg. Like tablet X, tablet Y was
formulated with HPMC, however, with the addition of
ethylcellulose and carboxypolymethylene. Tablet Y has also
been studied both in vitro and in vivo with scintigraphic
monitoring of tablet erosion (3,5). Results are for tablet X
unless otherwise noted.
Design of New Dissolution Apparatus
The rotating beaker design used in the present study is
illustrated in Fig. 1A. The design provides a controlled and
predictable flow around the tablets with parameters chosen to
produce physiologically relevant Reynolds numbers (above).
To this end, a beaker 220 mm in diameter was made to rotate
at a constant rate between 8 and 50 rpm (Fig. 1A). The beaker
was fastened to a stirring rod fixed to the beaker bottom. The
ratio of beaker-to-tablet-diameter was 20, ensuring minimal
effect of the beaker wall on the flow near the tablet. The
beaker was filled with 5000 ml of the test media and a tablet
with a drilled hole (0.5 mm diameter) was press-fit onto a stiff
steel wire (0.4 mm diameter) fastened rigidly to a steel rod.
The tablet was positioned centrally in the test medium 55 mm
from the center of the beaker and 40 mm below the free
surface. Measurements were made with two tablet orienta-
tions: (A) with the flat side of the tablet along the direction of
flow and (B) with the flat side perpendicular to the direction of
the flow (illustrated in Figs. 3 and 4). The rotating beaker was
immersed in a water bath for temperature control. To achieve
steady flow the beaker was rotated at least 30 min before an
experiment was initiated.
Fig. 1. (A) Illustration of rotating beaker with a tablet fixed on a
steel wire. The beaker is glued to the centrally placed rod at the
bottom so that when the rod is rotated at fixed rpm the beaker also
rotates at the same rpm. (B) Example photographs of a tablet
showing the three diameters D1, D2, and D3.
Fig. 2. Cross sections through the computational mesh showing finer mesh near and on the trailing side
of a tablet in position A. (A) Vertical cross section. (B) Horizontal cross section.
1217In Vitro and Numerical Study of Drug Release
The choice of the media viscosities and vessel rotation
rates were made based on preliminary numerical simulations
for tablet orientations A and B that quantified surface shear
stress for combinations of vessel rotation rate and fluid vis-
cosity that yielded tablet physiological Reynolds numbers.
Knowing the ranges of surface shear stress and tablet Rey-
nolds number encountered by tablets in vivo in the fed
stomach (see Introduction), experimentally realizable viscos-
ities of test media were coupled with beaker rotation rates
limited by the available instrumentation (8Y50 rpm) to
produce a set of experimental parameters that yielded tablet
surface shear stresses over the entire range encountered in
vivo [10Y500 dynes/cm2 (11)] at flow Reynolds numbers in
the physiological range.
Dissolution Media
The dissolution media all contained 0.15 M NaCl
(reagent grade, Scharlau Chemie S.A. Barcelona) water
solution with 0.5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) (specially
pure, BDH Laboratory Supplies, Pool) and a polymer, end-
capped polyethylene glycol (Bermodol PUR 2150\, Akzo
Nobel, Stenungsund). Three concentrations (w/w) of the
polymer were prepared for the experiments: 1.25%, 2.0%,
and 2.75% to obtain three target viscosities: ‘‘low’’ viscosities
25 cP, ‘‘medium’’ viscosities 150 cP, and ‘‘high’’ viscosities 500
cP. Bermodol PUR 2150\ was chosen as a viscosity enhancer
because solutions created with this polymer have approx-
imately Newtonian behavior (19). SDS was added to suppress
phase separation of polymer. Salt concentration levels were
chosen to mimic gastric levels.
The viscosities of the test media were measured with a
Rheometer (Carri-Med Rheometer CSL2 100, TA Instru-
ments Ltd., Leatherhead) using an acryl cone (6 cm dia-
meter, 1-). Measurements showed that over 24 h, viscosity
typically changed by 4Y13% depending on medium viscosity.
Because some experiments were performed over multiple
days (e3 days), media viscosities were measured before and
after each run; average run viscosities (2) were used in
subsequent analysis. The actual ranges of viscosities used in
the experiments were: low 6Y50 cP, medium 171Y379 cP, and
high 486Y667 cP. The density of all media (>) was 1 T 0.006
g/cm3. The mean (range) osmolarity and pH of the media was
339 T 9 mOsm and 5.4 T 0.05 pH (micro osmometer 3MO,
Advanced Instruments Inc, Massachusetts, USA) which is
within the range of possible values in the fed stomach (3).
The test media were maintained at 37-C.
Experimental Parameters
The three dissolution viscosities were chosen to produce
the in vivo range of shear stresses at in vivo Reynolds num-
bers. The numerical simulations showed that, when combined
Fig. 3. Simulated streamlines around the tablet in orientations A and
B and at Re = 1.5 and Re = 36.9, as indicated. Streamlines are shown
on a horizontal plane passing through the center of the tablets.
Fig. 4. Grayscale isocontours of local shear stress C on the tablet
surface at Re = 36.9 in orientations A and B (U = 11.5 cm/s, 2 = 20
cP). Darker shades of gray indicates higher local surface shear stress
and vice versa. The arrows show local fluid velocity vectors in a
horizontal plane passing through the center of the tablet. Although
the simulations were three-dimensional, velocity vectors are shown in
one plane only for clarity. The length and direction of the vectors
shows the magnitude and direction of local flow velocity, respectively.
1218 Abrahamsson et al.
with beaker rotations in the range 8Y20 rpm (with low
viscosities), 10Y40 rpm (with medium viscosities), and 10Y50
rpm (with high viscosities), a range of gastric-relevant surface
shear stresses were generated in vitro at Reynolds numbers
within the physiological range. Great effort was made to
select experimental parameters at Reynolds numbers that
maintain steady laminar flow around the tablet surface near
the physiological range. Within the limitations of the ins-
trumentation it was possible to produce tablet Reynolds
numbers in vitro in the range Re = (>UD/2) 0.70Y58, where
D is defined as the cube root of tablet volume.
After each experiment the wet tablet was photographed
from two sides from which the three major diameters D1, D2,
and D3 (Fig. 1B) were measured. Tablet volume was cal-
culated assuming ellipsoidal shape. The characteristic length
D of the tablet was defined as the cube root of tablet volume.
The rotating beaker design has the advantage that the flow
velocity in steady state is precisely known as solid body
rotation, that is, linear velocity along circular streamlines,
zero at the vessel center and maximum at the wall deter-
mined from vessel rotation rate and radius. The relative flow
velocity varied between 4 and 30 cm/s. For lower viscosity
media beaker rotation speed was limited to 20 to maintain
the Reynolds number within the physiological range.
For comparison with the specially designed apparatus,
the erosion of tablet X was also quantified in a USP I
rotating basket device in 900 ml of 0.15 mM NaCl with 0.5%
SDS at 37-C, and 25, 50, and 100 rpm.
Determination of Tablet Erosion Rates
To determine rates of tablet mass loss (‘‘tablet erosion’’),
tablets were removed from the beaker, dried overnight at
60-C, weighed using an SG balance (Mettler Toledo GmbH
Greifensee), then discarded. Tablet mass was measured for
30-, 60-, 90-, 120-, and 250-min periods. Tablet mass loss was
calculated for each time period and all experiments were
performed in duplicate. Because tablet mass was found to
decrease linearly over time (see Results), erosion rates were
quantified by linear regression of the erosion-time data. Mul-
tiple linear regression (MLR) was used to evaluate the effect
of different beaker rotations, medium viscosity and tablet
positions using of MODDE\ computer software (Umetrics
AB, Umea˚).
Numerical Experiments Replicating Each Rotating
Beaker Experiment
We applied computational fluid dynamics software
Fluent 6.0\ (Fluent Inc., Lebanon) to simulate each in vitro
experiment. The geometry of the in vitro experiment was
replicated precisely and a computational mesh was designed
using the grid generation software, Gambit 2.0.4\ (Fluent
Inc., Lebanon). Figure 2 shows two cross sections through
the mesh for tablet orientation A. To resolve the flow near
the tablet, a finer mesh was applied near the tablet surfaces
(Fig. 2A). A wake is generated on the downstream side of
the tablets. To accurately resolve the flow in the wake the
finer mesh region was further extended circumferentially on
the trailing side of the tablet, as shown in Fig. 2B. The grid
contained 172,427 tetrahedral cells and 33,452 nodes. The
‘‘no slip’’ boundary condition (surface velocity = fluid
velocity) was applied to the fluid at all surfaces.
To verify that the solution was grid independent, a sam-
ple calculation was repeated with twice the number of grid
cells. The root-mean-square difference between the two solu-
tions for velocity was <0.025%, verifying the adequacy of the
initial grid. To further test the accuracy of the solution, we
simulated a spherical tablet in a uniform flow at a low Rey-
nolds number of 1 to compare with published empirical fits
(20). The predicted drag was well within the accuracy of the
empirical fit (6.1%).
Development of a ‘‘Tablet Erosion Model’’
This study was directed at quantification of the potential
correlations between surface shear stress and tablet erosion
rate, and on the development of a ‘‘tablet erosion model’’Van
empirically derived mathematical relationships between tab-
let mass erosion rate, surface shear stress, relative tablet velo-
city, medium viscosity, and material properties of the tablet
formulation.
We summarize in the Appendix a methodology common-
ly applied in engineering experimental analysis for estimating
empirical equations from multifactorial data using ‘‘similarity’’
requirements between the system being modelled and the
experimental system through which data are collected. Here
we seek a mathematical representation from which mass
erosion rate mI can be predicted for a given ER tablet of
average diameter D that, while moving within in the stomach
through gastric fluid of viscosity 2 at relative velocity U, ex-
periences average surface shear stress Cavg. This relationship
is dependent on the structure (i.e., the physical property of
the tablet material, shape, and size) of a particular formulation
in resisting surface erosion for given surface shear stress. We
parameterize surface material structure with the ‘‘ultimate
shear stress’’ Cu, defined as the critical shear stress above
which the gel layer surface fractures. Although we do not
explicitly measure this parameter, we include it in the
similarity procedure and model its effects implicitly through
data collected experimentally for specific formulations.
The procedure described in the Appendix leads to the
following two nondimensional empirical equations in sym-
bolic form:
Cavg
32U=D
¼ f Reð Þ; ð1Þ
mI
CavgD2

U
¼ g Cavg
2U=D
;
Cu
Cavg
 
: ð2Þ
The symbols ‘‘f ’’ and ‘‘g’’ imply mathematical relationships
that are to be determined from experimental and comput-
er simulation data. For fixed tablet shape and orientation,
the nondimensional surface shear stress, Cavg/(2U/D), is
mathematically related only to the tablet flow Reynolds
number, Re = >UD/2, and we estimate this mathematical
relationship from data generated with computer simulation.
The symbol ‘‘g’’ in Eq. (2) implies a mathematical rela-
tionship between nondimensionalized mass erosion rate
mI

CavgD
2

U
 
mI , nondimensional surface shear stress Cavg/
1219In Vitro and Numerical Study of Drug Release
(2U/D), and nondimensional ‘‘ultimate shear stress’’ Cu/Cavg.
We estimate the mathematical function g with data from
combined in vitro experimental measurements of mI and
computer simulation ‘‘measurement’’ of Cavg. All data were
collected for tablets in flows with different 2 and U, but fixed
orientation, size D and material property Cu.
Once we have determined the mathematical relationship
for mI

CavgD
2

U
 
, we multiply by CavgD
2/U to obtain an
equation from which mass erosion rate mI can be predicted
from Cavg, D, U, and 2 for the specific ER tablet geometry
and formulation measured, at the two measured orientations,
and over the range of Reynolds numbers covered by the
experimental and numerical data used. This final result is the
‘‘tablet erosion model.’’ The great advantage is that, whereas
the data were collected for specific viscosities, tablet sizes
and beaker rotations rates, once the mathematical functions in
Eqs. (1) and (2) are found and the accuracy verified (for
specific tablet material structure and orientation), the tablet
erosion model can be used to ‘‘generate’’ data for any va-
riations in tablet diameter, medium viscosity, and relative
tablet velocity, so long as the Reynolds numbers and shear
stresses are within the range for which the data were collected.
RESULTS
Fluid Flow and Shear Stress on Tablet Surface
Figure 3 shows the streamlines around an ER tablet at
orientations A and B in the rotating beaker computed with
Fig. 5. Local and average shear stress on the tablet surface. (A) Bars show the range of local shear stress and the middle lines give the average
surface shear stress. (B)Y(D) Variations in local ranges of shear stress (Crange = Cmax j Cmin) and average shear stress (Cavg) with flow velocity at
three viscosities of 20 cp, 200 cp, and 500 cp.
1220 Abrahamsson et al.
numerical simulation, at Reynolds numbers 36.9 and 1.5. In
orientation A the flow pattern around the tablet is similar at
the two Reynolds numbers. However, in position B the flow
pattern is very different: whereas the streamlines remain
attached to the trailing side of the tablet at Re = 1.5, at Re 37
the streamlines separate from the sides and form an eddy on
the back of the tablet.
Like the flow pattern, the local shear stresses on the
tablet surface are also different in different orientations, as
shown in Fig. 4 by the isocontours of local shear stress
painted on the tablet surface (Re = 36.7). The darker and
lighter regions indicate relatively higher and lower surface
shear stress, respectively. Similar results are obtained at other
Reynolds numbers. Note the high variability in local shear
stress over the tablet surface for both orientations A and B.
In orientation A, higher shear stresses are produced by the
flow on the top and bottom edges of the tablet, and relatively
lower values on the trailing edge and sides. By contrast, ori-
entation B has much higher variations in surface shear stress
with highest values on the circumferential edges and lowest
stresses near the center of the plan form tablet surfaces.
However, whereas the range of shear stresses is greater
in orientation A than B, Fig. 5 shows that the average surface
stresses are similar. In Fig. 5A the gray and black bars show
the range of local shear stress on the tablet surface (Cmax,
Cmin), while the thick central lines show average surface shear
stress Cavg, for flow velocity 11.5 cm/s (20 rpm in the in vitro
experiment) at three viscosities. In each case the range of
local surface shear stress is greater with orientation A, but
average shear stress in each orientations is comparable.
Figures 5BYD show average shear stress Cavg and the range
of local shear stress (Cmax Y Cmin) over the parameter ranges
of the in vitro experiments. In all three cases the range of
local shear stress (Crange) is higher in orientation B than A,
but the average shear stress Cavg is similar.
Tablet Erosion
The tablet erosion-time profiles obtained in the beaker
were linear as indicated by regression coefficients R2 > 0.97
in all experiments. Examples are shown in Fig. 6 for
orientations A and B. This result is consistent with in vitro
erosion and drug dissolution-time data obtained by other
methods for the same formulation (17).
In Fig. 7 percentage change of tablet mass and diameter
is plotted against time from all the experiments. Whereas the
tablet masses decreased with time, the size of the tablets
remained roughly constant because of swelling of the matrix
which balanced the mass erosion. Therefore, the volumes
(and characteristic lengths) of each tablet were approximated
as constant over time in the numerical simulations and
calculation of average surface shear stress corresponding to
the in vitro experiments.
Figure 8 presents isocontours of mass erosion rate mI and
average surface shear Cavg as a function of flow velocity U and
media viscosity 2 over the parameter space of the in
vitroYcomputer experiments with the ER tablets in orienta-
tions A and B. Both erosion rate and surface shear stress
increased with increasing viscosity and fluid velocity (beaker
rotation rate). Multiple linear regression analysis confirmed
significant influence of viscosity 2 and relative velocity U on
Fig. 6. Examples of experimental measurements that demonstrate
the high linear correlation between mass erosion and time for tablets
X in orientations A and B, as indicated by figure numbers A and B,
respectively. Similar linear erosion-time profiles were obtained in all
tablet erosion experiments with R2 > 0.97.
Fig. 7. Changes in tablet mass and diameter D (cube root of tablet
volume) with time for each in vitro experiment. Although tablet mass
reduces with time, tablet diameter remains within T20%, indicating
that absorption of water into the gel layer roughly compensates for
volume lost by mass erosion during the period of the experiment.
1221In Vitro and Numerical Study of Drug Release
mass erosion rate (p < 0.001). However no interaction be-
tween these two factors was found, and tablet orientation did
not significantly affect the tablet erosion rate (p > 0.05),
consistent with the numerical experiments where very similar
average shear stresses on the tablet surface were obtained for
orientations A and B (Fig. 5).
Figure 8 suggests a correlation between tablet erosion
rate and average surface shear stress with varying U and 2.
This correlation is shown explicitly in Fig. 9 for formulations
X and Y, where mI (normalized by the lowest erosion rate) is
plotted against Cavg regardless of fluid viscosity, flow velocity,
or tablet orientation. The linear correlations between mI and
Cavg were very high (R
2 = 0.93 and 0.89 for tablets X and Y,
respectively). Tablet Y degraded a great deal more rapidly
than did tablet X for the same levels of surface shear, and the
rate of increase in mass erosion rate with surface shear was
much more pronounced with tablet Y than X (over the range
of shear stress measured, mI increased by a factor of 10 for
tablet Y and a factor of 4 for tablet X). The more robust
response of tablet X to surface shear, as compared to tablet
Y, is consistent with in vivo observations of more rapid tablet
degradation and drug uptake with tablet Y when taken
concomitant with food, as compared to tablet X (4,11).
Tablet Erosion Model for Tablet X
Following the procedure described in Materials and
Methods and outlined in the Appendix, we first determined
the mathematical form of the function ‘‘f ’’ in equation (1)
using data from a series of computer simulations developed
to replicate each in vitro experiment. From these data we
plotted Cavg/(2U/D) against Re and fit the data points with the
following parametric form:
Cavg
2U=D
¼ B1Re B2 þ B3 ln Reð Þ½ : ð3Þ
With the least-squares best-fit coefficients B1, B2, and B3
given in Table I for tablet orientations A and B, the accuracy
of the fit is nearly perfect (R2 > 0.99). Equation (3) is valid
for all ellipsoidal shaped tablets with Reynolds number in the
range Re  0.1 to 50. The difference in the coefficients B1,
B2, and B3 for orientations A and B is only 5Y17%, (Table I)
confirming the weak influence of tablet orientation on
average surface shear stress suggested by Fig. 5.
To determine the empirical function g in Eq. (2) we
plotted mI

CavgD
2

U
 
against Cavg/(2U/D) and Cavg (using
Fig. 8. Grayscale isocontours of rate of mass erosion rate dm/dt from in vitro experiments, and average shear stress Cavg
from computer simulation, as a function of relative flow velocity U and fluid viscosity 2, for tablets in positions A and B,
as indicated. Erosion rate and shear stress increase with increasing U and 2 in a similar manner.
1222 Abrahamsson et al.
isocontours as in Fig. 8) from the data for tablet X, and fit the
resulting surface with a polynomial up to second order in
Cavg/(2U/D) and Cavg. The resulting expression was then mul-
tiplied by CavgD
2/U to produce the ‘‘tablet erosion model’’ for
tablet X:
mI ¼ CavgD
2
U
"
C1
Cavg
2U=D
 2
þ C 02C2avg þC 03
C2avg
2U=D
 !
þ C4

Cavg
2U=D

þ C 05Cavg þ C6
#
ð4Þ
The coefficients C1, C2
0,..., generated through least squares
fit, are given in Table I (R2 = 0.98). Note that, because Cu is
an unknown constant for all experiments with the same
formulation, dimensional Cavg was fit rather than nondimen-
sional Cavg/Cu, resulting in three of the coefficients, C2
0, C30,
and C5
0, being dimensional because they incorporate Cu (see
Table I).
The accuracy of the mass erosion model for tablet X is
shown by the open circles in Fig. 9, generated with Eq. (4)
and the coefficients in Table I at the same conditions as the
experimental data points. Whereas linear regression on the
data demonstrated strong correlation between mI and Cavg,
Fig. 9 shows that erosion rates increase with surface shear
stress much more rapidly at low stress (Cavg < 35 dyne/cm
2)
than at higher stresses (Cavg 35Y600 dyne/cm2). A linear
regression line does not capture the low stress behavior, which
appears to be relatively independent of formulation type. The
mass erosion model, on the other hand, captures both low and
high surface shear behavior well. The data and model
calculations for tablet X in Fig. 9 were over nearly a factor of
4 in viscosity. Yet the points do not deviate significantly from
what is clearly a strong correlation between erosion rate and
shear stress. We conclude that there is, at best, a weak
influence of viscosity on the correlation between erosion rate
and shear stress, captured by the model.
Comparison with USP I
We compared the tablet mass erosion rates for tablet X
tested in a standard USP I dissolution apparatus with the
current data obtained in a controlled environment calibrated
to hydrodynamic conditions relevant to the ER tablets in
the fed stomach (Fig. 10). The erosion rates in the USP I
apparatus were obtained, as is standard, in water at 25Y100
rpm. Whereas the rates of mass erosion measured in the
current apparatus were in the range 9.5Y59 2g/s, the USP I
device measured mass erosion rates of only 5.9Y9.5 2g/s, a
Fig. 10. Ranges of mass erosion rates measured in the USP I
apparatus as compared with the current physiologically oriented
experimental procedure with a rotating beaker.Fig. 9. Correlation of tablet mass erosion rates mI for tablets X and
Y normalized by the lowest erosion rate mI , with average surface
shear stress. For tablet X mI 0 ¼ 9:5 2g=s; and for tablet Y mI 0 ¼
10:2 2g=s:
Table I. Coefficients of Tablet Erosion Model Relationships. C1YC6
with Eq. (4) are Appropriate Only for Tablet X, while B1YB3 with
Eq. (3) are Applicable to Any Ellipsoidal Tablet
Model coefficients Orientation A Orientation B
B1 3.83 3.35
B2 8.08  10j2 8.52  10j2
B3 3.12  10j2 3.78  10j2
C1 3.76  10j8 j2.25  10j7
C2
0 (cm4/dyne2)a 1.10  10j11 1.02  10j11
C2
0 (cm2/dyne)a j4.08  10j9 j7.97  10j9
C4 3.86  10j6 6.23  10j6
C5
0 (cm2/dyne)a 3.58  10j9 1.38  10j8
C6 j8.22  10j6 j1.09  10j5
a As discussed in Results, the fitted coefficients C2
0 , C3
0 , and C5
0 [Eq.
(4)] incorporate the ultimate shear stress, Cu. The corresponding
nondimensional coefficients C2, C3, C5 are related to the dimen-
sional coefficients by C2
0 = C2/Cu2 , C3
0 = C3/Cu, C5
0 = C2/Cu.
1223In Vitro and Numerical Study of Drug Release
narrow range below even the mildest conditions in the
current experiments. We conclude that other in vitro test
designs are necessary to approximate the in vivo tablet
environment.
DISCUSSION
We have developed a unique experimental procedure
that combines numerical simulation with in vitro experiment
to measure rates of mass erosion of hydrophilic matrix ER
tablets in a flow environment designed to approximate the
mechanical state of ER tablets in the fed stomach. We have
taken advantage, in our experimental design, of both the
strengths and the weaknesses of laboratory experiment vs.
computer simulation. Whereas mass erosion rates are readily
measured in vitro, measurement of shear stress on the gel
layer surface of hydrophilic tablets is not feasible. On the
other hand, computer simulation with modern physics-based
numerical methods can predict surface stress accurately, but
cannot predict surface erosion of arbitrary tablet formula-
tions. We therefore combined the two approaches into a
strategy in which tablet erosion is measured in a specially
designed in vitro apparatus concurrently with ‘‘measure-
ment’’ of tablet surface shear stress with an equivalent
computer simulation. We have also used computer simula-
tion to establish an in vitro test matrix designed to
approximate the surface shear stresses and flow conditions
experienced by ER tablets within the fed stomach. With this
coupled experimentalYnumerical strategy we measured tablet
erosion rates on two specific ER tablet formulations with
fixed geometry and orientation as a function of surface shear
stress, relative tablet speed, and medium viscosity at flow
conditions relevant to the fed gastric environment. This first-
of-its-kind study demonstrates that coupled computer and
laboratory experiments are both useful and feasible when
fluid and dissolution dynamics interact.
This study has verified that mass erosion, and thereby
drug release of a low soluble compound, from hydrophilic
matrix ER tablets are highly correlated (R2 = 0.93 and 0.89)
to the average shear stress acting on the tablet gel-layer
surface (3). Interestingly, tablet orientation has only a minor
influence on the correlations, while the material composition
of the formulation can strongly alter the rate at which erosion
increases with increasing surface shear stress (Fig. 9).
However, when examined in more detail, our measurements
on two tablets with very different material properties indicate
very different erosion-stress correlation at ‘‘low’’ vs.
‘‘high’’ surface shear stresses, below/above roughly 35 dyne/
cm2. At ‘‘low’’ surface shear stresses, the rate of tablet
erosion increased much more rapidly with increasing shear
stress than at higher surface stresses, however, in a manner
independent of tablet structure. At higher stresses (> roughly
35 dyne/cm2), erosion rates were much higher than at low
stresses and erosive behaviour was strongly dependent on
tablet structure.
This low-stress/high-stress dichotomy is interesting be-
cause computer model simulations of ER tablets in the fed
stomach (11) suggest that the most probable average surface
stresses, those which wear the tablet surface gradually over
long periods of time, are below roughly 40 dyne/cm2. The
current results suggest that this long-time slow degradation of
the tablet surface may be independent of tablet structure.
The higher stresses are less frequent and degrade the tablet
surface much more vigorously for shorter periods of time, but
do so in a strongly material-dependent manner.
This dual lowYhigh stress behavior is captured well by
the tablet erosion model [Eq. (4)], an accurate empirical
equation than predicts the tablet erosion rate of an ellipsoidal
tablet with the material structure of tablet X but of arbitrary
size D, from specified surface shear stress, relative tablet
speed, and medium viscosity. Whereas Eq. (4) is specific to a
particular material tablet structure, the mathematical rela-
tionship (3) is valid for all ellipsoidal tablets regardless of
material composition. With the equation one can predict
shear stress on the tablet surface from any specified tablet
size and speed, and medium viscosity and density as long as
Re < 60. On the other hand, the tablet erosion model includes
the strong linear correlation between mass erosion rate and
surface shear stress given by the data (Fig. 9), it predicts the
nonlinear interaction between erosion rate and surface stress,
and also contains (weaker) dependencies on tablet speed and
medium viscosity not included in the linear regression.
The range of shear stresses on ER tablets in the fed
stomach is very wide, and consequently tablet erosion rates
varied by factors of 4Y10 over the physiologically relevant
range. This is an important observation that requires
attention in the design of specific formulations in order to
minimize the impact on drug plasma profiles of concomitant
ingestion of food. Interestingly, the present in vitro method
was able to discriminate between tablets that previously had
shown different food sensitivities on tablet erosion that were
attributed to hydrodynamic factors (3,5,18). These studies
suggest that the differentiation between the tablets not
apparent at lower shear stresses, is apparent at higher shear
stresses, suggesting that the exposure to high intragastric
shear stress in the stomach is sufficiently long to influence
overall erosion-time profiles. For this reason, testing by the
present method at high shear forces might be useful as a
screening tool in early formulation development or as a pilot
test to a bioequivalence investigation.
We have shown (Fig. 10) that the rates of erosion
measured in the standard way in a USP I device produce
significantly lower rates of tablet erosion, and therefore
lower levels of shear stress, than does our current experi-
ment, which was designed to approximate in vivo levels. We
conclude that the more intense shear stresses experienced by
a tablet in the fed stomach are not produced with the USP I
method. Similar testing in a USP II device was not performed
because that apparatus is not suitable for hydrophilic matrix
tablets, in part owing to the risk of tablet adhesion to the
beaker wall, and in part owing to the nonphysiological flow
within the device (16). In contrast, the new experimental
approach described here produces both the higher magni-
tudes of surface shear encountered in vivo (Fig. 5), and
laminar flows dynamically similar to gastric fluid motions
(Fig. 3). Another important advantage of our rotating beaker
method over all pharmacopeial methods is the highly con-
trolled hydrodynamic environment it provides, a prerequisite
for accurate computer simulation and calculation of surface
shear stress.
Although advantageous in its ability to replicate the
physiological state, the current rotating beaker method is not
1224 Abrahamsson et al.
without limitations that warrant scrutiny in future designs.
With the current apparatus, for example, only monolithic
matrix formulations can be tested. On the other hand, this is
the most relevant dosage form for formulations in which drug
release is strongly dependent on shear-induced surface
erosion. A more practical limitation, however, is that
dissolved drug does not distribute uniformly in the bulk of
the dissolution medium as the tablet degrades. A nonuniform
distribution of felodipine in the beaker was experimentally
verified by traversing an UV probe through the beaker
during the experiment. Thus, because of the nonuniform
concentration of felodipine, the continuous measurement of
tablet mass using UV detection of felodipine was not
possible. Instead the loss of tablet dry weight was determined
after removal of the tablet.
In conclusion, in vitro dissolution testing is now possible
under highly controlled hydrodynamic conditions at a flow
and with tablet surface shear stresses within the physiological
range of the fed stomach. The rate-limiting nature of tablet
surface stress for tablet erosion and drug release from
hydrophilic matrix ER tablets have been verified and an
empirical relationships from which mass erosion rate can be
predicted for the formulations tested and surface stress is
predicted for any ellipsoidal particle have been developed.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by AstraZeneca. We are very
grateful to Ms. Lena Wejkum for her contributions to the
experiments on tablet Y.
APPENDIX
Development of the ‘‘Tablet Erosion Model’’
To develop the tablet erosion model we applied a
systematic procedure that exists in the engineering literature
for developing empirical mathematical relationships be-
tween an ‘‘independent variable,’’ here the mass erosion
rate mI ; and the ‘‘dependent variables’’ that affect mass
erosion rate (shear stress, relative velocity, fluid viscosity,
etc.). This procedure is a combination of ‘‘similarity theory’’
and ‘‘dimensional analysis.’’ We can only briefly summarize
the method here. The reader should refer to standard
textbooks in fluid dynamics (21) for further details.
Two different flows around two different tablets are
‘‘similar’’ if the flow patterns around the tablets are the same.
This requires, among other things, that the geometry and
orientation of the two tablets in the flow be the same. The
tablet size, which we define with D, need not be the same.
Neither does the velocity U of the flow relative to the tablet,
the fluid viscosity 2, nor the fluid density > have to be the
same to produce the same flow pattern (‘‘similarity’’). Using
a process called ‘‘dimensional analysis’’ (21), however, it can
be shown that the flow patterns will be the same only if a
specific combination of 2, >, U, and D, given by the
‘‘Reynolds number’’ Re = (>UD/2), is the same between the
two flows.
We applied ‘‘similarity theory’’ with ‘‘dimensional anal-
ysis’’ to generalize the development of empirical mathemat-
ical relationships from data. We first argued that, for fixed
orientation and tablet shape, average surface shear stress Cavg
depends only on relative flow velocity U, tablet size D, and
fluid properties viscosity 2 and density >. Dimensional
analysis leads to the result that an appropriately nondimen-
sionalized Cavg depends only on Reynolds number. In other
words, given sufficient data, we develop a mathematical
equation to fit the symbolic form,
Cavg
2U=D
¼ f >UD
2
 
¼ f Reð Þ: ðA1Þ
Dimensional analysis leads to 2U/D being the appropriate
nondimensionalization for Cavg, and the symbol ‘‘f ’’ implies a
mathematical relationship between Cavg/(2U/D) and Re =
>UD/2 that is to be determined from experimental data.
In this work we generated this data from computer simu-
lations that replicate the in vitro flow. The important point
from Eq. (A1) is that to determine an empirical mathemat-
ical relationship between Cavg, and the variables U, 2, D, and
>, we need not vary each of the four dependent variables (U,
2, D, >) separately. In this study we vary only 2 and U (for
fixed D and >) to collect data from which we empirically
estimate the mathematical relationship ( f ) between the two
nondimensional variables Cavg/(2U/D) and Re = >UD/2. Once
done, multiplication of right-hand side of the empirical
mathematical expression for f by 2U/D produces a mathe-
matical relationship between dimensional Cavg and U, 2, D,
and >.
We applied the same procedure to develop the form of
the mathematical relationship between an appropriately non-
dimensionalized mass erosion rate by arguing that, for fixed
tablet shape and orientation, mI depends only on average
surface shear stress Cavg, tablet size D, relative tablet velocity
U, a material surface parameter Cu (see Materials and Meth-
ods), and fluid properties 2 and >. The dimensional analysis
procedure leads to the following symbolic relationship:
mI
CavgD2

U
¼ h Cavg
2U=D
; Re;
Cu
Cavg
 
: ðA2Þ
Here dimensional analysis lead to the result that mass ero-
sion rate, nondimensionalized by CavgD
2/U, can be written as
a mathematical expression ‘‘h’’ that contains
Cavg
2U=D ; Re and
Cu/Cavg. In this work we determined this mathematical
relationship by combining experimental and computer
simulation data.
However, we can reduce Eq. (A2) to a simpler form.
Assuming that (A1) is uniquely invertible, we replace Re in
(A2) with a function that depends only on
Cavg
2U=D , producing
the following reduced form:
mI
CavgD2

U
¼ g Cavg
2U=D
;
Cu
Cavg
 
: ðA3Þ
Here ‘‘g’’ implies a mathematical relationship between
mI

CavgD
2

U
 
, Cavg/(2U/D), and Cu/Cavg that we determine
through data obtained by combining in vitro experimental
measurements of mI with computer simulation ‘‘measure-
ment’’ of Cavg, for tablets in flows with different 2 and U,
but with fixed orientation, size D and material property Cu.
1225In Vitro and Numerical Study of Drug Release
From the mathematical form of g, the tablet erosion model is
obtained by multiplying g by CavgD
2/U.
REFERENCES
1. A. Lindahl, A. L. Ungell, L. Knutson, and H. Lennernas.
Characterization of fluids from the stomach and proximal
jejunum in men and women. Pharm. Res. 14:497Y502 (1997).
2. J. B. Dressman, G. L. Amidon, C. Reppas, and V. P. Shah.
Dissolution testing as a prognostic tool for oral drug absorp-
tion: immediate release dosage forms. Pharm. Res. 15:11Y22
(1998).
3. B. Abrahamsson, K. Roos, and J. Sjogren. Investigation of
prandial effects on hydrophilic matrix tablets. Drug Dev. Ind.
Pharm. 25:765Y771 (1999).
4. D. A. Alderman. Review of cellulose ethers in hydrophilic
matrices for oral controlled-release dosage forms. Int. J. Pharm.
Technol. Prod. Manuf. 5:1Y9 (1984).
5. B. Abrahamsson, M. Alpsten, B. Bake, U. E. Jonsson, M.
Eriksson-Lepkowska, and A. Larsson. Drug absorption from
nifedipine hydrophilic matrix extended-release (ER) tablet-
comparison with an osmotic pump tablet and effect of food. J.
Control. Release 52:301Y310 (1998).
6. M. Kamba, Y. Seta, A. Kusai, M. Ikeda, and K. Nishimura. A
unique dosage form to evaluate the mechanical destructive force
in the gastrointestinal tract. Int. J. Pharm. 208:61Y70 (2000).
7. L. E. Dahlinder, C. Graffner, and J. Sjogren. Strength of the
insoluble residues of plastic matrix slow release tablets (Duret-
ter) in vitro and in vivo. Acta Pharm. Suec. 10:323Y332 (1973).
8. M. Shameem, N. Katori, N. Aoyagi, and S. Kojima. Oral solid
controlled release dosage forms: role of GI-mechanical de-
structive forces and colonic release in drug absorption under
fasted and fed conditions in humans. Pharm. Res. 12:1049Y1054
(1995).
9. B. Abrahamsson, M. Alpsten, B. Bake, A. Larsson, and J.
Sjogren. In vitro and in vivo erosion of two different hydrophilic
gel matrix tablets. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 46:69Y75 (1998).
10. A. Pal, K. Indireshkumar, W. Schwizer, B. Abrahamsson, M.
Fried and J. G. Brasseur, Gastric flow and mixing studied using
computer simulation. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 271
(2004).
11. A. Pal, B. Abrahamsson, W. Schwizer, G. S. Hebbard, and J. G.
Brasseur. Application of a virtual stomach to evaluate gas-
tric mixing and breakdown of solid food. Gastroenterology
124:A673YA674 (2003).
12. R. L. Panton. Incompressible Flow, John Wiley & Sons, New
York, 1996.
13. K. Indireshkumar, J. G. Brasseur, H. Faas, G. S. Hebbard, P.
Kunz, J. Dent, C. Feinle, M. J. Li, P. Boesiger, M. Fried, and
W. Schwizer. Relative contributions of ‘‘pressure pump’’ and
‘‘peristaltic pump’’ to gastric emptying. Am. J. Physiol. Gas-
terointest. Liver Physiol. 278:G604YG616 (2000).
14. N. Pallotta, M. Cicala, C. Frandina, and E. Corazziari. Antro-
pyloric contractile patterns and transpyloric flow after meal
ingestion in humans. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 93:2513Y2522 (1998).
15. J. L. Baxter, J. Kukura, and F. J. Muzzio. Hydrodynamics-
induced variability in the USP apparatus II dissolution test. Int.
J. Pharm. 292:17Y28 (2005).
16. J. Kukura, J. L. Baxter, and F. J. Muzzio. Shear distribution and
variability in the USP Apparatus 2 under turbulent conditions.
Int. J. Pharm. 279:9Y17 (2004).
17. K. Wingstrand, B. Abrahamsson, and B. Edgar. Bioavailability
from felodipine extended-release tablets with different dissolu-
tion properties. Int. J. Pharm. 60:151Y156 (1990).
18. B. Abrahamsson, M. Alpsten, M. Hugosson, U. E. Jonsson, M.
Sundgren, A. Svenheden, and J. Tolli. Absorption, gastrointes-
tinal transit, and tablet erosion of felodipine extended-release
(ER) tablets. Pharm. Res. 10:709Y714 (1993).
19. L. Karlson, S. Nilsson, and K. Thuresson. Rheology of an
aqueous solution of an end-capped poly(ethylene glycol) poly-
mer at high concentration. Colloid Polym. Sci. 277:798Y804
(1999).
20. J. D. Sartor and C. E. Abbott. Prediction and measurement
of the accelerated motion of water drops in the air. J. Appl.
Meteorol. 14:232Y239 (1975).
21. F. M. White. Fluid Mechanics, McGraw-Hill, Boston, 2003.
1226 Abrahamsson et al.
