MetaRouter: bioinformatics for bioremediation
Florencio Pazos*, David Guijas1, Alfonso Valencia2 and Victor De Lorenzo2
Department of Biological Sciences, Structural Bioinformatics Group, Biochemistry Building, Imperial College,
London SW7 2AZ, UK, 1bioALMA, Centro Empresarial Euronova, Ronda de Poniente, 4, 2nd floor, Unit C-D,
28760 Tres Cantos, Madrid, Spain and 2National Center for Biotechnology, Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain
Received August 14, 2004; Revised and Accepted October 5, 2004
ABSTRACT
Bioremediation, the exploitation of biological cata-
lysts (mostly microorganisms) for removing pollut-
ants from the environment, requires the integration
of huge amounts of data from different sources. We
havedevelopedMetaRouter, a system formaintaining
heterogeneous information related to bioremediation
in a framework that allows its query, administration
andmining (applicationofmethods forextractingnew
knowledge). MetaRouter is an application intended
for laboratories working in biodegradation and bio-
remediation, which need to maintain and consult
public and private data, linked internally and with
external databases, and to extract new information
from it. Among the data-mining features is a program
included for locating biodegradative pathways for
chemical compounds according to a given set of con-
straints and requirements. The integration of bio-
degradation information with the corresponding
protein and genome data provides a suitable frame-
work for studying the global properties of the bio-
remediation network. The system can be accessed
and administrated through a web interface. The full-
featured system (except administration facilities) is
freely available at http://pdg.cnb.uam.es/MetaRouter.
Additional material: http://www.pdg.cnb.uam.es/
biodeg_net/MetaRouter.
INTRODUCTION
Some microorganisms have acquired the ability to catabolize
chemical compounds that do not form part of their central
metabolism as they face them in the environment (1). This
is being exploited for developing strategies aimed at the
cleanup of pollutant compounds from soils and waters
(bioremediation) (2).
Bioremediation offers many interesting possibilities from
a bioinformatics point of view still slightly explored. This
discipline requires the integration of huge amounts of data
from various sources: chemical structure and reactivity of
organic compounds; sequence, structure and function of
proteins (enzymes); comparative genomics; environmental
microbiology; and so on. The accumulation of huge amounts
of data on individual genes and proteins allowed the first
studies of biology from a ‘Systems’ perspective (3–7). From
this point of view, biological systems are modeled as being
composed of components in complex relationships whose
ultimate properties cannot be understood by studying these
components separately and later ‘summing’ their properties,
but only by studying the system as a whole. In a similar
manner, data related to bioremediation (genome sequences,
structures of chemical compounds, enzyme sequences and
structures, etc.) are being accumulated in public databases (8).
This allows the first studies of bioremediation from a Systems
Biology perspective (9,10), which complement the traditional
approach focused on individual components (microorganisms,
enzymes, etc.). The bioinformatics resources devoted to bio-
remediation are still scarce. Some interesting projects are
being carried out to organize and store this huge amount
of information related to this subject, The University of
Minnesota Biocatalysis/Biodegradation Database (UMBBD)
(8) being the more prominent resource.
Here we present MetaRouter, a system for maintaining
heterogeneous information related to bioremediation and bio-
degradation in a framework that allows its updating, query,
modification and mining. The core of the system is a relational
database where the information on chemical compounds,
reactions, enzymes and organisms is stored in an integrated
framework. MetaRouter allows not only to interactively
consult the database but also to formulate new questions
with associated programs that run on top of the database.
THE DATABASE AND THE WEB INTERFACE
The current set of data include 740 chemical compounds (2167
synonyms), 820 reactions, 502 enzymes and 253 organisms.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +44 0 20 7594 5737; Fax: +44 0 20 7594 5789; Email: f.pazos@imperial.ac.uk
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use permissions, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org.
ª 2005, the authors
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 33, Database issue ª Oxford University Press 2005; all rights reserved
D588–D592 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gki068
For the chemical compounds, the following information is
included: name, synonyms, SMILES code, molecular weight,
chemical formula, image of the chemical structure, canonical
three-dimensional structure in PDB format, physicochemical
properties (density, evaporation rate, melting point, boiling
point and water solubility—the user can define and insert
new ones) and links to other databases. For the reactions:
substrates and products, catalyzing enzyme and links to
other databases. For the enzymes: name, Enzyme Commission
(EC) code, organisms where the gene is present, database
sequence identifiers and links to other databases. The main
public sources of information for obtaining the initial set of
data were UMBBD (8), ENZYME (11) and Swiss-Prot (12).
The core database uses the PostgreSQL relational database
management system. This database can directly be inter-
rogated at the low level by the user using SQL queries or
via data-mining programs. The system includes a web inter-
face that allows to consult the database or to use the programs
through standard web forms and to display the results in an
interactive graphical way (Figure 1). A menu on the left-hand
side of the interface, with the headings ‘Reactions’, ‘Com-
pounds’ and ‘Enzymes’ provides a convenient way to start
searching and browsing the database. It is possible to search
for compounds, reactions or enzymes according to any of the
properties described in the previous paragraph. Although it is
not possible to make complex queries about the structure of
chemical compounds, since the SMILES string contains a
linear description of that structure, it can be used to perform
some simple limited structural queries. In the representations
of the results, all the elements (e.g. enzymes, reactions and
chemical compounds) are active links that lead to other sec-
tions in the database or to external public resources. For exam-
ple, in the pages containing information on chemical reactions,
the substrates and products are linked to the corresponding
pages with information on chemical compounds. Similarly,
the enzymes are linked to the corresponding enzyme pages
which in turn contain links to the entries for those enzymes in
external sequence databases, like Swiss-Prot (12) and so on.
The client/server architecture allows the system to run in
a central server and be used simultaneously by any number
of clientmachineswith the requirement of a standardwebbrow-
ser. For local/private installations of the system, a distinction
between normal users and administrators (the ones who can
modify the database) is incorporated. The administrator can
addnew information (for example, new reactions or compounds
discovered/isolated in his/her laboratory) filling web forms in
the web interface. Working with the system at a lower level
(below theweb interface) it is possible to incorporate new infor-
mation on a large scale, for example, writing scripts to insert the
full metabolism [KEGG (13)] into the SQL database.
A context-sensitive HTML-based help system is included.
DATA MINING
The current system for extracting new information from the
database allows locating biodegradative pathways for an
individual compound or a set of compounds. That is, it enables
finding pathways between those compounds and the central
metabolism. [We obtain the definition of ‘central metabolism’
from UMBBD (8). In general, it must correspond to all the
pathways in KEGG (13) apart from ‘biodegradation of
xenobiotics’.] The system also permits to find pathways
between one compound and another (or between two sets
of compounds). The representation of possible pathways
can be restricted according to a number of criteria: length
of the pathway, all the required enzymes present in a given
organism(s), all the intermediate compounds having a range
of values for a given property (e.g. highly soluble), etc. The
pathways are displayed together in a versatile representation
where the user can choose what to see (compound names only
or images of the chemical structures, synonyms, properties,
formula, enzymes, etc.); and where the chemical compounds,
reactions and enzymes can be colored according to their pro-
perties. All the elements in the representation (compounds,
enzymes, reactions) are hyperlinked to the corresponding
information pages in MetaRouter database. This system allows
the exploration and design of biodegradative strategies for
chemical compounds depending on conditions such as envir-
onment, bacterial ecosystem and others (see Figure 2 and
Additional Material). Although a similar system for locating
pathways is available at UMBBD (8), the one presented here
provides graphical and more versatile representations and also
additional features like the selection/restriction of pathways.
ADDITIONAL FEATURES
The system is designed in such a way that it is easy to incor-
porate other data-mining programs to perform more complex
studies of the biodegradation network. This allows, among
others, the characterization of the properties of the network
from a Systems perspective (9), the generation of interactive
representations of the whole network to visualize its global
properties (see Additional Material) and the development of
a system for predicting the biodegradative fate of chemical
compounds based on their chemical structure that has been
trained with the information present in the database
(Gomez,M.J., manuscript in preparation). We intend to
include access to many of these features in the web interface
of the system.
DISCUSSION
The rise of genomic technologies and Systems Biology pro-
vide fresh approaches to currently untractable biological pro-
cesses that are at the root of serious environmental problems.
One formidable challenge in this respect is the biological fate
of the nearly 8 million new chemical compounds (40 000
predominant) which modern Organic and Industrial Chemistry
has placed in the Biosphere. A large number of microbial
strains are able to grow on environmental pollutants (about
800 today). Bioremediation was studied from a molecular
biology point of view, characterizing the chemical reactions,
genes, operons, etc. implicated in this process. The Biodegra-
dation database of the University of Minnesota (8) has made a
pioneering effort in putting together nearly every aspect of our
current knowledge on biodegradation pathways and in devel-
oping systems for dealing with that data [e.g. to learn rules for
predicting biodegradative features (14)]. Yet, most infor-
mation available in the literature of microbial biodegradation
of xenobiotics and recalcitrant chemicals deals with duos
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D589
Figure 1.MetaRouter web interface. Some screenshots of a typical session using MetaRouter through its web interface are shown. All the dynamic HTML pages
generated querying the database or using the system for locating pathways are linked between themselves and with external databases. (1) Searching for reactions;
(2) reaction information; (3) chemical compound information; (4) chemical compound canonical 3D structure; (5) enzyme information; (6) linking to external
databases; (7) possible pathways for the biodegradation of Atrazine; (8) controlling the representation of biodegradative pathways; and (9) editing the properties of a
chemical compound.
D590 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
Figure 2. Biodegradative pathways for toluene (methyl-benzene) detected and represented with MetaRouter. The full network of possible pathways is represented
displaying only the names of the chemical compounds. The subset of pathways that can be carried out by Pseudomonas putida is shown inside the central square
displaying the enzymes, and coloring chemical compounds according to their water solubility and reactions according to the first digit of the EC code of the enzyme.
The bottom-right square shows the shortest possible pathway for toluene degradation. The central metabolism is represented by a green circle.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D591
consisting of one pollutant versus one strain and thus, lacks
essential aspects of the natural scenarios, like the interchange
of genes between bacteria (15) or their metabolic cooperation
(16,17). This study of genomes and ‘functionomes’ from a
community point of view (in contrast to organism point of
view) is leading, for example, to the sequencing of ‘genomes’
of communities and ecosystems (18), instead of single organ-
isms. These circumstances expose the need to qualify and to
represent the information available in biodegradation data-
bases in a fashion in which the entire known biodegradative
potential of the microbial world can be crossed with the whole
collection of compounds known to be partially or totally
degraded through (mostly) bacterial action.
The database presented in this work constitutes a step
towards the integration of heterogeneous sources of infor-
mation related to bioremediation. Moreover, the associated
querying and mining systems allow to extract new information
from those data. The integration of heterogeneous data
related to biodegradation from different sources was critical,
for example, in proposing an evolutionary scenario for the
biodegradation network (9). In that case, phylogenetic distri-
butions of enzymes were compared with distances to the cen-
tral metabolism. None of these two sets of data alone could
have been used to address that problem.
The system presented here can help in assessing the envir-
onmental fate of compounds or mixtures and in designing
biodegradative strategies for them. Among our future
prospects are a plan to include in MetaRouter a system for
predicting biodegradative pathways for new compounds not
present in the database, the possibility of more advanced
queries on chemical structures, links to MedLine and other
databases, and an easy interface for studying and representing
the global properties of the bioremediation network.
Available at the MetaRouter website, http://pdg.cnb.uam.es/
biodeg_net/MetaRouter, are additional screenshots, more
examples of biodegradative pathways, documentation of the
system with a full description of its capabilities, examples of
representations of the whole bioremediation network and its
properties and information on how to access the system.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We want to acknowledge bioALMA’s staff and Konrad
Paszkiewicz (IC) for fruitful discussions, Jose Marı´a
Fernandez (CNB) for technical support, and the members of
AlfonsoValencia’s laboratory (CNB), in particular thosework-
ing in biodegradation (Manuel Gomez and Almudena Trigo)
and Victor De Lorenzo’s laboratory (CNB), especially Amalia
Mu~noz, for testing the program and giving feedback.
Metarouter represents data derived, with permission, from
The University of Minnesota Biocatalysis/Biodegradation
Database (UM-BBD; http://umbbd.ahc.umn.edu/), obtained
on May, 2002.
REFERENCES
1. Parales,R.E., Bruce,N.C., Schmid,A. and Wackett,L.P. (2002)
Biodegradation, biotransformation, and biocatalysis (b3).Appl. Environ.
Microbiol., 68, 4699–4709.
2. Dua,M., Singh,A., Sethunathan,N. and Johri,A.K. (2002) Biotechnology
and bioremediation: successes and limitations. Appl. Microbiol.
Biotechnol., 59, 143–152.
3. Ideker,T., Thorsson,V., Ranish,J.A., Christmas,R., Buhler,J., Eng,J.K.,
Bumgarner,R., Goodlett,D.R., Aebersold,R. and Hood,L. (2001)
Integrated genomic and proteomic analyses of a systematically perturbed
metabolic network. Science, 292, 929–934.
4. Jeong,H., Mason,S.P., Barabasi,A.L. and Oltvai,Z.N. (2001) Lethality
and centrality in protein networks. Nature, 411, 41–42.
5. Alves,R., Chaleil,R.A.G. and Sternberg,M.J.E. (2002) Evolution of
enzymes in metabolism: a network perspective. J. Mol. Biol., 320,
751–770.
6. Fraser,H.B., Hirsh,A.E., Steinmetz,L.M., Scharfe,C. and Feldman,M.W.
(2002) Evolutionary rate in the protein interaction network. Science,
296, 750–752.
7. Rison,S.G.C. and Thornton,J.M. (2002) Pathway evolution, structurally
speaking. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., 12, 374–382.
8. Ellis,L.B., Hou,B.K., Kang,W. and Wackett,L.P. (2003) The University
of Minnesota Biocatalysis/Biodegradation Database: post-genomic
data mining. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 262–265.
9. Pazos,F., Valencia,A. and De Lorenzo,V. (2003) The organization of the
MicrobialBiodegradationNetwork from aSystems-Biology perspective.
EMBO Rep., 4, 994–999.
10. Pieper,D.H., Martins dos Santos,V.A. and Golyshin,P.N. (2004)
Genomic and mechanistic insights into the biodegradation of organic
pollutants. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 15, 215–224.
11. Bairoch,A. (2000) The ENZYME database in 2000. Nucleic Acids Res.,
28, 304–305.
12. Boeckmann,B., Bairoch,A., Apweiler,R., Blatter,M.C., Estreicher,A.,
Gasteiger,E., Martin,M.J., Michoud,K., O’Donovan,C., Phan,I. et al.
(2003) The SWISS-PROT protein knowledgebase and its supplement
TrEMBL in 2003. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 365–370.
13. Kanehisa,M., Goto,S., Kawashima,S., Okuno,Y. and Hattori,M. (2004)
The KEGG resource for deciphering the genome. Nucleic Acids Res.,
32, D277–D280.
14. Hou,B.K., Ellis,L.B. and Wackett,L.P. (2004) Encoding microbial
metabolic logic: predicting biodegradation. J. Ind. Microbiol.
Biotechnol., 31, 261–272.
15. Wilkins,B.M. (2002) Plasmid promiscuity: meeting the challenge of
DNA immigration control. Environ. Microbiol., 4, 495–500.
16. Pelz,O., Tesar,M., Wittich,R.M., Moore,E.R., Timmis,K.N. and
Abraham,W.R. (1999) Towards elucidation of microbial community
metabolic pathways: unravelling the network of carbon sharing in a
pollutant-degradingbacterial consortiumby immunocapture and isotopic
ratio mass spectrometry. Environ. Microbiol., 1, 167–174.
17. Abraham,W.R., Nogales,B., Golyshin,P.N., Pieper,D.H. and
Timmis,K.N. (2002) Polychlorinated biphenyl-degrading microbial
communities in soils and sediments. Curr. Opin. Microbiol., 5,
246–253.
18. Venter,J.C., Remington,K., Heidelberg,J.F., Halpern,A.L., Rusch,D.,
Eisen,J.A., Wu,D., Paulsen,I., Nelson,K.E., Nelson,W. et al. (2004)
Environmental genome shotgun sequencing of the Sargasso Sea.
Science, 304, 66–74.
D592 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
