  
10.1128/JVI.78.23.13197-13206.2004. 
2004, 78(23):13197. DOI:J. Virol. 
Anna E. Whitfield, Diane E. Ullman and Thomas L. German
 
NGlycoprotein G
Tomato Spotted Wilt VirusSoluble Form of 
Expression and Characterization of a
http://jvi.asm.org/content/78/23/13197
Updated information and services can be found at: 
These include:
REFERENCES
http://jvi.asm.org/content/78/23/13197#ref-list-1at: 
This article cites 64 articles, 27 of which can be accessed free
CONTENT ALERTS
 more»articles cite this article), 
Receive: RSS Feeds, eTOCs, free email alerts (when new
http://journals.asm.org/site/misc/reprints.xhtmlInformation about commercial reprint orders: 
http://journals.asm.org/site/subscriptions/To subscribe to to another ASM Journal go to: 
 o
n
 M
arch 6, 2014 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://jvi.asm.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
 o
n
 M
arch 6, 2014 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://jvi.asm.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
JOURNAL OF VIROLOGY, Dec. 2004, p. 13197–13206 Vol. 78, No. 23
0022-538X/04/$08.000 DOI: 10.1128/JVI.78.23.13197–13206.2004
Copyright © 2004, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.
Expression and Characterization of a Soluble Form of
Tomato Spotted Wilt Virus Glycoprotein GN
Anna E. Whitfield,1 Diane E. Ullman,2 and Thomas L. German1*
Departments of Entomology and Plant Pathology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin,1
and Department of Entomology, University of California, Davis, California2
Received 27 April 2004/Accepted 28 July 2004
Tomato spotted wilt virus (TSWV), a member of the Tospovirus genus within the Bunyaviridae, is an econom-
ically important plant pathogen with a worldwide distribution. TSWV is transmitted to plants via thrips
(Thysanoptera: Thripidae), which transmit the virus in a persistent propagative manner. The envelope
glycoproteins, GN and GC, are critical for the infection of thrips, but they are not required for the initial
infection of plants. Thus, it is assumed that the envelope glycoproteins play important roles in the entry of
TSWV into the insect midgut, the first site of infection. To directly test the hypothesis that GN plays a role in
TSWV acquisition by thrips, we expressed and purified a soluble, recombinant form of the GN protein (GN-S).
The expression of GN-S allowed us to examine the function of GN in the absence of other viral proteins. We
detected specific binding to thrips midguts when purified GN-S was fed to thrips in an in vivo binding assay.
The TSWV nucleocapsid protein and human cytomegalovirus glycoprotein B did not bind to thrips midguts,
indicating that the GN-S–thrips midgut interaction is specific. TSWV acquisition inhibition assays revealed
that thrips that were concomitantly fed purified TSWV and GN-S had reduced amounts of virus in their
midguts compared to thrips that were fed TSWV only. Our findings that GN-S binds to larval thrips guts and
decreases TSWV acquisition provide evidence that GN may serve as a viral ligand that mediates the attachment
of TSWV to receptors displayed on the epithelial cells of the thrips midgut.
Tomato spotted wilt virus (TSWV) is the prototypic member
of the genus Tospovirus within the family Bunyaviridae. TSWV
is a prominent plant pathogen with a worldwide distribution
and a large host range (reviewed in reference 56). The virus
infects 732 species of plants in 102 families (http://www
.oznet.ksu.edu/tospovirus/hostlist.html), resulting in enormous
annual monetary losses due to crop damage and pesticide
applications (11, 18).
The family Bunyaviridae is made up of the Tospovirus, Han-
tavirus, Nairovirus, Phlebovirus, and Bunyavirus genera. TSWV,
like all viruses in the family Bunyaviridae, has a tripartite,
negative-strand RNA genome. All of these viruses encode a
nucleocapsid (N) protein on a small (S) RNA segment, two
membrane glycoproteins on a medium (M) RNA segment, and
a large (L) protein on a large RNA segment. The glycoproteins
are derived from a polyprotein that is proteolytically processed
to yield the two glycoproteins (GPs). The GPs are designated
GN and GC based on their positions relative to the amino and
carboxy termini of the polyprotein. For most of the members of
the Bunyaviridae studied, the GN protein has a Golgi retention
sequence and the GC possesses an endoplasmic reticulum re-
tention sequence (3, 28, 39, 57). When the TSWV glycopro-
teins are expressed together, they colocalize to the Golgi, the
site of virion formation (27, 28).
TSWV is transmitted by at least seven species of thrips
(Thysanoptera: Thripidae) in a persistent, replicative manner
(64). Frankliniella occidentalis (Pergande), the Western flower
thrips, is an efficient vector of TSWV and has a wide plant host
range and a global distribution (34). Thrips acquire the virus as
first or early second instar larvae, but adult thrips that acquire
the virus are unable to transmit it (42, 62, 65). The insects
ingest the virus, and the virus enters the midgut epithelial cells,
where it replicates and spreads to surrounding muscle cells (12,
42, 62). Eventually, TSWV infects the salivary glands, enabling
adult insects to transmit the virus for the duration of their lives
(63, 68).
The hypothesis that TSWV acquisition involves a thrips mid-
gut receptor(s) that binds the virus GPs is supported by several
observations. First, the TSWV GPs are necessary for thrips
acquisition but not for plant infection. Serial, mechanical in-
oculations of TSWV between plants lead to envelope-deficient
mutants that have deletions and point mutations in the se-
quences encoding the GPs. These mutants are no longer trans-
missible by thrips, but they are not compromised in their ability
to infect plants (41, 48). Second, anti-idiotypic antibodies that
mimic the GPs specifically label the midgut, the expected lo-
cation of the cellular receptor (5). Third, by analogy to other
members of the Bunyaviridae, the GP-thrips receptor hypoth-
esis is consistent with the role of GPs in the acquisition of
bunyaviruses by arthropod vectors (37, 38, 58).
Several lines of evidence indicate that GN may serve as a
viral attachment and/or entry protein. The RGD motif of GN
is intriguing because this motif is known to interact with -in-
tegrins on cell surfaces (47, 59). Several viruses have been
shown to bind -integrin receptors via RGD motifs in the
context of their viral attachment proteins (2, 14, 50). More-
over, hantaviruses use integrins as receptors (15, 16). Research
with La Crosse virus, another member of the Bunyaviridae,
provides insight into the possible TSWV GN participation in
virus entry. When La Crosse virions were subjected to a pro-
* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Department of Entomol-
ogy, University of Wisconsin, 1630 Linden Dr., Madison, WI 53706.
Phone: (608) 262-1696. Fax: (608) 262-3322. E-mail: tlg@entomology
.wisc.edu.
13197
 o
n
 M
arch 6, 2014 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://jvi.asm.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
tease treatment, GC was cleaved but GN remained intact. The
protease-treated virions exhibited increased binding to the in-
sect vector midgut; however, they exhibited reduced binding to
cultured mosquito and mammalian cells (37, 38). These results
indicate that La Crosse GN may mediate attachment to insect
midguts while GC may play a role in cell-to-cell spread in
mammals and insects.
To determine the role(s) of GN in binding to thrips guts, we
expressed and purified a soluble recombinant form of GN.
Because GN is an integral membrane protein, we expressed the
ectodomain of GN from a recombinant baculovirus in SF21
cells, thus creating a protein that was soluble in the absence of
detergents (52). Soluble recombinant proteins are essential for
functional studies with living organisms and cells in which
membrane integrity is imperative for determinations of glyco-
protein function. By expressing GN individually, we examined
its role in virus binding and entry in the absence of other viral
proteins. Here we report the first high-level expression and
characterization of a soluble glycoprotein encoded by a mem-
ber of the Tospovirus genus. We have characterized the trun-
cated form of GN (GN-S) and found that it is soluble and rec-
ognized by monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) generated against
wild-type GN. A comparison of TSWV GN and GN-S revealed
that both proteins contain O-linked glycans and form dimers.
We provide evidence that GN-S binds larval midguts and in-
hibits TSWV acquisition in a manner consistent with GN par-
ticipation in virus binding and/or entry.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cells, insects, and virus. Spodoptera frugiperda cells (SF21) were grown in
IPL41 medium (Gibco-BRL) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (Gibco-
BRL), 2.6 g of tryptose broth (Sigma)/liter, and 1% penicillin-streptomycin-
amphotericin B (Gibco-BRL). A colony of F. occidentalis was maintained on
green bean pods (Phaseolus vulgaris) as previously described (62). TSWV (isolate
TSWV-L) was maintained by thrips transmission as described previously (62, 63),
and the virus was mechanically transferred one time after thrips transmission,
which did not affect the thrips transmissibility of the isolate. Infected leaves used
for virus purification were harvested just prior to maximal symptom expression
(at approximately 2 weeks postinoculation), and TSWV virions were isolated by
the procedures of Gonsalves and Truijillo (19).
Sequence analysis. The GN/GC open reading frame (ORF) encodes an 1,135-
amino-acid polypeptide that is cleaved to generate the two glycoproteins.
HMMTOP (60, 61), Tmpred (23), and PHDhtm (53, 54) were used to predict
hydrophobic and transmembrane domains of GN. SignalP was used to identify a
putative signal sequence and signal peptidase cleavage sites (44), Prosite was
used to identify N-linked glycosylation sites and the lectin-like domain on the
protein (13, 22), and NetOGlyc 2.0 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetOGlyc
-2.0/) was used to predict O-linked N-acetylgalactosamine glycosylation sites.
Construction of a recombinant baculovirus encoding a soluble form of GN. We
PCR amplified the ectodomain of GN from pGF7, a plasmid containing the
GN/GC ORF (1). Two transmembrane domains were consistently identified in
the GN portion of the ORF by the prediction methods described above, and the
GN-S construct was designed to exclude the putative signal sequence, the trans-
membrane domains, and the adjacent cytoplasmic tail. The forward primer used
to generate the GN-S (amino acids 35 to 309) polypeptide started at nucleotide
109 of the ORF (5 GTCATGAGCTCGGTAGAGATAATTCGTGGAGA
CCAT 3), and the reverse primer started at nucleotide 946 (5 ACTCAGCGG
CCGCGGCTGTTTGTTTATAAATGCT 3). The 5 primer contained a recog-
nition site for SacI, and the 3 primer contained a recognition site for NotI
(underlined). We used MasterAmp DNA polymerase (Epicentre) with PreMix 4
for PCRs. The PCR amplification protocol consisted of three cycles of denatur-
ation at 94°C for 60 s, annealing at 50°C for 60 s, and extension at 72°C for 90 s.
The next 40 cycles followed the same protocol except that the annealing tem-
perature was increased to 55°C. The expected 0.9-kb product was cloned into the
pBacgus-3 baculovirus transfer plasmid (Novagen, Madison, Wis.). The PCR
product and the transfer plasmid were sequentially cut with NotI and SacI. The
PCR product was ligated into the pBacgus-3 plasmid in frame with the GP64
signal sequence and a six-His tag and was transformed into Escherichia coli strain
DH5. The transformants were analyzed by diagnostic restriction digestion and
DNA sequence analysis. The transfer plasmid DNA was prepared according to
the manufacturer’s instructions (Novagen). Baculovirus DNA (BacVector-1000;
Novagen) and transfer plasmid DNA were cotransfected into SF21 cells. Cells
containing recombinant viruses were visualized by staining with X-Gluc (5-
bromo-4-chloro-3-indoyl--D-glucuronide). Recombinant viruses were subjected
to three rounds of plaque purification, and high-titer virus stocks were made
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Three recombinant viruses were
screened for protein production by Western blot analysis using MAbs to GN (1)
and the six-His tag (Invitrogen). To characterize the expression of GN-S, we
harvested the cell pellets and supernatants of baculovirus-infected SF21 cells at
0, 24, 48, 72, and 96 h postinfection and analyzed the samples by Western
blotting. For protein expression, SF21 cells were infected at a multiplicity of
infection of 5 to 10, and the cell culture medium was harvested at 72 h postin-
fection.
Protein purification. Protein purification was performed as described by Lop-
per and Compton (36), with a few modifications. The medium was harvested and
the GN-S protein was purified from the cell-free supernatant. The medium was
supplemented with a cocktail of protease inhibitors (2 g each of antipain,
aprotinin, chymostatin, leupeptin, and pepstatin/ml) and dialyzed against phos-
phate-buffered saline (PBS), pH 7.4. The resulting dialysate was incubated with
nickel resin (Qiagen) by a batch procedure. After batch binding, the resin was
poured into a column, and subsequent steps were performed according to a
column procedure. The column was first washed with 2 bed volumes of a low-pH
buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate, 10% glycerol, pH 6.0) and subsequently
washed with 30 bed volumes of 10 mM imidazole (50 mM sodium phosphate, 0.5
M sodium chloride, 10% glycerol, pH 7.0) and 5 bed volumes of 50 mM imida-
zole. GN-S was eluted with 200 mM imidazole, dialyzed against PBS–10% glyc-
erol, and stored in aliquots at 80°C.
SDS-PAGE, Western blots, and immunoprecipitations. To monitor protein
expression, glycosylation, and dimerization, we separated the proteins by sodium
dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) in 10% poly-
acrylamide gels and analyzed them by Coomassie brilliant blue staining or West-
ern blotting. For Western blot analysis, polyacrylamide gels were electrophoreti-
cally transferred to Hybond-C Extra membranes (Amersham) in transfer buffer
(48 mM Tris, 39 mM glycine, 20% methanol, and 0.037% SDS). The membranes
were blocked with 5% nonfat dry milk and then incubated with a GN MAb used
at a 1:2,000 dilution (1, 5) or a six-His MAb (Clontech) diluted 1:7,500 in
PBS-Tween 20 and 5% nonfat dry milk. Western blots were visualized with
horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-mouse immunoglobulin G and
ECLplus (Amersham).
To determine if the GN MAb recognized GN-S under native conditions, we
performed immunoprecipitation by using a Seize X protein A IP kit (Pierce)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, anti-GN or -GC (500 g)
was incubated with immobilized protein A gel for 1 h and then covalently bound
by the addition of disuccinimidyl suberate. Affinity-purified GN-S (0.02 mg) was
incubated with the cross-linked antibody overnight at 4°C. The mixture was
washed five times with BupH (0.14 M sodium chloride, 0.008 M sodium phos-
phate, 0.002 M potassium phosphate, and 0.01 M potassium chloride, pH 7.4)
and then eluted with a low-pH elution buffer (Pierce). The fractions were ana-
lyzed by Western blotting.
Analysis of glycosylation. For comparative analyses of GN and GN-S glycosyl-
ation, purified GN-S or TSWV virions were deglycosylated with enzymes to
remove N-linked glycans (N-glycosidase F) and/or O-linked glycans (endo--N-
acetylgalactosaminidase, -2,3,6,8,9-neuraminidase, -1,4-galactosidase, and
-N-acetylglucosaminidase). The proteins were denatured with 0.1% SDS and 50
mM -mercaptoethanol (-ME) at 100°C for 5 min. After heating, Triton X-100
was added to 0.75%, and then glycosidases were added. To assay for the addition
of fucoses that were -1,3-linked to N-acetylglucosamine, we incubated the
proteins with N-glycosidase A (Calbiochem). Purified TSWV or GN-S was incu-
bated with 1 U of N-glycosidase A in a solution containing 10 mM sodium
acetate, 0.5 M sodium isothiocyanate, and 0.1 -ME at pH 5.2. The proteins were
incubated for a minimum of 3 h at 37°C. Protein deglycosylation was evaluated
by observing protein mobility shifts when the proteins were analyzed by Western
blotting.
Analysis of dimerization. To determine if GN and GN-S exist as dimers, we
added increasing concentrations of the reducing agent -ME (concentrations
ranged from 0 to 5%) to the gel loading buffer (62.5 mM Tris-HCl [pH 6.8], 2%
SDS, 10% glycerol, 0.005% bromophenol blue). GN-S or freshly purified TSWV
was mixed with the gel loading buffer and boiled for 5 min. Protein dimerization
was analyzed by Western blotting.
13198 WHITFIELD ET AL. J. VIROL.
 o
n
 M
arch 6, 2014 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://jvi.asm.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
In vivo binding assay. An insect feeding assay was developed to determine if
GN-S binds to thrips guts. First instar larval thrips were fed a solution of protein
mixed with buffer TF (PBS, 10% glycerol, 0.01% Chicago sky blue, and 5 mg of
bovine serum albumin [BSA]/ml) through a layer of Parafilm. Thrips were fed in
cylindrical 25-mm-diameter containers similar to the method described by
Hunter et al. (24). Immunolabeling treatments were as follows: (i) TF buffer
alone, (ii) TF buffer and 0.1 nM GN-S, (iii) TF buffer and partially purified
TSWV, (iv) TF buffer and 0.1 nM human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) gB protein
tagged with a six-His tag (a soluble form of the gB viral attachment protein,
expressed from a baculovirus and purified by the same method as GN-S), and (v)
TF buffer and 0.2 nM TSWV nucleocapsid (N) protein tagged with a six-His tag
(49). Thrips were allowed to feed for 2 h, and insects that ingested the feeding
solution, as indicated by blue guts, were transferred to another feeding chamber
containing a 7% sucrose solution. After 2 h, the midguts no longer contained
visible amounts of the blue feeding solution, and these insect guts are hereafter
referred to as cleared guts. Thrips were then dissected in insect physiological
saline (150 mM NaCl, 2 mM NaHCO3, 2 mM MgCl2, 2 mM CaCl2, 2 mM KCl,
and 20 mM C6H12O6) and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in 50 mM sodium
phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, overnight at 4°C. The thrips were washed twice and
permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 for 30 min, after which the guts were
blocked with 20% normal goat serum (NGS) in PBS. Insects that fed on purified
virus were treated with GN MAb at a 1:20 dilution and then washed five times
with PBS. MAb binding was detected with a fluorescein isothiocyanate-conju-
gated secondary antibody (1:100). Alternatively, thrips that were fed six-His-
tagged proteins were labeled with Penta  His Alexa fluor 488 (Qiagen) diluted to
6 g/ml in PBS–20% NGS. Actin was stained with Texas red phalloidin (Mo-
lecular Probes) to delineate cell boundaries and tissue types. The dissected
insects were mounted in the Slow Fade Light reagent (Molecular Probes) and
viewed with a Bio-Rad 1024 laser scanning confocal microscope. Images were
collected by use of the same laser power and gain. The in vivo binding assay was
repeated six times.
Inhibition of TSWV acquisition. An assay was performed to determine if GN-S
inhibits TSWV acquisition, with two types of experiments being performed.
Experiment A treatments included buffer (n  8), TSWV (n  9), and TSWV
and GN-S (n  14). Experiment B treatments included buffer (n  8), TSWV
(n  10), TSWV and GN-S (n  12), and gB and TSWV (n  16). The gB and
TSWV treatment was included to test the specificity of TSWV acquisition inhi-
bition by GN-S. Experiment A was conducted three times, and experiment B was
conducted twice. For each treatment, a group of thrips were subjected to the
assay and each gut served as a subsample of the group.
The feeding solutions contained 50 l of sodium sulfite or TSWV in sodium
sulfite, 10 l (10 mg/ml) of BSA, 0.1% Chicago sky blue, 20 l of 20% sucrose
solution, and 50 l of PBS–10% glycerol or 50 l of GN (0.1 nM) or gB (0.1 nM)
protein in PBS–10% glycerol. Thrips were fed, cleared, dissected, and fixed as
described above for the in vivo binding assay. After being blocked, the guts were
treated with a polyclonal antibody to the TSWV N protein at a 1:50 dilution in
PBS–20% NGS for 2 h at room temperature (RT). The dissected insects were
washed five times with PBS. Subsequently, the guts were incubated with Alexa
fluor 647-conjugated anti-rabbit immunoglobulin G (Molecular Probes) diluted
1:50 in PBS–20% NGS for 1 h at RT. The guts were washed five times with PBS
and then incubated with Texas red phalloidin (Molecular Probes) diluted 1:200
in PBS for 1 h at RT. The guts were washed six times with PBS and mounted in
antifade solution (Molecular Probes). Images were collected with a Bio-Rad
1024 laser scanning confocal microscope. Images were collected by use of the
same microscope settings (i.e., laser power and gain) for all treatments within
each experimental repeat. Images collected were all of the same size and mag-
nification and included the anterior region of the midgut and portions of the
posterior midgut.
Image analyses were performed with Adobe Photoshop (v. 7.0) to quantify the
amounts of virus in insect midguts. The average amount of fluorescence (inten-
sity of fluorescent pixels/total number of pixels in the 512-by-512 pixel image)
over the surface of the captured image was optically measured in the blue
channel for each midgut, which represented a subsample within each treatment.
The average fluorescence for each treatment was calculated. Each experimental
repeat was considered a treatment replicate (i.e., there were three and two
replicates for experiments A and B, respectively). With Minitab (v. 13.31) soft-
ware, analysis of variance was performed on the average fluorescence to deter-
mine the treatment effects on virus acquisition separately for each experiment.
Fisher’s least significant differences were calculated to make pairwise compari-
sons between treatment means.
RESULTS
Sequence analysis. We used several protein sequence anal-
ysis tools to identify posttranslational modifications, hydropho-
bic domains, and motifs of the GN/GC polyprotein. The anal-
yses revealed a putative signal sequence at the N terminus of
GN, a signal peptidase cleavage site at amino acid 35, nine
possible N-glycosylation sites in the polyprotein, and possible
O-linked N-acetylgalactosamine glycosylation sites at amino
acids 58 and 209. Another signal peptidase site is predicted to
occur at amino acid 464, and if this site is cleaved by a signal
peptidase, this would likely be the cleavage that generates the
GN and GC proteins from the polyprotein. We also identified
a region of GN from amino acids 132 to 231 that resembles a
lectin-like domain. Schematics of the recombinant truncated
GN-S protein and the GN/GC polyprotein are shown in Fig. 1.
The GN soluble polypeptide begins at amino acid 35 after
the first hydrophobic domain and the putative signal peptidase
cleavage site. To ensure the faithful translation and secretion
of GN in the baculovirus system, we deleted the predicted GN
signal sequence and replaced it with the signal sequence of the
major baculovirus glycoprotein, GP64 (8). We also deleted the
putative membrane-spanning domain and cytoplasmic tail so
that the recombinant protein would be secreted. The expressed
polypeptide continues to amino acid 309, where the predicted
transmembrane region begins.
Expression and purification of GN-S. To characterize the
expression of GN-S, we performed a time course experiment
and determined by Western blot analysis that maximal GN-S
was expressed at approximately 72 h postinfection (data not
shown). GN-S was secreted into the medium (Fig. 2, lane 2).
The Coomassie blue-stained gel shows that the cell culture
supernatant (Fig. 2, lane 3) was heavily stained due to the
presence of 10% fetal bovine serum in the medium. GN-S was
purified from the cell culture supernatant (Fig. 2, lanes 4 and
5) with a yield of approximately 5 mg/liter.
GNMAb recognizes soluble GN-S. To ensure that a GN MAb
generated against wild-type GN recognized GN-S, we attempt-
FIG. 1. Schematic of the TSWV glycoprotein ORF and of soluble,
truncated GN (GN-S). The top figure represents the precursor polypro-
tein, with putative signal sequences, signal peptidase cleavages sites, N-
and O-linked glycosylation sites, and transmembrane domains indi-
cated. The bottom figure is a schematic of GN-S, from amino acids 35
to 309, expressed from a baculovirus. Note that the putative hydro-
phobic domains were removed and six-His tags were added. The figure
is not drawn to scale.
VOL. 78, 2004 EXPRESSION AND CHARACTERIZATION OF SOLUBLE TSWV GN 13199
 o
n
 M
arch 6, 2014 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://jvi.asm.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
ed to immunoprecipitate GN-S with a GN MAb. GN-S bound to
the cross-linked antibody and specifically eluted at a low pH
(Fig. 3A, lane 5). As a control for nonspecific binding, anti-GC
was also used, and no GN protein was eluted from this column
(Fig. 3B, lanes 4 and 5). The GN MAb was able to bind GN-S
under native and reducing (data not shown) conditions, sug-
gesting that the GN epitope is a linear epitope and is accessible
on the native protein. Furthermore, the GN MAb recognized
the GN ectodomain and could be used to detect GN-S under
nondenaturing conditions.
Analysis of GN glycosylation. Enzymatic deglycosylation has
been used as a tool to demonstrate the presence of carbohy-
drates on bunyavirus and tospovirus glycoproteins (43, 46).
Because glycosylation can play an important role in protein
stability and/or function, we compared GN and GN-S glycosyl-
ation. We incubated purified proteins and the virus with en-
zymes to specifically remove N- or O-linked glycans. Endogly-
cosidase F was used to remove N-linked glycans, and a cocktail
of enzymes was used to remove O-linked glycans. Both GN and
GN-S exhibited an increased mobility when glycans were re-
moved. We consistently observed a small shift in protein mo-
bility when the virus was incubated with O-glycosidases (Fig. 4,
compare lanes 1 and 3), indicating that GN is modified by the
addition of O-linked glycans. We observed no change in the
mass (Fig. 4, compare lanes 2 and 3) when TSWV virion GN
was incubated with enzymes to remove N-linked glycans. When
the N- and O-glycosidases were used simultaneously (Fig. 4,
lane 4), the shift in mobility was similar to the shift observed
when just O-linked glycans were removed (Fig. 4, compare
lanes 1 and 4). These results indicate that TSWV GN purified
from infected plants is modified by the addition of O-linked
glycans but not N-linked glycans. We did not detect fucose
-1,3-linked glycans on wild-type GN, as no additional shift was
observed when N-glycosidase A was added (Fig. 4, lane 5) or
when the protein was incubated with N-glycosidase A only
(data not shown).
As observed with TSWV GN, the removal of O-linked gly-
cans resulted in an increased mobility for GN-S, indicating that
O-linked glycans comprise approximately 4 kDa of the molec-
ular mass of GN-S (Fig. 5A, compare lanes 1 and 3). We found
that GN-S was also N-glycosylated, and the removal of N-
linked glycans from GN-S resulted in a 3-kDa shift in mobility
(Fig. 5A and B, compare lanes 2 and 3). To ensure that the
shift in mobility that we observed when GN-S was incubated
with O-glycosidases was not due to the removal of N-linked
glycans, we simultaneously subjected the proteins to both N-
and O-glycosidases and observed that the shift in mobility was
consistent with both the N- and O-linked glycans being re-
moved (Fig. 5A, lane 4). Approximately 7 kDa of the molec-
ular mass of GN-S was composed of N- and O-linked glycans,
confirming that GN-S is N- and O-glycosylated.
Analysis of dimerization. Viral envelope glycoproteins are
generally found as oligomers such as dimers, trimers, and tet-
ramers. In many instances, these higher-order structures are
disulfide bond dependent. We analyzed GN and GN-S electro-
phoretic mobilities by SDS-PAGE under nonreducing and re-
ducing conditions to determine if they formed oligomers.
When TSWV purified from infected plants was subjected to
FIG. 2. Purification of soluble GN (GN-S) by nickel affinity chro-
matography. Culture supernatants were harvested at 72 h postinfec-
tion, purified, and dialyzed against PBS. The samples were analyzed by
SDS-PAGE, one gel was stained with Coomassie brilliant blue (lanes 3
and 5), and another gel was analyzed by Western blotting (lanes 1, 2, and
4). Equal volumes were added to each well. Lane 1, six-His-tag molecular
weight marker; lanes 2 and 3, cell culture medium added to column; and
lanes 4 and 5, GN-S protein eluate from the 200 mM imidazole wash.
FIG. 3. Immunoprecipitation of soluble GN (GN-S) with GN MAb. Antibodies were cross-linked to protein A gel, poured into a column, and
incubated with GN-S. The columns were washed extensively, and the protein was eluted with a low-pH buffer. Fractions were analyzed by
SDS-PAGE, and Western blots were probed with a six-His MAb. (A) GN-S incubated with GN MAb column. Lane 1, six-His marker; lane 2, GN-S
added to the column; lanes 3 and 4, washes 1 and 5, respectively; lane 5, eluant 1; and lane 6, eluant 2. (B) GN-S incubated with GC MAb column.
Lane 1, GN-S added to the column; lanes 2 and 3, washes 1 and 5, respectively; lane 4, eluant 1; lane 5, eluant 2; and lane 6, six-His molecular
weight marker.
13200 WHITFIELD ET AL. J. VIROL.
 o
n
 M
arch 6, 2014 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://jvi.asm.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
SDS-PAGE with increasing amounts of -ME and analyzed by
Western blotting with a GN MAb, we found that GN existed as
monomers, SDS-resistant homodimers, and heterodimers with
GC (Fig. 6A, lanes 1 and 2). The 135-kDa band was confirmed
to be GN-GC heterodimers by probing the blot with a GC MAb
and observing the same band (data not shown). When the
amount of -ME in the sample loading buffer was increased,
the disulfide bonds were reduced and the dimers resolved into
monomers (Fig. 6A, lane 6). GN-S was also observed as a
50-kDa monomer and a 100-kDa dimer under nonreducing
conditions (Fig. 6B, lanes 1 and 2). The addition of 0.1% -ME
to the sample loading buffer caused dimers of GN to partially
shift to monomers (Fig. 6B, lane 3), and -ME concentrations
of 1% (Fig. 6B, lane 4) and 2.5% (Fig. 6B, lane 5) reduced all
of the dimers to monomers. Because GN-S was still capable of
forming dimers, we concluded that the domains involved in
dimerization are located in the ectodomain.
In vivo binding assay. To examine the biological activity of
GN-S, we assayed GN-S for the ability to bind to thrips guts.
Thrips were fed purified protein and then cleared so that only
FIG. 4. Analysis of wild-type GN glycosylation. Purified TSWV was
incubated with glycosidases to remove oligosaccharides and then sep-
arated by SDS-PAGE. The proteins were transferred to a nitrocellulose
membrane, and GN was detected with a GN MAb. GN was incubated with
enzymes to remove the oligosaccharides. Lane 1, O-linked glycans; lane 2,
N-linked glycans; lane 3, mock digestion, no glycosidases; lane 4, N-
and O-linked glycans; and lane 5, endoglycosidase A and N- and
O-linked glycans.
FIG. 5. Analysis of soluble GN (GN-S) glycosylation. Purified GN-S
was incubated with glycosidases to remove oligosaccharides and then
separated by SDS-PAGE. The proteins were transferred to nitrocel-
lulose membranes, and GN-S was detected with a six-His MAb. (A) GN-S
incubated with enzymes to remove oligosaccharides. Lane 1, O-linked gly-
cans; lane 2, N-linked glycans; lane 3, mock digestion, no glycosidases; and
lane 4, N- and O-linked glycans. (B) Short exposure of panel A showing
the differences in size of GN-S incubated with enzymes to remove N-
linked glycans (lane 2) and with no enzymes for a mock digestion (lane 3).
FIG. 6. Analysis of GN and GN-S dimerization. Increasing amounts
of -ME were added to TSWV purified from infected plants (GN) or
to GN-S. Proteins were detected by Western blotting. (A) Purified
TSWV detected with GN MAb. Lane 1, no -ME and sample was not
boiled; lane 2, no -ME; lane 3, 0.1% -ME; lane 4, 1.0% -ME; lane
5, 2.5% -ME; and lane 6, 5% -ME. (B) Purified GN-S protein was
detected with a six-His MAb. Lane 1, no -ME and sample was not
boiled; lane 2, no -ME; lane 3, 0.1% -ME; lane 4, 1.0% -ME; lane
5, 2.5% -ME; and lane 6, six-His-tagged molecular weight marker.
VOL. 78, 2004 EXPRESSION AND CHARACTERIZATION OF SOLUBLE TSWV GN 13201
 o
n
 M
arch 6, 2014 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://jvi.asm.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
proteins that were retained in the midgut were detected. We
focused our study on the thrips midgut because it is the site of
virus entry (63). The thrips midgut consists of a single layer of
epithelial cells that is surrounded by longitudinal and circular
muscle cells (40). Midgut muscle and epithelial cells had dis-
tinct labeling patterns with Texas red phalloidin, which allowed
us to identify the tissues that we were optically sectioning in the
gut. Thrips that were fed a BSA-buffer solution (Fig. 7A) did
not become labeled with antibody. For an examination of the
specificity of the GN-S gut interaction, thrips were fed a TSWV
FIG. 7. In vivo binding assay. Larval thrips were fed BSA, TSWV N protein, HCMV glycoprotein gB, soluble GN (GN-S), or purified TSWV.
After the feeding, thrips guts were cleared for 2 h in a 7% sucrose solution. Thrips were then dissected, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, and
permeabilized. The guts were immunolabeled with a six-His MAb conjugated to Alexa fluor 488 (green), except for panels F and G, for which the
samples were labeled with a GN MAb and a fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated goat anti-mouse antibody. Actin was stained with Texas red
phalloidin (red). Staining was visualized by confocal microscopy. (A) Thrips fed BSA; (B) thrips fed six-His-tagged nucleocapsid (N) protein; (C)
thrips fed purified, six-His-tagged HCMV gB protein; (D) thrips fed GN-S; (E) exterior of a gut from a thrips that was fed GN-S showing that labeling
was associated with midgut epithelial cell layers and not with other tissues; (F) thrips fed purified TSWV; and (G) thrips fed purified GN-S. Bar, 50 m.
13202
 o
n
 M
arch 6, 2014 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://jvi.asm.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
nucleocapsid (N) protein that was expressed in bacteria and
purified via a six-His tag. The N protein did not label thrips
guts (Fig. 7B). Another protein, glycoprotein B (gB) of
HCMV, was fed to thrips to examine the specificity of protein-
thrips midgut binding. The gB protein also failed to bind larval
thrips midguts (Fig. 7C). GN-S (Fig. 7D) consistently bound to
thrips midgut epithelial cells. We observed GN-S labeling (Fig.
7D) associated with the midgut epithelial cell layer and not
with the muscle cells surrounding the midgut (Fig. 7E). Be-
cause GN-S bound to thrips guts and HCMV gB and TSWV N
did not, we believe that there is a specific interaction between
GN-S and a thrips midgut molecule.
For a comparison of GN-S binding and TSWV GN binding,
thrips were fed the virus or GN-S and were immunolabeled
with a GN MAb. The virus accumulated in the midgut epi-
thelial cells of thrips that were fed TSWV (Fig. 7F), and a
similar localization was observed for thrips that were fed
GN-S (Fig. 7G). The in vivo binding experiment was re-
peated six times, and in all experiments we observed GN-S
binding to thrips guts.
GN-S inhibition of TSWV acquisition by thrips. We further
characterized the interaction between GN-S and thrips by test-
ing GN-S for the ability to inhibit TSWV acquisition. The
insects used for this experiment were from the same popula-
tion and were 0 to 24 h old. All thrips chosen for experiments
contained blue dye, indicating that they had fed on the virus
solution. Acquisition was assessed by immunolabeling with an
antibody to the TSWV N protein and was quantified by image
analysis. Virus acquisition was reduced 4-fold (P  0.009) and
12-fold (P  0.003) by GN-S in experiments A and B, respec-
tively (Fig. 8). In experiment B, HCMV gB, which did not bind
to midguts in our in vivo binding assay (Fig. 7C), did not inhibit
TSWV acquisition (Fig. 8B). These results indicate that GN-S
inhibited TSWV acquisition and that another viral envelope
protein, gB, did not inhibit TSWV acquisition by thrips.
DISCUSSION
Our findings that GN-S binds larval thrips guts and that it
inhibits TSWV acquisition provide evidence that GN plays a
role in virus binding and/or entry into the vector midgut. Re-
combinant soluble forms of viral envelope proteins have
proven to be powerful tools for elucidating virus-host interac-
tions (9, 32, 33, 66). By making a soluble form of the GN
protein, we were able to use this protein in experiments that
would not be feasible with wild-type purified GN because it is
insoluble in the absence of detergents. Our data revealed that
GN-S could bind the midgut epithelial cells of larval thrips
without assistance from other TSWV proteins. The specificity
of the GN-S–thrips interaction was supported by the failure of
another structural TSWV protein, N, to bind thrips midgut
epithelial cells. Furthermore, we demonstrated that the viral
attachment protein, glycoprotein B, from another enveloped
virus, HCMV, did not bind to thrips guts or inhibit TSWV
acquisition.
Our observations regarding the tissue-specific localization
and binding of GN to thrips gut tissue are supported by those
of other studies with TSWV and animal-infecting members of
the family Bunyaviridae. We found that both GN-S and TSWV
are present in the midgut epithelia 2 to 4 h after feeding, which
is consistent with studies that report the presence of TSWV in
the anterior region of the midgut epithelia 16 h after acquisi-
tion access (12, 42, 62, 63). Immunolabeling experiments with
anti-idiotypic GN and GC showed that anti-idiotypic GPs
bound larval thrips guts (5). In support of a GN-vector inter-
action, researchers found that after the enzymatic removal
of GC, and not GN, La Crosse virions exhibited an increased
ability to bind mosquito midguts (37, 38). This finding high-
lights the importance of GN in virus binding to vector midguts.
Furthermore, a sequence analysis of isolates of La Crosse virus
with different passage histories revealed that the GN coding
sequence is more stable than the GC coding sequence (7). The
FIG. 8. Effect in vivo of purified, recombinant TSWV GN (GN-S) on thrips acquisition of TSWV in feeding experiments. Thrips were given 2-h
acquisition access periods to BSA, TSWV alone, TSWV plus GN-S, and TSWV plus gB. All treatments contained the same concentrations of virus
and/or buffers. Thrips were then allowed to feed on a sucrose solution to clear their guts. Acquisition was measured by immunolabeling with a
TSWV nucleocapsid polyclonal antibody. The amount of immunolabeled TSWV was quantified by measuring the average amount of fluorescence
(647 nm) in an optical section of a thrips gut, using Adobe Photoshop 7.0. Each bar represents a mean of three or two replicates for experiment,
A or B, respectively. Bars headed by different letters are significantly different, with P values of 0.05. (A) Thrips were fed BSA in buffer, TSWV,
and a combination of TSWV and GN-S. In a second set of experiments (B), thrips were also fed recombinant HCMV gB and TSWV, which served
as another negative control. Thrips guts were imaged with a laser scanning confocal microscope.
VOL. 78, 2004 EXPRESSION AND CHARACTERIZATION OF SOLUBLE TSWV GN 13203
 o
n
 M
arch 6, 2014 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://jvi.asm.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
binding role of GN was further strengthened by the discovery
of neutralizing antibodies to Hantaan virus GPs (29, 35).
Because GN-S bound to thrips guts and inhibited TSWV
acquisition, it is likely that GN binding to the thrips midgut
inhibited TSWV binding or entry. We consistently observed an
inhibition of TSWV acquisition by GN-S, but there was vari-
ability in the levels of inhibition. This variation was likely
attributable to differences between individual virus prepara-
tions. TSWV is a labile virus; therefore, it was necessary to
purify a fresh batch of virus for each experiment. For experi-
ment A, we observed higher acquisition levels for both TSWV
alone and the TSWV and GN-S treatments, while for experi-
ment B we observed lower acquisition levels for all treatments.
The inhibition results with GN-S and TSWV are supported by
the results of research with Rice ragged stunt virus, which is
transmitted by rice brown planthoppers (20). In those experi-
ments, the viral spike protein inhibited virus transmission and
insects fed a nonstructural virus protein exhibited no transmis-
sion inhibition. These results support the finding that GN-S
inhibited TSWV acquisition and the concept of disrupting the
insect-mediated transmission of viruses via viral attachment
proteins. The finding that GN-S can inhibit TSWV entry is the
first step towards developing new control strategies for TSWV.
Our characterization of GN-S showed that the recombinant
protein shares biochemical properties with GN even though the
putative transmembrane domains, signal sequence, and cyto-
plasmic tail were removed and the remaining amino acids
(35–309) were expressed with a six-His tag. Like virion GN,
GN-S contains O-linked oligosaccharides and organizes into a
homodimer. We also found that a MAb raised against virion
GN recognized GN-S. The properties of GN-S compared to
those of wild-type TSWV GN indicate that GN-S may serve as
a surrogate for GN in experiments.
When the transmembrane domains were removed from the
TSWV GN protein and the ectodomain was fused to the bac-
ulovirus GP64 signal sequence, GN-S was efficiently secreted
from the cell. The GN proteins of several virus species within
the family Bunyaviridae contain Golgi retention sequences (4,
17, 28), and the retention signals were mapped to the trans-
membrane domain and the cytosolic tail for Rift Valley fever
virus (17) and the cytosolic tail for Uukuniemi virus (4). The
TSWV GN Golgi localization signal has not been mapped, but
by analogy with other members of the Bunyaviridae it likely
resides in the transmembrane domain and/or cytosolic tail.
Because these domains were removed from GN-S, the Golgi
localization signal was likely removed, allowing the protein to
be secreted, or the GP64 signal sequence negated any part of
the Golgi retention motif that may have been maintained in
the construct.
We found by enzymatic deglycosylation that GN-S and wild-
type GN were modified by the addition of O-linked glycans.
Sequence analysis results for our TSWV isolate predicted two
sites on GN that may be O-glycosylated. O-linked glycosylation
is a common form of posttranslational modification and may
be involved in protein conformation (25), the stability of cell
surface glycoproteins (31), and virus attachment to cell sur-
faces (45). Several virus glycoproteins have been shown to be
O-glycosylated, including the human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 envelope glycoprotein (6), the respiratory syncytial virus
G protein (10), and equine herpesvirus type 1 gp300 (67). The
GP ORF of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus, another
member of the Bunyaviridae, contains a variable mucin-like
domain that is predicted to be extensively O-glycosylated (55),
indicating that O-linked glycans may be an important modifi-
cation of Bunyaviridae proteins. The findings of Naidu et al.
(43), however, differ from ours to some extent. They did not
detect O-linked glycans on an isolate of TSWV from Georgia.
It is possible that our findings disagree because different
TSWV isolates were examined in both studies and because
TSWV isolates may be glycosylated differently. For example, a
GP sequence reported by Kormelink et al. (30) contains eight
sites that may be N-glycosylated, but a sequence reported by
Adkins et al. (1) for a Hawaiian isolate of TSWV contains nine
sites that may be N-glycosylated. Single amino acid changes
could alter GP glycosylation and may explain the differences in
our findings. Another possible explanation for the apparent
differences in GN glycosylation may be due to the use of dif-
ferent methods for examining the glycosylation of GPs. We
used enzymatic removal followed by SDS-PAGE to detect
glycans, while Naidu et al. used lectin affinity blotting (43).
Further studies of GN posttranslational modifications may elu-
cidate the function(s) of glycans in protein folding, stability in
the insect gut, or interactions with molecules on the thrips gut.
While both wild-type and recombinant GN contained O-
linked glycans, only recombinant GN contained N-linked gly-
cans. This difference may have been due to two events. First,
during the construction of GN-S, we found upon sequencing
that a new N-linked glycosylation site was added by the addi-
tion of the affinity purification tags. Second, the protein ex-
pression host may affect glycosylation (i.e., GN was isolated
from TSWV-infected plants while GN-S was isolated from bac-
ulovirus-infected insect cells). In support of this hypothesis,
Adkins et al. (1) found that a nontruncated GN protein ex-
pressed in a baculovirus was also N-glycosylated. This supports
the claim that GN glycan modifications and/or site usage may
vary in plants and insects.
We found that both wild-type GN and GN-S oligomerize and,
more specifically, that both exist as monomers and dimers. As
for GN-S, it was not surprising that the protein formed dimers
because the GN ectodomain contains seven cysteines, and thus
some of the amino acids expected to be involved in dimeriza-
tion were retained in GN-S. We do not know which form of GN
is involved in virus entry, but because GN and GN-S are capable
of forming oligomers, this form of GN may interact with mol-
ecules on the surface of the thrips gut to mediate attachment
and/or entry.
GPs encoded by other members of the Bunyaviridae have
been shown to form oligomers. Uukuniemi virus GN maintains
a pH-stable covalent homodimeric association (51). The GN
protein of Sin Nombre virus was also found in monomeric and
stable, SDS-resistant, multimeric forms, with the dimer being
the only form present late in infection (57). Conversely, Punta
Toro virus GN was found as a heterodimer with GC, but not as
a homodimer (39). The ability of envelope glycoproteins to
oligomerize seems to be conserved within the Bunyaviridae,
indicating that this is an important part of the virus life cycle.
Understanding the formation of higher-order oligomers may
be important for determining how the GPs interact with mol-
ecules on the thrips gut to mediate acquisition or other virus
processes such as assembly and replication.
13204 WHITFIELD ET AL. J. VIROL.
 o
n
 M
arch 6, 2014 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://jvi.asm.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
We hypothesize that TSWV entry into the vector midgut
entails a complex series of steps and that GN is involved in the
virus accessing the midgut epithelia. Virus entry may begin
with an initial docking step followed by binding to a cellular
receptor. This binding may result in a GP becoming fusogenic
and in a subsequent mixing of membrane bilayers, resulting in
the release of virion contents. Our results suggest a role for GN
in this process but do not preclude a role for GC. We found
biochemical similarities between native GN and GN-S in their
ability to form dimers, and we demonstrated that GN and GN-S
are both modified by the addition of O-linked glycans. These
biochemical similarities and functional data provide a basis for
further studies to investigate the role of GN in virus binding
and entry into thrips midgut cells by using GN-S. Our success-
ful expression and characterization of GN-S provide a new
understanding of TSWV GP biology. GN-S provides a signifi-
cant new tool for delving deeper into the mechanisms of thrips-
tospovirus interactions, which in time may help to elucidate the
means of acquisition of other arthropod-transmitted viruses.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Bruce Christensen and Teresa Compton for critical read-
ings of the manuscript. HCMV gB was a gift from Teresa Compton,
and the GN and GC monoclonal antibodies were a gift from John
Sherwood. We also thank the Keck Biological Imaging Laboratory for
the use of and assistance with the confocal microscope and Dorith
Rotenberg for statistical consultations and a critical review of the
manuscript.
This work was supported by United States Department of Agricul-
ture grant 99-35303-8271 and by Hatch funds (WIS04316).
REFERENCES
1. Adkins, S., T. J. Choi, B. A. Israel, M. D. Bandla, K. E. Richmond, K. T.
Schultz, J. L. Sherwood, and T. L. German. 1996. Baculovirus expression and
processing of tomato spotted wilt tospovirus glycoproteins. Phytopathology
86:849–855.
2. Akula, S. M., N. P. Pramod, F. Z. Wang, and B. Chandran. 2002. Integrin
31 (CD49c/29) is a cellular receptor for Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus (KSHV/JJV-8) entry into the target cells. Cell 108:407–419.
3. Andersson, A. M., and R. F. Pettersson. 1998. Targeting of a short peptide
derived from the cytoplasmic tail of the G1 membrane glycoprotein of
Uukuniemi virus (Bunyaviridae) to the Golgi complex. J. Virol. 72:9585–9596.
4. Andersson, A. M., L. Melin, A. Bean, and R. F. Pettersson. 1997. A retention
signal necessary and sufficient for Golgi localization maps to the cytoplasmic
tail of a Bunyaviridae (Uukuniemi virus) membrane glycoprotein. J. Virol.
71:4717–4727.
5. Bandla, M. D., L. R. Campbell, D. E. Ullman, and J. L. Sherwood. 1998.
Interaction of tomato spotted wilt tospovirus (TSWV) glycoproteins with a
thrips midgut protein, a potential cellular receptor for TSWV. Phytopathol-
ogy 88:98–104.
6. Bernstein, H. B., S. P. Tucker, E. Hunter, J. S. Schutzbach, and R. W.
Compans. 1994. Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 envelope glycopro-
tein is modified by O-linked oligosaccharides. J. Virol. 68:463–468.
7. Borucki, M. K., B. J. Kempf, C. D. Blair, and B. J. Beaty. 2001. The effect of
mosquito passage on the La Crosse virus genotype. J. Gen. Virol. 82:2919–
2926.
8. Boublik, Y., P. Di Bonito, and I. M. Jones. 1995. Eukaryotic virus display:
engineering the major surface glycoprotein of the Autographa californica
nuclear polyhedrosis virus (AcNPV) for the presentation of foreign proteins
on the virus surface. Biotechnology 13:1079–1084.
9. Boyle, K. A., and T. Compton. 1998. Receptor-binding properties of a soluble
form of human cytomegalovirus glycoprotein B. J. Virol. 72:1826–1833.
10. Collins, P. L., and G. Mottet. 1992. Oligomerization and post-translational
processing of glycoprotein G of human respiratory syncytial virus: altered
O-glycosylation in the presence of brefeldin A. J. Gen. Virol. 73:849–863.
11. Daughtrey, M. L., R. K. Jones, J. W. Moyer, M. E. Daub, and J. R. Baker.
1997. Tospoviruses strike the greenhouse industry: INSV has become a
major pathogen on flower crops. Plant Dis. 81:1220–1230.
12. de Assis Filho, F. M., R. A. Naidu, C. M. Deom, and J. L. Sherwood. 2002.
Dynamics of tomato spotted wilt virus replication in the alimentary canal of
two thrips species. Phytopathology 92:729–733.
13. Faulquet, L., M. Pagni, N. Hulo, C. J. Sigrist, K. Hofmann, and A. Bairoch.
2002. The PROSITE database, its status in 2002. Nucleic Acids Res. 30:235–
238.
14. Fox, G., N. R. Parry, P. V. Barnatt, B. McGinn, D. Rowlands, and F. Brown.
1989. The cell attachment sequence on foot-and-mouth disease virus in-
cludes the amino acid sequence RGD (arginine-glycine-aspartic acid).
J. Gen. Virol. 70:625–637.
15. Gavrilovskaya, I. N., E. J. Brown, M. H. Ginsberg, and E. R. Mackow. 1999.
Cellular entry of hantaviruses which cause hemorrhagic fever with renal
syndrome is mediated by 3 integrins. J. Virol. 73:3951–3959.
16. Gavrilovskaya, I. N., M. Shepley, R. Shaw, M. H. Ginsberg, and E. R.
Mackow. 1998. 3 integrins mediate the cellular entry of hantaviruses that
cause respiratory failure. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95:7074–7079.
17. Gerrard, S. R., and S. T. Nichol. 2002. Characterization of the Golgi reten-
tion motif of Rift Valley fever virus GN glycoprotein. J. Virol. 76:12200–
12210.
18. Goldbach, R. W., and D. Peters. 1994. Possible causes of the emergence of
tospovirus diseases. Semin. Virol. 5:113–120.
19. Gonsalves, D., and E. E. Trujillo. 1986. Tomato spotted wilt virus in papaya
and detection by ELISA. Plant Dis. 70:501–506.
20. Guoying, Z., L. Xiongbin, L. Huijuan, L. Juanli, C. Shengxiang, and G.
Zuxun. 1999. Rice ragged stunt oryzavirus: role of the viral spike protein in
transmission by the insect vector. Ann. Appl. Biol. 135:573–575.
21. Hanover, J. A., W. J. Lennarz, and J. D. Young. 1980. Synthesis of N- and
O-linked glycopeptides in oviduct membrane preparations. J. Biol. Chem.
255:6713–6716.
22. Hofmann, K., P. Bucher, L. Falquet, and A. Bairoch. 1999. The PROSITE
database, its status in 1999. Nucleic Acids Res. 27:215–219.
23. Hofmann, K., and W. Stoffel. 1993. TMbase—a database of membrane
spanning protein segments. Biol. Chem. 374:166.
24. Hunter, W. B., H. T. Hsu, and R. H. Lawson. 1995. A novel method for
tospovirus acquisition by thrips. Phytopathology 85:480–483.
25. Jentoft, N. 1990. Why are proteins O-glycosylated? Trends Biochem. Sci.
15:291–294.
26. Kikkert, M., C. Meurs, F. van de Wetering, S. Dorfmuller, D. Peters, R.
Kormelink, and R. Goldbach. 1998. Binding of tomato spotted wilt virus to
a 94-kDa thrips protein. Phytopathology 88:63–69.
27. Kikkert, M., J. van Lent, M. Storms, R. Bodegom, R. Kormelink, and R.
Goldbach. 1999. Tomato spotted wilt virus particle morphogenesis in plant
cells. J. Virol. 73:2288–2297.
28. Kikkert, M., A. Verschoor, R. Kormelink, P. Rottier, and R. Goldbach. 2001.
Tomato spotted wilt virus glycoproteins exhibit trafficking and localization
signals that are functional in mammalian cells. J. Virol. 75:1004–1012.
29. Koch, J., M. Liang, I. Queitsch, A. A. Kraus, and E. K. F. Bautz. 2003.
Human recombinant neutralizing antibodies against Hantaan virus G2 pro-
tein. Virology 308:64–73.
30. Kormelink, R., P. de Haan, C. Meurs, D. Peters, and R. Goldbach. 1992. The
nucleotide sequence of the M RNA segment of tomato spotted wilt virus, a
bunyavirus with two ambisense RNA segments. J. Gen. Virol. 73:2795–2804.
31. Krieger, M., P. Reddy, K. Kozarsky, D. Kingsley, L. Hobbie, and M. Pen-
man. 1989. Analysis of the synthesis, intracellular sorting, and function of
glycoproteins, using a mammalian cell mutant with reversible glycosylation
defects. Methods Cell Biol. 32:57–84.
32. Lasky, L. A., J. Groopman, C. Fennie, P. Benz, D. Capon, D. Dowbenko, G.
Nakamura, W. Nunes, M. Renz, and P. Berman. 1986. Neutralization of the
AIDS retrovirus by antibodies to a recombinant envelope glycoprotein. Sci-
ence 233:209–212.
33. Lasky, L. A., G. Nakamura, D. H. Smith, C. Fennie, C. Shimasaki, D. Patzer,
P. Berman, T. Gregory, and D. J. Capon. 1987. Delineation of a region of the
human immunodeficiency virus type I gp120 glycoprotein critical for inter-
action with the CD4 receptor. Cell 50:975–985.
34. Lewis, T. 1997. Pest thrips in perspective, p. 13, 675–709. In T. Lewis (ed.),
Thrips as crop pests. CAB International, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
35. Liang, M., M. Mahler, J. Koch, Y. Ji, L. Dexin, C. Schmaljohn, and E. K. F.
Bautz. 2003. Generation of an HFRS patient-derived neutralizing recombi-
nant antibody to Hantaan virus G1 protein and definition of the neutralizing
domain. J. Med. Virol. 69:99–107.
36. Lopper, M., and T. Compton. 2002. Disulfide bond formation of human
cytomegalovirus glycoprotein B. J. Virol. 76:6073–6082.
37. Ludwig, G. V., B. M. Christensen, T. M. Yuill, and K. T. Schultz. 1989.
Enzyme processing of La Crosse virus glycoprotein G1: a bunyavirus infec-
tion model. Virology 171:108–113.
38. Ludwig, G. V., B. A. Israel, B. M. Christensen, T. M. Yuill, and K. T. Schultz.
1991. Role of La Crosse virus glycoproteins in attachment of virus to host
cells. Virology 181:564–571.
39. Matsuoka, Y., S.-Y. Chen, C. E. Holland, and R. W. Compans. 1996. Mo-
lecular determinants of Golgi retention in the Punta Toro virus G1 protein.
Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 336:184–189.
40. Moritz, G. 1997. Structure, growth and development, p. 15–63. In T. Lewis
(ed.), Thrips as crop pests. CAB International, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
41. Nagata, T., A. K. Nagata-Inoue, M. Prins, R. Goldbach, and D. Peters. 2000.
Impeded thrips transmission of defective tomato spotted wilt virus isolates.
Phytopathology 90:454–459.
VOL. 78, 2004 EXPRESSION AND CHARACTERIZATION OF SOLUBLE TSWV GN 13205
 o
n
 M
arch 6, 2014 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://jvi.asm.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
42. Nagata, T., A. K. Nagata-Inoue, H. M. Smid, R. Goldbach, and D. Peters.
1999. Tissue tropism related to vector competence of Frankliniella occiden-
talis for tomato spotted wilt tospovirus. J. Gen. Virol. 80:507–515.
43. Naidu, R. A., C. J. Ingle, C. M. Deom, and J. L. Sherwood. 2004. The two
envelope membrane glycoproteins of Tomato spotted wilt virus show differ-
ences in lectin-binding properties and sensitivities to glycosidases. Virology
319:107–117.
44. Nielsen, H., J. Engelbrecht, S. Brunak, and G. von Heijne. 1997. Identifica-
tion of prokaryotic and eukaryotic signal peptides and prediction of their
cleavage sites. Protein Eng. 10:1–6.
45. Paulson, J. C. 1989. Glycoproteins: what are the sugars for? Trends Bio-
chem. Sci. 14:272–275.
46. Pekosz, A., C. Griot, N. Nathanson, and F. Gonzalez-Scarano. 1995. Tropism
of bunyaviruses: evidence for a G1 glycoprotein-mediated entry pathway
common to the California serogroup. Virology 214:339–348.
47. Pierschbacher, M. D., and E. Ruoslahti. 1984. Cell attachment activity of
fibronectin can be duplicated by small synthetic fragments of the molecule.
Nature 309:30–33.
48. Resende, O. R., P. de Haan, A. C. de Avila, E. W. Kitajima, R. Kormelink,
R. Goldbach, and D. Peters. 1991. Generation of envelope defective inter-
fering RNA mutants of tomato spotted wilt virus by mechanical passage.
J. Gen. Virol. 72:2375–2383.
49. Richmond, K. E., K. Chenault, J. L. Sherwood, and T. L. German. 1998.
Characterization of the nucleic acid binding properties of tomato spotted
wilt virus nucleocapsid protein. Virology 248:6–11.
50. Roivainen, M., L. Piirainen, T. Hovi, I. Virtanen, T. Riikonen, J. Heino, and
T. Hyypia¨. 1994. Entry of coxsackievirus A9 into host cells: specific interac-
tions with v3 integrin, the vitronectin receptor. Virology 203:357–365.
51. Ro¨nka¨, H., P. Hilden, C.-H. Bonsdorff, and E. von Kuismanen. 1995. Ho-
modimeric association of the spike glycoproteins G1 and G2 of Uukuniemi
virus. Virology 211:241–250.
52. Rosenberg, I. M. 1996. Membrane and particulate-associated proteins, p.
135–152. In Protein analysis and purification. Birkhauser, Boston, Mass.
53. Rost, B. 1996. PHD: predicting one-dimensional protein structure by profile
based neural networks. Methods Enzymol. 266:525–539.
54. Rost, B., P. Fariselli, and R. Casadio. 1996. Topology prediction for helical
transmembrane proteins at 86% accuracy. Protein Sci. 7:1704–1718.
55. Sanchez, A. J., M. J. Vincent, and S. T. Nichol. 2002. Characterization of the
glycoproteins of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus. J. Virol. 76:7263–
7275.
56. Sherwood, J. L., T. L. German, A. E. Whitfield, J. W. Moyer, and D. E.
Ullman. 2001. Tospoviruses, p 1034–1040. In O. C. Maloy and T. D. Murray
(ed.), Encyclopedia of plant pathology. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York,
N.Y.
57. Spiropolou, C. F., C. S. Goldsmith, T. R. Shoemaker, C. J. Peters, and R. W.
Compans. 2003. Sin Nombre virus glycoprotein trafficking. Virology 308:48–
63.
58. Sundin, D. R., B. J. Beaty, N. Nathanson, and F. Gonzalez-Scarano. 1987. A
G1 glycoprotein epitope of La Crosse virus: a determinant of infection of
Aedes triseriatus. Science 235:591–593.
59. Tamkun, J. W., D. W. DeSimone, D. Fonda, R. S. Patel, C. Buck, A. F.
Horowitz, and R. O. Hynes. 1986. Structure of integrin, a glycoprotein in-
volved in the transmembrane linkage between fibronectin and actin. Cell
46:271–282.
60. Tusna´dy, G. E., and I. Simon. 1998. Principles governing amino acid com-
position of integral membrane proteins: applications to topology prediction.
J. Mol. Biol. 283:489–506.
61. Tusna´dy, G. E., and I. Simon. 2001. The HMMTOP transmembrane topol-
ogy prediction server. Bioinformatics 17:849–850.
62. Ullman, D. E., J. J. Cho, R. F. L. Mau, D. M. Westcot, and D. M. Custer.
1992. Midgut epithelial cells act as a barrier to tomato spotted wilt virus
acquisition by adult Western flower thrips. Phytopathology 82:1333–1342.
63. Ullman, D. E., T. L. German, J. L. Sherwood, D. M. Westcot, and F. A.
Cantone. 1993. Tospovirus replication in insect vector cells: immunocyto-
chemical evidence that the nonstructural protein encoded by the S RNA of
tomato spotted wilt tospovirus is present in thrips vector cells. Phytopathol-
ogy 83:456–463.
64. Ullman, D. E., R. Meideros, L. R. Campbell, A. E. Whitfield, J. L. Sherwood,
and T. L. German. 2002. Thrips as vectors of tospoviruses, p. 113–140. In
R. T. Plumb and J. A. Callow (ed.), Advances in botanical research: plant
virus vector interactions, vol. 36. Academic Press, London, United Kingdom.
65. van de Wetering, F., R. Goldbach, and D. Peters. 1996. Tomato spotted wilt
tospovirus ingestion by first instar larvae of Frankliniella occidentalis is a
prerequisite for transmission. Phytopathology 86:900–905.
66. Whitbeck, J. C., C. Peng, H. Lou, R. Xu, S. H. Willis, M. Ponce de Leon, T.
Peng, A. V. Nicola, R. I. Montgomery, M. S. Warner, A. M. Soulika, L. A.
Spruce, W. T. Moore, J. D. Lambris, P. G. Spear, G. H. Cohen, and R. J.
Eisenberg. 1997. Glycoprotein D of herpes simplex virus (HSV) binds di-
rectly to HVEM, a member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor superfam-
ily and a mediator of HSV entry. J. Virol. 71:6083–6093.
67. Whittaker, G. R., L. A. Wheldon, L. E. Giles, J. M. Stocks, I. W. Halliburton,
R. A. Killington, and D. M. Meredith. 1990. Characterization of the high Mr
glycoprotein (gP300) of equine herpesvirus type 1 as a novel glycoprotein
with extensive O-linked carbohydrate. J. Gen. Virol. 71:2407–2416.
68. Wijkamp, I., J. van Lent, R. Kormelink, R. Goldbach, and D. Peters. 1993.
Multiplication of tomato spotted wilt virus in its insect vector, Frankliniella
occidentalis. J. Gen. Virol. 74:341–349.
13206 WHITFIELD ET AL. J. VIROL.
 o
n
 M
arch 6, 2014 by PENN STATE UNIV
http://jvi.asm.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
