Acceptability of Praneem polyherbal vaginal tablet among
HIV uninfected women & their male partners in Pune
India - Phase I study
N.S. Joglekar, S.N. Joshi*, S.N. Navlakha, U.R. Katti* & S.M. Mehendale*
Departments of Social Sciences & *Epidemiology, National AIDS Research Institute (ICMR), Pune, India
Received October 26, 2004
Background & objectives: The number of HIV infected women is steadily increasing worldwide and
women controlled methods to prevent HIV are urgently needed. Vaginal microbicides are products
for vaginal administration that can be used to prevent HIV infection and other sexually transmitted
diseases (STDs). We conducted a Phase I safety and acceptability study of Praneem polyherbal
tablet, a candidate microbicide, among HIV uninfected women in Pune, India.
Methods: Twenty eligible women were requested to use the product intravaginally once daily for
14 consecutive days between menses. Safety was assessed by clinical examination, laboratory
monitoring and colposcopy. Acceptability was assessed after 14 days of product use through
structured questionnaires, focus group discussions among participating women, and in - depth
interviews with a subset of 5 randomly selected male partners.
Results: Praneem polyherbal tablet was found acceptable by the study participants with 90 per
cent of the participants showing 80 per cent and more acceptability score. Discharge of the product
residue was reported as a concern by 6 (30%) of participants. Nineteen (95%) female participants
liked the smell and the same number reported that the product was easy to use and did not affect
the usual sexual pleasure. However, men reported lack of sexual satisfaction.
Interpretation & conclusion: Product characteristics received good acceptability score in women.
However, studies of long-term safety and acceptability among at-risk population would provide
more detailed information about its long term acceptability.
Key words Acceptability - HIV - microbicide - Praneem polyherbal tablet - scores
Over 86 per cent of the reported HIV infections
in India have been contracted through heterosexual
intercourse1. Negotiating male condom use to
prevent HIV infection may not be always possible
for women owing to social, cultural and gender
inequalities2. Thus women urgently need female
controlled methods to protect themselves against
HIV infection.
Indian J Med Res 123, April 2006, pp 547-552
547
Vaginal microbicides can be used to prevent HIV
infection and other sexually transmitted diseases
(STDs)3. Over 60 products are currently being
evaluated as possible microbicides and are in various
stages of clinical development4, Praneem polyherbal
tablet is one such product, indigenously developed
in India. It contains purified extracts of Azadirachta
indica (Neem) along with purified Saponins from
Sapindus mukerosi and Mentha citrata oil with
sodium alginate as an excepient.
A considerable work has been done to explore
biological activities and medicinal applications of
Neem during the last five decades5. We undertook
a Phase I study to evaluate the acceptability of
Praneem polyherbal vaginal tablet, a candidate
microbicide, among women at low risk for HIV
infection. The safety of the product is reported
elsewhere6.
Material & Methods
Clinical procedures: The study was conducted by
National AIDS Research Institute (NARI), Pune,
India, in collaboration with Department of Obstetrics
and Gynaecology, Sassoon General Hospital, Pune.
The study protocol was approved by the Scientific
Advisory Committee and the Ethics Committee of
NARI, the ethics committee of Sassoon General
Hospital and the Drug Controller General of India.
Participants were recruited from the community
involvement plan of NARI, in which AIDS awareness
and the need for female controlled methods for HIV
prevention were stressed. Willing and potentially
eligible volunteers were referred to the study clinic.
Thirty six women volunteers were screened to
decide eligibility and 20 participants (mean age
30 + 4.8 yr, range 20-40 yr) were enrolled between
July 2003 to January 2004. Demography,
reproductive health history and safer sex behaviour
data have been described in the safety report6. Twenty
women were enrolled into the study three to five days
post menstruation, after establishing their eligibility
based on clinical, colposcopic and laboratory
evaluations. They were instructed to use the product
once daily for 14 consecutive days starting on the
day of enrollment. They were clinically and
colposcopically evaluated for safety on day 7 and
day 14 of the product use respectively6.
Acceptability assessment
Acceptability scores – A structured pre-coded
questionnaire was administered on day 14, which
included questions to assess acceptability regarding
colour of the product, odour of the product, product
usage related acceptability, symptoms experienced
and experiences during sexual contacts. These five
characteristics of the product were rated as 0 or 1,
with ‘0’ indicating non acceptability and ‘1’
indicating positive acceptability. Sum of these
scores was considered as the total score for
acceptability.
Qualitative assessment of acceptability –
Participants were asked about the properties that they
liked and disliked the most with open-ended
questions at their day 14 visit. Their responses were
tabulated to determine acceptability.
Acceptability assessment also included exit focus
group discussions (FGDs) with the participants. A
total of four FGDs were conducted among the
participants completing 14 days of product use within
one month of completion of the study. A focus group
guide was developed to explore the acceptability
related issues that were not captured in the
quantitative data instrument. Each focus group
discussion required up to one hour and 4-6
participants participated in each of the four FGDs.
A study counselor trained in qualitative data
collection methods facilitated the discussion and one
note-taker attended the group discussion. The
discussions included topics related to the decision-
making process for participation in the study, product
acceptability, and difficulties related to the product
use, willingness to consider using the product in
future, and experiences and reactions of the
male partners.
In depth interviews of five randomly selected
male partners of the participating women were
conducted to explore their views on the product
acceptability and attitude towards a possible
female controlled method for HIV prevention.
548 INDIAN J MED RES, APRIL 2006
These interviews were conducted with the help of
an in depth interview guide, which included
quest ions related to male involvement  in
microbicide trials, acceptability of the products
and concerns related to the product use. Each
interview lasted for about 45 to 60 min. The FGDs
and interviews were audio taped with the
permission of the participants, transcribed into the
local language and then translated into English.
The FGD and interview transcripts were analyzed
after coding into specific themes, e.g., ‘willingness
to use the product in future’, ‘difficulties faced during
product usage’, ‘liked characteristics’, ‘disliked
characteristics’ etc.
Results
Of the 20 enrolled participants, 12 (60%) were
housewives and 8 (40%) were unskilled labourers.
Five participants were illiterate and 15 (75%) had
some education. All of them were married and
monogamous except one participant who had two
lifetime sexual partners. The mean age at marriage
was 16.5 + 2.9 yr and the mean duration of marriage
was 14.5 + 6.7 yr.
Benefit of investigations done, as a part of
screening for the study, curiosity and wish to have
pelvic exam with novel technology (colposcopy),
interest in experiencing vaginal product and strive
to save women of future generations were the main
motives behind participation as reported by the
participants during FGDs. One participant reported
trust in the medicinal qualities of Neem. All of the
female participants had consulted their spouses
before deciding about study participation in order to
avoid unnecessary problems and suspicion by their
male partners subsequently.
The main reason for male partners consenting
for the study was altruistic motivation to save the
community from the dangerous disease. Although
they had fear about side effects initially, assurance
of management of side effects by the study team
during the informed consent process helped them
in making an informed choice of  s tudy
participation.
Product adherence: All the 20 enrolled participants
completed all of their scheduled follow up visits.
Nineteen of them completed the full schedule of
product applications. The product use was extended
for three days for one participant who had missed
three applications.
Acceptability of the product characteristics: The
maximum acceptability score that could be attained
was 5. Acceptability score was 5 for 9 subjects, 4 for
9 others and 3 for the remaining 2, the mean being
4.35. Only one participant out of twenty, perceived
herself at risk of STDs and she had acceptability
score of 5.
Majority of the women liked the product. All the
participants liked its ‘cream’ colour and 19 (95%)
liked its smell too. Out of the 19 (95%) participants
who found the product easy to use, 12 (63.2%) had
not used any vaginal product in the past, and all of
them had 80 per cent and more acceptability scores.
Product storage was not perceived as a problem by
most of the women. Smell was rated as the most liked
characteristic by 15 (75%) participants, the same was
reiterated during FGDs. Being a tablet, women liked
the easy mode of insertion.
Product experience: Of the twenty participants, 9
(45%, 95% CI 22.8-68.7) reported total 17 episodes
of some genital irritation, possibly related to the
product use. However, 7 of these 9 had a maximum
acceptability score and two of these 7 had
experienced multiple symptoms. The data indicated
willingness to accept the product in spite of irritative
symptoms.
The median number of sexual contacts reported
by the participating women during the study period
was two. Leaking of the product before sex was
reported by two participants, one woman reported
leaking of the product during sex and 9 (45%)
participants reported leaking after sex. Only one
participant who was married for 15 yr reported that
she did not get sexual pleasure while using the
product and also reported leakage of the product after
sex. Sexual pleasure was perceived to be as good as
the one without product use by rest of the participants
and the same was reported during FGDs. One
JOGLEKAR et al: ACCEPTABILITY OF PRANEEM POLYHERBAL VAGINAL TABLET 549
participant commented that vaginal products would
not affect sexual pleasure, as the products will be
used by women.
During male in - depth interviews, smell of the
product and lack of sexual pleasure were the main
reported concerns, however, product use did not
affect men’s routine sexual activity.
Concerns related to the product: Discharge of the
product remains was reported to be the most disliked
characteristic by 6 (30%) women; of these 2 were
most concerned about soiling of the clothes. In the
focus group discussions, most participants
expressed a concern over intermittent discharge,
which continued up to 8 h after the product
insertion. Some participants informed that ‘curd like
discharge’ appeared intermittently which soiled
their clothes and that made them feel miserable.
Discharge was usually noticed at the time of
micturation. Other problems reported included the
large size of the tablet, and transient itching related
to the product use. Almost half of the participants
(9/20, 45%) did not mention anything that they did
not like about the tablet.
During FGDs, storing the study product was
mentioned as a problem due to lack of privacy and
inquisitiveness of children.  Men did not like the use
of condom during the study period and three of them
reported tightness, uneasiness and inconvenience.
Acceptance of vaginal products by Indian women and
men: Women participants felt that Indian women
would accept such a product, as its use would be
under their own control and products free from side
effects would have greater acceptability. During male
in depth interviews all men expressed willingness to
use the product in future.
Overall, both men and women felt that male
involvement is crucial in vaginal microbicides trials
in order to avoid conflicts. It was felt that a joint
decision to participate in the study would be a better
option. However, two men who were better educated
than the others (7th grade and above) opined that
male involvement should be left to the women’s
discretion.
Discussion
 A 30 per cent efficacious vaginal microbicide, if
used 60 per cent of the times would provide more
protection than a method that is 90 per cent
efficacious but used only 20 per cent of the times7.
Thus consistent use is the most crucial factor in
deciding effectiveness of a particular product. Ability
and willingness of a potential user to use a product
or technology in every day life, depends on individual
perceptions of susceptibility to certain conditions,
benefits of that particular method, concerns about
the potential side effects, behavioural choice, cost
and access8. Acceptability of the product has been
reported to be a function of interaction between
product characteristics and perceptions of the
users9,10.
Praneem polyherbal tablet was acceptable to the
participating women in terms of its aesthetic
characteristics like appearance and smell. All the
participants completed their scheduled follow up
visits and adhered to the treatment regimen. Nearly
90 per cent of the participants showed 80 per cent
and more acceptability scores. This can be considered
as indicative of consistent usage of the product.
Product usage was perceived as easy by a majority
of the participants. Product acceptability was good
even among those women who had never used a
vaginal product and hence a hypothetical
apprehension about possible non acceptability of
vaginal products among Indian women should not
become a barrier for microbocides advocacy.
Safety of the product could definitely affect its
acceptability11. This product was found to be safe in
the study population in once daily application for 14
consecutive days6. This finding would be of great
value in the post trial promotion of this product in
the community.
Sexual experience was expected to influence the
product acceptability in men. This has been reported
earlier in South African studies12. Effect of the
physical presence of the product on sexual experience
in men could have been altered by the confounding
effect of condom use by men during the study.
550 INDIAN J MED RES, APRIL 2006
As opposed to men, women did not experience any
negative effect following the product use on sexual
satisfaction. Moreover, sexual pleasure was perceived
to be a man’s issue by the participants. This finding
again substantiates that sexual preferences of men are
considered as more important in the Indian cultural
setting and their perceptions would greatly affect
acceptability of vaginal microbicides in future. Both
men and women expressed a need for vaginal products
for HIV prevention, but had concerns about their
covert and uninformed use.
Perceived risk could positively affect the
acceptance for vaginal microbicides in women as
reported in the earlier literature13,14 and we made the
same observation.
Post-usage discharge of the product residue
seemed to be a major concern to the women. Similar
finding has been reported in earlier studies14-16. This
needs to be addressed by making necessary
modifications in the manufacturing process and
product formulation.
Acceptability measurements involving actual
testing of the real product and monitoring effects
following its long term use and reactions are
considered as more objective17, our data provided
assessment of the acceptability of praneem tablet
based on actual experiences following the product
use. The primary objective of this study was a short-
term assessment for safety.
The generalizability of our findings may be
limited as this trial was done with the population
selected according to study specific criteria, and
large-scale efficacy studies among high risk women
would provide wider acceptability data.
As per UNAIDS, less than 20 per cent of married
Indian women have ever heard of AIDS18. Awareness
and education programmes should aim at informing
women of the risks they face. There is also a
need for awareness on microbicides as
a female controlled option for prevention of HIV and
STDs and as a possible alternative to male condoms.
Indigenously developed products like 'Praneem'
might help to serve the urgent need for a female
controlled option like a vaginal microbicide, for
Indian women. To conclude, Praneem polyherbal
tablet was found to be acceptable by the study
participants in Pune. However, studies among at risk
populations will provide data on its acceptability
among the potential users in that category. Product
characteristics, perceptions about the risk for HIV
infection, product usage and related sexual
experience were the factors that influenced
acceptability of vaginal products in women, whereas
sexual satisfaction related to the product use was the
main determinant of acceptability in men.
Acknowledgment
Authors acknowledge Dr R.S. Paranjape, Director, NARI,
Pune, for his continuous help and encouragement. We thank Dr
G.P. Talwar and Panacea Biotech Ltd., New Delhi, India, for
providing the study product, and National AIDS Control
Organization (NACO), New Delhi for providing financial support.
We also thank Dr Kapila Bharucha, Sassoon General Hospital,
Pune, for making the study implementation possible, data entry
staff and other staff of National AIDS Research Institute and
Sassoon General Hospital, Obstetrics and Gynaecology
department for technical help. We gratefully acknowledge the
participation and co-operation by the participants without whom
the study would not have been possible.
References
1. Surveillance for AIDS cases in India as reported to NACO
as on 31st March 2004 (webpage: http:/www.naco.nic.in/
AIDS Cases/overv.htm), accessed on May 22, 2004.
2. Bhattacharya G. Sociocultural and behavioral contexts of
condom use in heterosexual married couples in India:
challenges to the HIV prevention program. Health Educ
Behav 2004; 31 : 101-17.
3. Elias CJ, Coggins C. Female-controlled methods to prevent
sexual transmission of HIV. AIDS 1996; 10 (Suppl 3) : S43-51.
4. D’Cruz OJ, Uckun FM. Clinical development of
microbicides for the prevention of HIV infection.
Curr Pharm Des 2004; 10 : 315-36.
5. Biswas K, Chattopadhyay I, Banerjee RK, Bandhopadhyay U.
Biological activity and medicinal properties of neem
(Azadirachta Indica). Curr Sci 2002; 82 : 1336-45.
6. Joshi SN, Katti U, Godbole S, Bharucha K, Kumar BK,
Kulkarni S, et al. Phase I safety study of Praneem polyherbal
vaginal tablet use among HIV-uninfected women in Pune,
India. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2005; 99 : 769-74.
JOGLEKAR et al: ACCEPTABILITY OF PRANEEM POLYHERBAL VAGINAL TABLET 551
7. Watts CH, Thompsom WA, Heise LL. The effectiveness of
microbicides for HIV prevention. Abstract Number 33161,
abstract book, p 624. 12th World AIDS conference, Geneva,
Switzerland, June 28-July 3, 1998.
8. Mobilization for microbicides: The Decisive Decade.
The Rockefeller Foundation microbicide initiative.
Available at http://www.rockfound.org/documents/488/
rep1_summary.pdf, accessed on August 20, 2004.
9. Hammett TM, Mason TH, Joanis CL, Foster SE, Harmon P,
Robles RR, et al. Acceptability of formulations and
application methods for vaginal microbicide among drug-
involved women: results of product trials in three cities.
Sex Transm Dis 2000; 27 : 119-26.
10. Morrow K, Rosen R, Richter L, Emans A, Forbes A, Day J,
et al. The acceptability of an investigational vaginal
microbicide PRO 2000 Gel, among women in Phase I clinical
trial. J Womens Health (Larchmt) 2003; 12 : 655-66.
11. Moon MW, Khumalo-Sakutukwa GN, Heiman JE,
Mbizvo MT, Padian NS. Vaginal microbicides for HIV/
STI prevention in Zimbabwe: what key informants say.
J Transcult Nurs 2002; 13 : 19-23.
12. Ramjee G, Gouws E, Andrews A, Myer L, Weber AE. The
acceptability of a vaginal microbicide among south African
men. Int Fam Plann Perspect 2001; 27 : 164-70.
13. Elias C, Coggins C. Acceptability research on female-
controlled barrier methods to prevent heterosexual
transmission of HIV: Where have we been? Where are we
going? J Womens Health Gend Based Med 2001; 10 : 163-
73.
14. Bentley ME, Fullem AM, Tolley EE, Kelly MS, Joglekar NS,
Srirak N, et al. Acceptability of a microbicide among women
and their partners in a 4-country Phase I trial. Am J Public
Health 2004; 94 : 1159-64.
15. Raymond E, Alvarado G, Ledesma L, Diaz S, Bassol S,
Morales E, et al. Acceptability of two spermicides in five
countries. Contraception 1999; 60 : 45-50.
16. Bentley M, Morrow K, Fullem A, Chesney MA, Horton SD,
Rosenberg Z, et al. Acceptability of a novel vaginal
microbicide during a safety trial among low-risk women.
Fam Plann Perspect 2000; 32 : 184-8.
17. Turner CF. Measuring the acceptability of microbicides:
Problems and principles. AIDS 2000; 15 : S31-2.
18. UNAIDS, Report on the Global AIDS Epidemic 2004.
4th  g lobal  repor t .  p27-28.  Joint  Uni ted  Nat ions
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS).  Geneva,
Switzerland, July 2004.
Reprint requests: Mrs Neelam S. Joglekar, Behavioural Scientist, National AIDS Research Institute (ICMR)
G-73, MIDC, Post Box 1895, Bhosari, Pune 411026, India
e-mail: joglekarneelam@yahoo.com
552 INDIAN J MED RES, APRIL 2006
