Mass Spectrometry Reveals Specific and Global Molecular
Transformations during Viral Infection
Eden P. Go,† William R. Wikoff,† Zhouxin Shen,†,‡ Grace O’Maille,† Hirotoshi Morita,†
Thomas P. Conrads,§ Anders Nordstrom,† Sunia A. Trauger,† Wilasinee Uritboonthai,†
David A. Lucas,§ King C. Chan,§ Timothy D. Veenstra,§ Hanna Lewicki,| Michael B. Oldstone,|
Anette Schneemann,*,† and Gary Siuzdak*,†
Department of Molecular Biology and The Center for Mass Spectrometry, The Scripps Research Institute,
La Jolla, California 92037, Mass Consortium Corporation, San Diego, California 92109, Laboratory of
Proteomics and Analytical Technologies, SAIC-Frederick, Inc., National Cancer Institute,
Frederick, Maryland 21702, and Departments of Molecular and Integrative Neuroscience and Infectology,
The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037
Received May 5, 2006
Mass spectrometry analysis was used to target three different aspects of the viral infection process:
the expression kinetics of viral proteins, changes in the expression levels of cellular proteins, and the
changes in cellular metabolites in response to viral infection. The combination of these methods
represents a new, more comprehensive approach to the study of viral infection revealing the complexity
of these events within the infected cell. The proteins associated with measles virus (MV) infection of
human HeLa cells were measured using a label-free approach. On the other hand, the regulation of
cellular and Flock House Virus (FHV) proteins in response to FHV infection of Drosophila cells was
monitored using stable isotope labeling. Three complementary techniques were used to monitor
changes in viral protein expression in the cell and host protein expression. A total of 1500 host proteins
was identified and quantified, of which over 200 proteins were either up- or down-regulated in response
to viral infection, such as the up-regulation of the Drosophila apoptotic croquemort protein, and the
down-regulation of proteins that inhibited cell death. These analyses also demonstrated the up-
regulation of viral proteins functioning in replication, inhibition of RNA interference, viral assembly,
and RNA encapsidation. Over 1000 unique metabolites were also observed with significant changes in
over 30, such as the down-regulated cellular phospholipids possibly reflecting the initial events in cell
death and viral release. Overall, the cellular transformation that occurs upon viral infection is a process
involving hundreds of proteins and metabolites, many of which are structurally and functionally
uncharacterized.
Keywords: virus ¥ protein regulation ¥ viral infection ¥ metabolites ¥ isotope labeling ¥ mass spectrometry
Introduction
A key component in understanding biological events is to
quantitatively monitor molecular concentration changes within
the cell. Direct measurement of the cellular response to
perturbation provides a means to identify the species that
participate in cellular regulation and further allows for the
determination of the molecule’s functional activity. The course
of viral infection involves host cell regulation, but there is no
comprehensive method to characterize these changes. Current
approaches for monitoring the progress of viral infection and
the cellular response include assays based on cell cultures,
antibody-antigen reactions, and nucleic acid analysis.1 Assays
based on cell cultures such as the plaque assay and variations
thereof remain the most commonly used.2 Other assays such
as those based on a specific interaction of viral antigen with
antibodies are often problematic due to the nature of affinity
recognition and are specific to a particular molecule, limiting
the use for large-scale proteomics.3 Gene expression in infected
cells at the mRNA level can be measured using PCR and
Northern blot,4 and microarrays allow simultaneous analysis
of thousands of gene expression products in a single experi-
ment and have been applied in virology.5-7 However, these
experiments do not necessarily reflect changes at the protein
level in the infected cells, because changes in mRNA and
protein expression levels are not directly correlated.8-10
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mails: (for A.S.)
aschneem@scripps.edu and (for G.S.) siuzdak@scripps.edu.
† Department of Molecular Biology and The Center for Mass Spectrometry,
The Scripps Research Institute.
‡ Mass Consortium Corporation.
§ National Cancer Institute.
| Departments of Molecular and Integrative Neuroscience and Infectology,
The Scripps Research Institute.
10.1021/pr060215t CCC: $33.50  2006 American Chemical Society Journal of Proteome Research 2006, 5, 2405-2416 2405
Published on Web 08/17/2006
Differential protein quantification for proteomics is typically
measured by two-dimensional PAGE, followed by mass spec-
trometry identification of the differentially expressed proteins.
An alternative approach to quantify regulatory changes is stable
isotope labeling combined with nanoLC and mass spectrom-
etry.11,12 Generally, two sets of samples are differentially labeled
with a stable isotope: one sample with the light form, the other
with the heavy form of the label. Depending on the type of the
chemical labeling reagent used, samples are differentially
labeled before, during, or after enzymatic digestion, combined,
and then subjected to a separation/enrichment technique
followed by analysis by mass spectrometry for quantitative
comparison. Changes in protein expression levels are quantified
by determining the ratio of the peak intensities of the light and
heavy forms of the generated peptides. The pairwise compari-
son of the peak intensities of peptides labeled with the heavy
and light form of the label serves as the basis for quantitative
protein analysis. It should be noted that the accuracy of the
quantitative measurement depends on when the label was
incorporated. Highest level of accuracy can be achieved when
the label is incorporated early in the process due to the
reduction of the sample losses and variability.
Stable isotope labeling has become an indispensable tool in
protein quantitation. Two of the most widely used methods in
which isotopes can be introduced in a proteome pool are
metabolic isotope labeling and chemical isotope labeling.13,14
In metabolic isotope labeling, a stable isotope, typically either
15N or 13C, is introduced into the cell culture during cell growth
or protein synthesis. Amino acids from isolated proteins are
either globally or selectively labeled. While metabolic isotope
labeling is simple, it is limited to protein samples derived from
cell cultures. In chemical isotope labeling, chemical modifica-
tion of functional groups on the peptide side chains or specific
structural features on the protein allow the incorporation of
stable isotopes before, during, or after proteolysis. Among the
most commonly used labeling approaches are isotope coded
affinity tag (ICAT),15,16 18O labeling,17-21 lysine-specific label-
ing,22,23 and labeling of the N- or C-termini of the peptides by
acylation24 or esterification.25
While stable isotope labeling has been widely used in
comparative proteomics, label-free approach is becoming a
viable and an attractive alternative.26-28 The method is rela-
tively simple as it utilizes reproducible chromatographic sepa-
ration and high mass accuracy measurements along with data
normalization methods29 to follow the changes in retention
times and relative integrated peak intensities that reflect the
changes in concentration of analytes in a perturbed biological
system. Moreover, informatics algorithms are employed to
facilitate the data analysis due to the large dataset that can be
obtained from LC-MS experiments. Overall, this is highly
effective in comparative proteomics due to its comprehensive-
ness and throughput. To date, the label-free quantitative
proteomics approach has been successfully applied to the
quantitative proteome analysis of human serum,30,31 yeast,27,32
and Shewanella oneidensis.33
This study presents the use of label-free proteomics ap-
proach and stable isotope labeling to quantify differentially
expressed proteins in cells during the course of viral infection.
Specifically, we apply a nonlinear approach to align and
quantify proteins (without isotope labeling) expressed when
measles virus (MV) infects cells. Measles, one of the typical viral
diseases of childhood, is a ssRNA negative strand enveloped
virus. MV was used to test a new approach to protein quan-
titation that does not require chemical labeling of the proteins.
Digests of whole cell lysates were examined directly with a high
mass accuracy ESI-TOF mass spectrometer equipped with a
separate reference sprayer. This dual spray configuration allows
the introduction of reference ions through a separate ESI probe
without signal suppression of the main ESI ions and allows for
the mass correction that yields accurate mass within 5 ppm
relative error. The ESI-TOF data was analyzed using a newly
developed software package XCMS34 for nonlinear alignment
of the chromatograms and integration of the peak intensities.
This allowed us to monitor the changes in levels of the measles
structural protein, phosphoprotein P, during the course of
cellular infection.
We also applied quantitative profiling approaches based on
direct analysis of intensity using 18O and cICAT labeling in
combination with nanoLC-MS/MS, FT-MS, DIOS-MS, and
capillary LC-ESI TOF MS to profile the changes in protein and
metabolite expression levels in Flock House Virus (FHV)-
infected Drosophila cells. FHV is a small non-enveloped
icosahedral insect positive strand nodavirus that replicates
robustly in plants, insects, yeast, and mammalian cells.35-37 Its
genome consists of two single-stranded messenger-sense RNAs,
RNA1 and RNA2. RNA1 encodes the viral replicase, protein A
(112 kDa), and RNA2 encodes the coat protein alpha (44 kDa).
Following assembly of the virus particle, most of the alpha
protein subunits undergo an autocatalytic cleavage, which
yields mature coat proteins beta (39 kDa) and gamma (4.4
kDa).38 Cell cultures infected with FHV also produce a sub-
genomic RNA, RNA3, which is derived from the 3′-end of RNA1
and is not packaged into the virions. It encodes the two
nonstructural proteins, B1 and B2 (10 kDa). Protein B2 func-
tions to inhibit RNA silencing.39 We monitored expression of
both structural and nonstructural FHV proteins in Drosophila
cells at various times after infection of sf9 Drosophila cells with
virus. The rate at which viral proteins were produced during
the course of infection was determined by monitoring the peak
intensity ratio of at least one peptide and its isotopic analogue
as internal standard. This approach was validated by determin-
ing the absolute concentration of one of the viral proteins
during the course of infection, using an internal, isotopically
labeled standard. We also identified and quantified the differ-
entially expressed host proteins following viral infection. A total
of 1500 host proteins was identified and quantified, of which
150 were up-regulated while 66 were down-regulated in
response to viral infection.
In addition to monitoring protein regulation, we developed
a mass-based metabolite profiling approach to monitor changes
in metabolite levels during the course of viral infection. The
examination of the metabolite profile from whole cells was
motivated by the improved capabilities of mass spectrometry
technology, making quantitative endogenous metabolite in-
formation possible. These novel viral and cell protein analyses
combined with metabolite profiling offer a comprehensive
window into the process of viral infection (see Table 1).
Experimental Section
Materials and Reagents. All reagents were obtained in high
purity from Sigma-Aldrich except when noted otherwise.
Ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3), ammonium formate
(HCO2NH4), guanidine hydrochloride (GdnâHCl), dibasic so-
dium phosphate (Na2HPO4), ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
(EDTA), phosphate-buffered saline solution (PBS), monobasic
research articles Go et al.
2406 Journal of Proteome Research ¥ Vol. 5, No. 9, 2006
sodium phosphate (NaH2PO4), sodium chloride (NaCl), am-
monium hydroxide (NH4OH), Tris, sodium fluoride (NaF),
sodium orthovanadate (Na3VO4), iodoacetamide (IAA), Triton
X-100, penicillin, streptomycin, and phenylmethylsulfonyl fluo-
ride (PMSF) were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO).
Sodium sulfate (Na2SO4) was from ICN Biochemicals, Inc.
(Aurora, OH). Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and formic acid were
from Fluka (Milwaukee, WI). Hydrochloric (HCl) acid and
hydrofluoric (HF) acid were from Fisher Scientific (Fairlawn,
NJ). HPLC grade acetonitrile (CH3CN) and methanol (CH3OH)
were obtained from EM Science (Darmstadt, Germany).
UltraLink immobilized monomeric avidin, Tris(2-carboxyethyl)-
phosphine hydrochloride (TCEPâHCl), ImmunoPure D-biotin,
and bicinchonic acid (BCA) protein assay reagent kit were
purchased from Pierce (Rockford, IL). Water was purified by a
Barnstead Nanopure system (Dubuque, IA). Cleavable ICAT
reagents were from Applied Biosystems, Inc. (Foster City, CA).
RapiGest, (heptadecafluoro-1,1,2,2-tetrahydrododecyl)dimethyl-
chlorosilane and trypsin were obtained from Waters Corpora-
tion, Gelest, Inc., and Promega, respectively.
Cell Culture and Viruses. Drosophila melanogaster cells
(Schneider’s line 1) were suspended at a density of 4  107 cells/
mL in a Schneider’s insect medium supplemented with 15%
fetal bovine serum, 100 units of penicillin/mL, and 100 íg of
streptomycin/mL. The suspension was inoculated with FHV at
a multiplicity of 20 plaque forming units/cell and allowed to
attach for 1 h at room temperature with gentle agitation. A
volume of 2.5 mL (1  108 cells) was aliquoted into 100 mm
tissue culture dishes containing 12.5 mL of growth medium.
The dishes were incubated without further agitation at 27 °C.
Cells were harvested and processed for protein analysis at 0,
4, 8, 12, 16, 20, 22, and 24 h post-infection. A sample of
uninfected cells served as a control. For MV, HeLa cells were
used as previously reported, and cell proteins analyzed 0, 18,
and 72 h post-infection.40 MV was propagated, purified, and
quantitated as previously published.40,41
Measles Virus (MV). HeLa cells were infected with MV, and
harvested at 18 or 72 h post-infection, or mock-infected with
buffer. Cells were lysed by freeze/thaw and clarified, and the
total protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay.
Proteins were digested with trypsin following denaturation in
6 M urea, reduction with DTT, and reaction with iodoacet-
amide. Proteins were identified using a chip-based nano-
electrospray LC-MS/MS with an ion trap (Agilent MSD Trap,
HPLC Chip Cube). A total of 500 ng of protein was injected,
and the peptides were eluted with a gradient from 8 to 37%
acetonitrile, at a flow rate of 500 nL/min over 20 min. MS/MS
data were search against the Swiss-Prot database using Mascot.
The search results show that individual ion scores above 32
indicate the peptide based identification at 95% confidence
level. Ion score of 48 was obtained for the phosphoprotein P
peptides. A total of 1 íg of protein was also injected on a
capillary flow reverse-phase HPLC column (Agilent 1100 sys-
tem), using a reverse-phase column (Zorbax 300 SB-C18 with
0.5 mm inner diameter and 150 mm length) at a flow rate of 7
íL/min. The resolving portion of the gradient was from 5 to
37% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid over 35 min. The mass
spectrometer was an ESI-TOF (Agilent MSD) with a reference
spray containing ions at m/z 121.0509 and 922.0098. The scan
range was from 100 to 2000 m/z with a capillary voltage of 3500
V, and a fragmentator voltage of 120 V. The program XCMS
was used to align the datasets,34 and Analyst was used to
calculate the peak heights and areas for particular ions.
Protein Extraction. At various times after infection, medium
was removed from the dishes and the cell monolayers were
rinsed with PBS. The cells were washed off the tissue culture
dish with 10 mL of PBS buffer, transferred to a 15 mL conical
tube, and pelleted by centrifugation at 670g for 5 min. The
supernatant was removed, and the cells were immediately
frozen in a dry ice-ethanol bath and stored at -80 °C pend-
ing analysis. Frozen cells were thawed at room temperature
and then resuspended in 150 íL of TNE buffer (10 mM Tris
Buffer, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8) and lysed with 150
íL of 2% (w/v) RapiGest in TNE buffer. Samples were mixed
with a vortexer and incubated at room temperature for 60 min
to extract proteins. The samples were then centrifuged at
20 000g for 10 min and supernatants were used for protein
digestion.
Tryptic Protein Digestion for 18O Labeling. Each time point
sample was diluted 10-fold in 10 mM Tris buffer to a final
concentration of 0.1% RapiGest. The total protein concentration
of each sample was measured by Bradford assay, and 300 íL
of each sample (100 íg of proteins) was used for protein
digestion. Samples were boiled for 5 min to denature the
proteins followed by 5 min sonication, reduction, and alkylation
with 2 mM TCEP at 37 °C for 30 min and 10 mM IAA at 37 °C
in the dark for 30 min, respectively. Proteins were then digested
at 37 °C with trypsin at a protein/enzyme ratio of 50:1 (w/w)
overnight, followed by a second trypsin digestion under the
same conditions. Each sample was brought to a final concen-
tration of 50 mM (pH < 2) HCl to break down RapiGest. The
samples were subsequently incubated at 37 °C for 1 h and
centrifuged at 25 000g for 10 min.
Table 1. Experimental Approaches Used in This Study
separation
mass
spectrometry label virus/target purpose
time
points (h) figure
1D-nano LC-MS ESI-ion trap none MV proteins viral protein
expression levels
0, 18, 72 1
1D-capillary LC-MS ESI-TOF none MV proteins relative protein
quantitation
0, 18, 72 1
none DIOS 16O/18O FHV proteins R,B2,A
expression kinetic
viral protein
expression kinetics
0, 4, 8, 12, 16,
20, 22, 24
2
1D-nanoLC ESI-ion trap 16O/18O FHV proteins R,B2,A
expression kinetics
viral protein
expression kinetics
0, 4, 8, 12, 16,
20, 22, 24
3
2D-nanoLC FT-MS cICAT FHV/untargeted cellular
proteins
cellular protein
expression changes
0, 8 4, 5
1D-microLC-MS ESI-TOF none FHV/untargeted small
molecules (100-1000 m/z)
small molecule
changes in response
to viral infection
0, 12 6
MS Reveals Molecular Transformations during Viral Infection research articles
Journal of Proteome Research ¥ Vol. 5, No. 9, 2006 2407
Preparation of the 16O/18O Labeled FHV Digest. Labeling
experiments were performed by digesting the proteins in H2O18
and by using Prolytica 18O labeling kit obtained from Strategene,
Inc. 18O labeling efficiency of 95% was obtained indicating
efficient 18O incorporation to peptides. 16O/18O labeling with
Prolytica kit was done using the protocol recommended by the
manufacturer. Briefly, two 50 íL portions of the tryptic digest
from each time point were dried in a SpeedVac. The dried
peptides were reconstituted with 10 mM Tris buffer followed
by the addition of 10 íL of resuspended immobilized trypsin.
The peptide/immobilized trypsin mixture was dried without
heat in a SpeedVac for 1 h. The dried mixture was resuspended
in 40 íL of H2O18 and 10 íL of acetonitrile while the other dried
portion in 40 íL of water and 10 íL of acetonitrile. The mixtures
were continuously agitated in a vortex mixer for 3-5 h at room
temperature. The reaction was stopped by adding 2.5 íL of
concentrated formic acid. The samples were centrifuged at
13 200g for 5 min, and the supernatants were used for the
analysis.
Internal Standards for 18O Labeling. Sucrose gradient-
purified FHV at a concentration of 0.93 mg/mL and a protein
coat concentration of about 0.275 íg/mL as measured by
Bradford assay and the 16-hour time point were used as
internal standards in this study. One hundred microliters of
each virus solution and 0.2% RapiGest in TNE buffer were
mixed to dissolve the virus particles. These solutions were
subsequently digested using the same digestion protocol
described above.
Cleavable ICAT (cICAT) Labeling. Equal amounts of D.
melanogaster proteins (1 mg each) were labeled either with the
light (control, cICAT-13C0) or the heavy (8 h post FHV infection,
cICAT-13C9) isotopic versions of the cICAT reagent using a
modified method from that recommended by the manufac-
turer. Briefly, 1 mg of each cell protein extract was dissolved
in 80 íL of 6 M GdnâHCl in 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.3. Each
sample was chemically reduced by adding 1 íL of 100 mM
TCEPâHCl followed by boiling in a water bath for 10 min. The
reduced samples were transferred to vials containing either
cICAT-13C0 or cICAT-13C9 dissolved in 40 íL of CH3CN and
incubated at 37 °C for 2 h. The two samples were combined,
buffer exchanged into 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.3, using a D-Salt
Excellulose desalting column (Pierce, Rockford, IL), and di-
gested with trypsin overnight at 37 °C using an enzyme-to-
protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w). The digestion was quenched by
boiling the samples in a water bath for 10 min and adding
PMSF to a final concentration of 1 mM.
Affinity Purification and Cleaving of cICAT-Labeled Pep-
tides. A 1.5 mL bed volume UltraLink immobilized monomeric
avidin column was slurry-packed in a glass Pasteur pipet and
equilibrated with 2 PBS (0.2 M sodium phosphate, 0.3 M
NaCl, pH 7.2). The column was blocked with 2 mM D-biotin in
2 PBS, pH 7.2, the biotin was stripped from the reversible
binding sites of the column as per manufacturer’s instructions,
and the column was re-equilibrated with 2 PBS, pH 7.2. The
cICAT-labeled peptides were boiled for 5 min, cooled to room
temperature, loaded onto the avidin column, and allowed to
incubate for 15 min at ambient temperature. After washing the
column with 10 bed volumes each of 2 PBS, pH 7.2, 1 PBS,
pH 7.2, and 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.3/20% CH3CN, the cICAT-
labeled peptides were eluted using 30% CH3CN/0.4% formic
acid and lyophilized to dryness. The biotin moiety was cleaved
from the cICAT-labeled peptides by treatment with the cleaving
reagents provided by the manufacturer for 2 h at 37 °C, and
lyophilized to dryness.
Strong Cation Exchange Fractionation of cICAT-Labeled
Peptides. The lyophilized D. melanogaster/FHV cICAT-labeled
peptides were dissolved in 250 íL of 0.1% formic acid and
injected onto a strong cation exchange liquid chromatography
(SCXLC) column (1 mm  150 mm, Polysulfoethyl A, PolyLC,
Inc., Columbia, MD). The following HCO2NH4/CH3CN multi-
step gradient was used to elute the cICAT-labeled peptides from
the column at a flow rate of 50 íL/min: 3% mobile phase B
for 5 min, followed a linear increase to 10% B in 35 min, a linear
increase to 60% B in 46 min, then a linear increase to 100% B
in 1 min and maintained at 100% B for 9 min. Mobile phase A
was 25% CH3CN, and mobile phase B was 25% CH3CN, 0.5 M
HCO2NH4, pH 3.0. Fractions were collected every minute for
96 min. The SCXLC fractions were reconstituted in 20 íL of
0.1% TFA, and 5 íL of each combined into 16 total fractions
(from 10 to 90 min) prior to mass spectral analysis.
Mass Spectrometry. DIOS-MS experiments were conducted
on an Applied Biosystems Voyager STR mass spectrometer
operated in the positive ion mode. This instrument was
equipped with automated and multisampling capabilities for
rapid sample analysis. DIOS chips were attached to a modified
MALDI target plate with a conductive tape, and samples were
irradiated with a 337 nm N2 laser operated at 5 Hz. Five
replicates of each time point sample were deposited on the
DIOS chip with each spot analyzed twice. Mass spectra were
generated by averaging 500 individual laser shots into a single
spectrum. Each spectrum was accumulated from 10 shots at
50 different locations within the DIOS spot. The whole data
collection process took less than 3 h to complete. The ratios of
the peak intensities of 16O- and 18O-labeled peptides, m/z 1073.6
and 1077.6, corresponding to LSQPGLAFLK, and m/z 1935.1
and 1939.1, corresponding to the VVVTTTQTAPVPQQNVPR,
were used to calculate the FHV protein ratios between the time
point samples and internal standard.
NanoLC-MS/MS experiments were performed on an Agilent
MSD/trap ESI-ion trap mass spectrometer which was directly
coupled to an Agilent 1100 nano-pump and micro-autosampler
for tandem LC-MS analysis. Mobile phases utilized for the
experiment consisted of buffer A, 99.9% H2O (Burdick and
Jackson, high purity solvent) and 0.1% formic acid (J. T. Baker);
and buffer B, 99.9% acetonitrile (Fisher, optima grade) and 0.1%
formic acid which were pumped at a flow rate of 250 nL/min.
Eight microliters of each time point sample mixed with internal
standard at ratio of 2.5:1 was injected into a reversed-phase
fused silica column (100 íM i.d., 15 cm long) pulled to a
diameter of <5 ím and then packed with C18 stationary phase
(Zorbax SB-C18, Agilent). The experiment was performed using
a 120 min reversed-phase gradient. A blank run was performed
between every two samples to ensure that there was no sample
carryover. The integrated intensities of the extracted ion
chromatograms (EIC) of m/z 968.4 (+2 charge ion of VVVTTTQT-
APVPQQNVPR), and 970.4 (+2 charge ion of the 18O-labeled
VVVTTTQTAPVPQQNVPR), 944.5 (+2 charge ion of VFVD-
PLATTTTIQDPLR), 946.5 (+2 charge ion of the 18O-labeled
VFVDPLATTTTIQDPLR), 584.4 (+2 charge ion of LALIQELPDR),
and 586.5 4 (+2 charge ion of the 18O-labeled LALIQELPDR)
were used to calculate the coat protein, protein A, and protein
B2 ratios between the time point samples and internal stan-
dard, respectively. MS/MS data were searched against the
Swiss-Prot database using Mascot (MatrixScience, Ltd.) to
confirm that m/z 970.4, 946.5, 586.3 represented the peptides,
research articles Go et al.
2408 Journal of Proteome Research ¥ Vol. 5, No. 9, 2006
VVVTTTQTAPVPQQNVPR, VFVDPLATTTTIQDPLR, and LAL-
IQELPDR from FHV with 18O modification.
Nanoflow RPLC-FT-MS/MS of cICAT-Labeled Peptides.
Ten centimeter-long nanoRPLC-ESI columns were coupled
online with a hybrid linear ion-trap (LIT) Fourier transform ion
cyclotron resonance mass spectrometer (LTQ-FT, Thermo-
Electron, San Jose, CA) to analyze the cICAT-labeled peptides
from the uninfected and FHV-infected D. melanogaster cells.
To construct the nanoRPLC-ESI columns, 75 ím i.d. fused-
silica microcapillaries (Polymicro Technologies, Phoenix, AZ)
were flame-pulled to construct a 10 cm fine i.d. (i.e., 5-7 ím)
tip against which 3 ím, 300 Å pore size C-18 silica-bonded
stationary RP particles (Vydac) were slurry-packed using a slurry
packing pump (Model 1666, Alltech Associates, Deerfield, IL).
The columns were connected via a stainless steel union to an
Agilent 1100 nanoflow LC system (Agilent Technologies, Palo
Alto, CA), which was used to deliver mobile phases A (0.1%
formic acid in water) and B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile).
After loading 6 íL of sample, the cICAT-labeled peptides were
eluted at a flow rate of 200 nL/min using a linear step gradient
of 2-40% B for 110 min and 40-98% B for 30 min. The hybrid
LIT-FT-MS was operated in a data-dependent MS/MS mode
in which the three most intense peptide molecular ions in a
FT-MS scan were sequentially and dynamically selected for
subsequent collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the LIT-
MS using a normalized collision energy of 35%. The temper-
ature for the capillary of the ion source was set at 160 °C.
Metabolite Extraction and íLC-ESI-TOF MS Analysis.
Cells stored in the -80 °C freezer were taken out to thaw for 5
min before 600 íL of ice-cold acetone was added. Samples were
sonicated for 20 min and subsequently transferred to 2 mL
eppendorf vials. The original tubes were washed with 200 íL
of acetone, and the washing solution was collected and
transferred to the corresponding eppendorf vial. The samples
were placed in the in -20 °C freezer and kept there for an
additional 20 min after which they were centrifuged in a 5417C
Eppendorf centrifuge at 16 400 rpm. The supernatant was
decanted and was placed in a new vial. The remaining pellet
was subjected to a second extraction with 350 íL of MeOH and
50 íL of H2O and 1% formic acid. The procedure was repeated,
and the second supernatant was pooled with the first before
drying and storage in a -20 °C freezer until analysis. Prior to
analysis, each extract was dissolved in 12 íL of 95:5 ACN/H2O
(0.1% formic acid) out of which 4 íL was injected in duplicate
for each extraction. The LC separation was performed with an
Agilent 1100 series fitted with capillary pump heads on a 150
 0.5 mm (5 ím particle size) Agilent Zorbax column at a flow
rate of 7 íL/min. Gradient separation included a 4 min hold
at 5% ACN, then a 26 min linear gradient to 95% ACN which
was held for 2 min before re-equilibration. MS data were
collected using an Agilent LC/MSD TOF, scanning m/z range
of 100-1000. Two internal calibrants at m/z 121.0509 and
922.0098, sprayed with a separate nebulizer, were employed
to improve mass accuracy. CID fragmentation patterns of the
496 and 524 m/z ions were obtained using a Q-TOF mass
spectrometer (Waters/Micromass).
Peptide Identification and Quantitation for cICAT Experi-
ment. The raw MS/MS data acquired on the hybrid LIT-FT-
MS were searched using SEQUEST against a combined D.
melanogaster/FHV proteome database (19 477 protein entries)
downloaded from the European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI)
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/proteome/index.html). Dynamic modi-
fications for cysteinyl (Cys) residues were set by mass additions
of the cleaved cICAT labels (227.13 Da for the light label, 236.16
Da for the heavy label) in a single search. SEQUEST criteria
were set as Xcorr g 1.9 (for [M + H]1+ ions), g 2.2 (for [M +
H]2+ ions), and g 2.9 (for [M + H]3+ ions), and DeltaCn g 0.08
for the identification of fully tryptic peptides within the cICAT-
labeled samples. The identified peptides were quantified using
XPRESS (ThermoElectron, San Jose, CA), which calculates the
relative abundances (13C9/13C0, in this data set) of peptides
based on the area of their extracted ion chromatograms (XIC).
Significance thresholds for up- and down-regulation were
determined by evaluating the normal equations:
A significant up- or down-regulation was considered to be 2ó-
above or below the mean.
DIOS Chip Preparation. The details of DIOS chip prepara-
tion have been described elsewhere.42 Briefly, DIOS chips were
prepared by etching low resistivity (0.005-0.02 ¿âcm) n-type
Si(100) wafers (Silicon Quest) in 25% v/v HF/ethanol under
white light illumination at a current density of 5 mA/cm2 for 2
min. Typically, photopatterning was performed to create 36
sample spots on each chip. Immediately after etching, the DIOS
chip was rinsed with ethanol and dried in a stream of N2 to
give an H-terminated surface, which was oxidized by exposure
to ozone (flow rate of 0.5 g/h from an ozone generator directed
at the surface for 30 s) and subsequently modified with
(heptadecafluoro-1,1,2,2-tetrahydrododecyl)dimethylchloro-
silane as silylating reagent. The silylation reaction was per-
formed by adding 100 íL of the appropriate silylating reagent
on the oxidized DIOS chip, which was placed in a glass Petri
dish and incubated in an oven at 90 °C for 30 min. The
modified DIOS chip was then rinsed thoroughly with ethanol
and was dried in a stream of N2. This simple silylating
procedure generates a modified DIOS chip terminated with a
perfluoroalkyl group.
Safety Considerations. Extreme care should be taken in
handling hydrofluoric acid solutions because of their toxicity
and corrosiveness. All inhalation, ingestion, or skin and eye
contact should be strictly avoided. Etching of silicon wafers
should be conducted in a ventilated fume hood using proper
double-layered nitrile gloves, lab coat, and goggles. Hydro-
fluoric acid solution spills and burns can be neutralized and
treated with 2.5% calcium gluconate gel.
Results and Discussion
Monitoring Unlabeled Viral Proteins Using Nonlinear
Alignment of LC-MS Data: Measles Virus Infection of HeLa
Cells. Antibodies to selected regions of the measles virus (MV)
hemagglutinin (HA) react with the viral HA expressed on the
plasma membrane of intact infected HeLa cells and transduce
a membrane signal that selectively down-regulate the viral
phosphoprotein inside the cell, thereby down-modulating viral
transcription.40,43 In contrast, antibodies to non-MV or to HeLa
cell surface antigens have no effect on the MV phosphoprotein
inside the cell and on the modulation of viral transcription.
We employed mass spectrometry to determine the down-
regulation of MV phosphoprotein in HeLa cells in the presence
of antibodies to MV and its normal expression in HeLa cells
treated with the antibody to HeLa cell surface antigen during
P ) 1
óx2ð
e-(x-í)
2/(2ó2) (1.1)
z ) ł - í
ó
(1.2)
MS Reveals Molecular Transformations during Viral Infection research articles
Journal of Proteome Research ¥ Vol. 5, No. 9, 2006 2409
the course of MV infection. Figure 1 indicates the ability to
identify the anticipated levels and to quantitate MV phospho-
protein under these various experimental conditions.
In this experiment, HeLa cells were infected with the
Edmonston strain of MV, and harvested at two different time
points, 18 and 72 h. Uninfected cells at the same time points
were analyzed as a control. Another experiment was designed
to examine antibody-induced antigenic modulation in MV.
HeLa cells were incubated with either a control antibody
(antibody to HeLa cells) or an antibody against MV before
infection.40 The relative quantitation of MV proteins was then
examined. In the first experiment, MV proteins present in the
cells were identified using nanoLC-MS/MS. A second experi-
ment was performed for relative quantitation of the viral
proteins. From the ion trap experiment, two ions at m/z 609.3
and 720.7 corresponding to the tryptic peptides, ASDVETAE-
GGEIHELLR and AGSSGLSKPCLSAIGSTEGGAPR, respectively,
derived from the measles phosphoprotein P were identified
from the infected cells. The peptide, ASDVETAEGGEIHELLR,
is a tryptic fragment of the 19 amino acid naturally processed
and presented peptide, MV-P1, of the measles phospho-
protein.44 The phosphoprotein forms part of ribonucleoprotein
(RNP) complex and is involved in both replication and tran-
scription, and also has a structural role in the assembled virus,
surrounding the RNA. In the second experiment, the samples
were analyzed using an ESI-TOF equipped with capillary LC.
This instrument has the advantage of a wider dynamic range
and very accurate mass measurement and, therefore, has the
potential for better quantitative measurements than the ion
trap used for protein identification. Each sample was run in
triplicate. The data were first analyzed using XCMS,34 after
which the two ions at m/z 609.3 and 720.7, corresponding to
the MV phosphoprotein, were selected and integrated using
Analyst (Figure 1). For the uninfected cells at 18 and 72 h, the
integrated intensities of both ions are zero. At 18 and 72 h, the
ion currents allow comparison of the intensities at different
time points, which correspond to the multiplication of the virus,
and expression of the phosphoprotein. The ratio of ion intensi-
ties between 18 and 72 h was 1.6 for the ion m/z 609.3 and 1.9
for the ion at m/z 720.7. This indicates that the relative level
of MV phosphoprotein increased by a factor of between 1.6
and 1.9 between 18 and 72 h after infection. When a control
antibody was incubated with HeLa cells, the expression of
phosphoprotein P progressed with the same kinetics as infected
cells without antibody (Figure 1). However, when antibody
against MV was added, expression of phosphoprotein P was
almost completely suppressed. This experiment demonstrates
that the process of antibody-induced antigenic modulation in
MV can be monitored using mass spectrometry, and the result
is in agreement with previous experiments, using methionine
label and immunoprecipitation.40
Monitoring Viral Proteins via Isotopic Labeling: FHV-
Infected Drosophila Cells. 18O labeling of peptides during
tryptic digestion is a simple, robust, and effective way to
generate isotopic tags for protein quantitation. The approach
incorporates two 18O atoms from water at the C terminus of
every lysine or arginine residue, by exchange during a trypsin
digestion, resulting in a mass difference of 4 Da between two
differentially labeled peptides. To assess the viability of this
approach in the quantitative analysis of protein expression in
FHV-infected Drosophila cells, we determined its labeling
efficiency and specificity. In the initial set of experiments, two
identical digests of purified FHV particles, one performed in
the presence of H2O18 and the other in the presence of H2O16,
were mixed at a 1:1 ratio and analyzed by DIOS-MS and LC-
MS/MS. Representative DIOS-MS data of a 1:1 mixture of 16O
and 18O labeled FHV digests revealed peptide peaks derived
from the tryptic cleavage of the coat proteins within 10 ppm
mass accuracy (Figure 2A). The inset (right) shows that the
isotope pairs were separated by 4 Da, indicating the incorpora-
tion of two 18O atoms. Comparison of the relative peak
intensities of the 18O- and 16O-labeled peptides demonstrated
that 18O was efficiently incorporated into the peptides during
proteolysis. The peptide mass fingerprint of this data set was
Figure 1. Individual ion intensities for MV phosphoprotein P obtained from nanoESI-TOF experiment. Two ions at m/z 609.3 and 720.7
corresponding to the phosphoprotein P tryptic peptides, ASDVETAEGGEIHELLR and AGSSGLSKPCLSAIGSTEGGAPR, respectively,
were measured for each MV-infected cell sample, and the relative peak areas (arbitrary units) were compared. Inset: extracted ion
chromatogram for ion m/z 720.7, comparing 18 and 72 h time points from infected cells, using the XCMS program.
research articles Go et al.
2410 Journal of Proteome Research ¥ Vol. 5, No. 9, 2006
searched against the Swiss-Prot protein database using Mascot
(Matrix Science Ltd.). Search results indicated that protein
scores greater than 52 are significant. A significant score (85
for the coat protein) was obtained for the digest, indicating
greater than 95% confidence level in the match. Additional
validation of the protein identification was obtained from LC-
MS/MS analysis of the same 16O/18O mixture. An MS/MS
spectrum (Figure 2B) of the doubly charged ion of the peptide
VVVTTTQTAPVPQQNVPR with m/z of 968.2 Da showed char-
acteristic b- and y-fragment ions that allowed straightforward
interpretation of the MS/MS data for protein identification.
To determine the accuracy and sensitivity of the 18O-labeling
method to small variations in protein expression levels, the
linearity of the method was examined. Differentially labeled
16O and 18O FHV digests were mixed at 16O/18O ratios ranging
from 0.1 to 10 and analyzed by DIOS-MS and nanoLC-MS/
MS. Using the peptide VVVTTTQTAPVPQQNVPR and its cor-
responding 18O analogue as internal standard, we monitored
the response of the peak intensity ratio as a function of the
concentration ratio. The data shown in Figure 2A (inset, center)
revealed a linear response over the working concentration
range with a slope close to 1 and an R2 value of 0.9974. The
precision of the measurement was within 15%, which was
calculated using the percent relative standard deviation (RSD)
of the concentration ratio. This implied that the approach was
sensitive to small variations in protein concentration and that
accurate quantitation was possible.
Monitoring Viral Protein Expression Kinetics: FHV-
Infected Drosophila Cells. The applicability of the 18O-labeling
approach in quantitative protein profiling was examined in a
time course experiment of viral protein synthesis in FHV-
infected Drosophila cells. Previous pulse chase experiments
showed that FHV proteins are expressed in different amounts
at different times during the course of infection.38,45 The
expression of the viral proteins as a function of time was
determined using nanoLC-MS/MS, using the 18O-labeled
peptides generated from infected cells at 16 h post-infection
as internal standard. Aliquots of cell lysates collected at eight
time points after infection (see Experimental Section for details)
and an uninfected control lysate were digested separately and
then mixed in a 1:1 (v/v) ratio with the 18O-labeled peptides
from the 16 h time point sample. Each time point sample was
analyzed in triplicate. MS/MS data generated from these
samples were searched against the Swiss-Prot database using
Mascot. The search results show that individual ion scores
above 31 indicate that the peptide-based identification is at
95% confidence level. Peptide ion scores in this search were
from 37 to 77, indicating unambiguous identification of the
FHV coat protein, protein A, and protein B2. However, our
search was not able to uniquely identify B1 because protein
B1 is expressed in smaller amounts, and more importantly, it
is identical to the C-terminal portion of protein A. Thus,
peptides identified from the C-terminal end of protein A may
have contained a partial contribution from protein B1.
On the basis of these search results, we used three peptides
(VVVTTTQTAPVPQQNVPR (m/z 968.4, +2 charge), VFVD-
PLATTTTIQDPLR (m/z 946.1, +2 charge), and LALIQELPDR
(m/z 534.5, +2 charge)) and their 18O analogues to determine
relative steady-state levels of the coat protein, protein A, and
protein B2 over the course of infection. As shown in Figure 3,
protein A was produced early, followed by protein B2, then the
coat protein. Protein A could be detected within the first 3 h
after infection, and its relative concentration increased steadily
thereafter and reached a maximum at 10 h after which it
plateaued. Similarly, protein B2 was produced early after
infection, but its level continued to increase until 20 h before
reaching a plateau. In contrast, synthesis of the coat protein
was significantly delayed (Figure 3B). Its levels were low for
the first 10 h but increased rapidly thereafter until reaching
maximum at 20 h followed by a plateau, following sigmoidal
kinetics. The viral protein expression kinetics that we observed
is consistent with the respective functions of each protein.
Protein A is the replicase, thus, requiring early expression, and
the coat protein is expressed at an initially slower rate, as its
function is viral assembly and encapsidation. Protein B2 was
found to exhibit the earliest expression kinetics of the three
viral proteins observed in this experiment. This is consistent
with the recently discovered function of B2,39 which is to inhibit
RNA interference from the cell. It is reasonable to assume that
earliest possible expression of B2 as a rapid response to cellular
RNA silencing is advantageous for viral synthesis and function.
These results are in excellent agreement with previous pulse-
chase experiments demonstrating temporal control of FHV
protein synthesis in Drosophila cells.46
These results prompted us to determine the absolute con-
centration of the viral coat protein at various times after
infection. Specifically, we monitored the change in concentra-
tion of the coat protein using known amounts of 18O-labeled
pure FHV digest as internal standard. Aliquots from each of
the eight time point samples and control were digested, mixed
Figure 2. (A) DIOS-MS spectrum of a 1:1 mixture of 16O/18O FHV
digest. Inset, center: Linearity of the relative quantitation using
isotopically labeled FHV digests. Inset, right: the expanded view
of the DIOS-MS spectrum of the 16O- and 18O-labeled peptide,
VVVTTTQTAPVPQQNVPR, combined at a 1:1 ratio. (B) MS/MS
spectrum of the doubly charged ion of 16O- and 18O-labeled
FHV tryptic peptide, VVVTTTQTAPVPQQNVPR from LC-MS/MS
analysis.
MS Reveals Molecular Transformations during Viral Infection research articles
Journal of Proteome Research ¥ Vol. 5, No. 9, 2006 2411
with the internal standard at a 16O/18O ratio of 2.5:1 (v/v), and
then analyzed by LC-MS/MS and DIOS-MS. Each time point
sample was run in triplicate for LC-MS/MS and in 10 replicates
for DIOS-MS. The average ratio of 16O- and 18O-labeled
peptides and the corresponding percent relative standard
deviation (RSD) for each time point were obtained using the
peptide VVVTTTQTAPVPQQNVPR. The measured percent RSD
values were less than 10%, reflecting the excellent reproduc-
ibility of both types of analysis. On the basis of the known
concentration of the internal standard, the absolute concentra-
tion of the coat protein was determined at each time point.
LC-MS/MS and DIOS-MS data demonstrated that the expres-
sion kinetics of the coat protein is slow in the first 10 h, rapidly
increases between 10 and 20 h, and then plateaus (Figure 3B).
From the known concentration of the coat protein, which was
measured by the Bradford assay, and the known number of
cells from which it had been obtained, we could determine the
yield of coat protein per cell and, based on the known
composition of FHV particles, the number of virions present
at a given time point. This revealed that the number of virus
particles per cell at 16 h post-infection was greater than 6.0 
104, consistent with the large paracrystalline arrays of virions
observed in cells by electron microscopy late in infection.47,48
The growth curves of coat protein synthesis obtained by DIOS-
MS and nanoLC-MS/MS were in good agreement. The DIOS-
MS analysis was much more rapid, requiring only 3 h, while
nanoLC-MS/MS required 3 days of continuous automated
analysis. This demonstrates the potential for DIOS-MS in the
rapid absolute quantitation of viral proteins during the infection
process.
Monitoring Host Protein Expression: FHV-Infected
Drosophila Cells. The response of Drosophila to bacterial and
fungal infection involves two signaling pathways, Toll and Imd,
to activate the transcription factor NF-kB family of proteins
and the induction of pathways associated with the innate
immune response.49 The response to infection with Drosophila
virus C is distinct from the response to bacteria and fungi and
suggests the possibility of a conserved innate immunity path-
way specific to viral infection, involving the Jak-STAT signaling
pathway.50 In contrast, the response to infection with Droso-
phila X virus activates Toll, thus, producing a response similar
to that of bacteria.41 This indicates the importance of examining
the response of Drosphila to additional viruses.
FHV-infected Drosophila cells collected at various times after
infection represented ideal samples to identify and quantify
differentially expressed host proteins and potentially gain
insights into virus-host interactions. To reduce sample com-
plexity, we chose the cICAT labeling strategy which involves
affinity tagging of proteins at cysteine residues and isolation
of proteolytically generated peptides by affinity chromatogra-
phy. Peptides without cysteine residues are thus excluded,
reducing complexity and permitting quantification of low-
abundance host proteins. The host protein expression profile
was monitored by FT-MS at 0 and 8 h post-infection. At 8 h
post-infection, FHV-infected Drosophila cells remain metaboli-
cally active and have had ample time to respond to the
replication of the virus. A total of 1500 proteins were identified
by searching the MS/MS data against a combined Drosophila
Figure 3. (A) Relative rates of viral protein expression (FHV viral
proteins A, B2) induced in FHV-infected Drosophila cells analyzed
by nanoLC-MS/MS. (B) FHV coat protein growth curve generated
from DIOS and nanoLC-MS/MS analysis of proteolyzed cell
lysate. A polynomial equation was fit to each set of data.
Figure 4. Probability distribution of cICAT ratios obtained from
the cICAT FT-MS experiment. The frequency distribution of
cICAT ratios was calculated and distributed into bins. A normal
distribution curve was fit to these data, and the mean (í) and
standard deviation (ó) were calculated. cICAT ratios corre-
sponding to frequencies that were 2ó above or below the mean
were considered to be significantly up (1.69)- or down (0.63)-
regulated.
research articles Go et al.
2412 Journal of Proteome Research ¥ Vol. 5, No. 9, 2006
melanogaster/FHV proteome database (19 477 protein entries)
downloaded from the European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI)
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/proteome/index.html). The host protein
expression levels were quantified based on one or more distinct
peptides unique to the differentially expressed Drosophila
proteins (see Experimental Section for details). Significant
expression level changes were determined by fitting a normal
distribution curve to the cICAT ratios and taking proteins at
2ó- above, a ratio of 1.69, or 2ó- below, a ratio of 0.63, the
mean (Figure 4). Of the 1500 proteins that were identified and
quantified in the cICAT experiment, 150 were up-regulated and
66 were down-regulated by these criteria (Table 2).
Proteins with expression levels that changed significantly
were broadly categorized on the basis of their biochemical
function. As can be seen in Figure 5, differentially expressed
host proteins fell into similar classes regardless of whether they
were up- or down-regulated. Of particular interest with regard
to viral infection was the significant up-regulation of heat shock
proteins, particularly hsp23, whose levels were 34-fold in-
creased, which are involved in folding of viral structural
proteins and assistance in viral assembly.51 A more specific
response to viral infection might be reflected in the up-
regulation of proteins involved in cell death, for example,
croquemort protein, and a corresponding down-regulation of
proteins that inhibit cell death, for example, inhibitor of
apoptosis 1. By inducing cell death, the production and spread
of virus in the host could be limited and thereby contribute to
survival of the organism.
Metabolite Analysis: FHV-Infected Drosophila Cells. The
metabolite profile in the FHV-infected Drosophila cells was also
monitored during the course of infection. Since metabolite
levels are regulated by gene expression and enzyme activity,
monitoring these changes may lead to the identification of
cellular components or pathways that are important to virus
replication and the molecular signatures associated with viral
diseases. To this end, using microscale RPLC separation, in
conjunction with high mass accuracy ESI-TOF, the changes in
metabolite concentrations within the cell during the course of
viral infection were examined. The integrated areas of the
molecular ion signals, retention time, and mass precision
tolerance in parts per million (ppm) of endogenous metabolites
were measured. Comparison of the total ion chromatograms
(TIC) of the metabolite fractions from 0 and 12 h post-infection
shows significant differences in the intensities (Figure 6A).
Typical metabolite fraction yields over 1000 unique ions after
íLC-ESI TOF MS analysis. These molecular ions were char-
acterized by their monoisotopic m/z, peak height/area, and
retention time.
An essential component required for comparative analysis
of metabolite levels is to analyze the retention time and mass
precision between replicate injections. This comparison allows
the determination of the degree of reproducibility and specific-
Table 2. Selected Proteins and the Response to Viral Infection between 0 and 8 ha
accession
number protein name
average ratio
I8h/I0h
Up-Regulated Proteins in FHV-Infected Drosophila Cells
Q9VM33 Probable elongation factor G, mitochondrial precursor (mEF-G) 157.2
P30189 DNA topoisomerase I (EC 5.99.1.2) 54.6
P02516 Heat shock protein 23 33.8
Q9V3I5 CG6297-PA, isoform A (Cg6297-pb, isoform b) (Protein kinase JIL-1) 15.7
Q9VYD7 Mitochondrial import inner membrane translocase subunit Tim9A 6.0
Q9VQ96 CG4267-PA (RH13166p) 4.5
Q24572 Chromatin assembly factor 1 P55 subunit 3.7
Q24208 Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 gamma subunit 3.7
P52304 Serine/threonine-protein kinase polo (EC 2.7.1.37) 3.5
Q8I8U7 Transcription-associated protein 1 (dTRA1) 2.6
P40793 Cdc42 homolog 2.6
P23573 Cell division control protein 2 cognate (EC 2.7.1.37) 2.3
Q9Y1A3 Mitochondrial import inner membrane translocase subunit Tim8 2.2
P02518 Heat shock protein 27 2.2
Q9VHA0 Polycomb protein Scm (Sex comb on midleg protein) 2.1
O61231 60S ribosomal protein L10 (QM protein homolog) (dQM) 2.1
P36958 DNA-directed RNA polymerase II 15.1 kDa polypeptide (EC 2.7.7.6) 2.0
Q27367 Croquemort protein (d-CD36) 2.0
Q9V9S8 Ferrochelatase, mitochondrial precursor (EC 4.99.1.1) 2.0
Down-Regulated Proteins in FHV-Infected Drosophila Cells
Q94901 CG8597-PA, isoform A (Cg8597-pb, isoform b) (RNA-binding protein lark) 0.6
Q94535 Splicing factor U2af 38 kDa subunit 0.6
O96840 CG5788-PA (Ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme) (EC 6.3.2.19) 0.6
O46037 Vinculin 0.6
Q9VTU3 CG6811-PA (LD02491p) 0.6
Q7KNS3 Lissencephaly-1 homologue (Lissencephaly1) (Dlis1) (DLis-1) 0.5
P29845 Heat shock 70 kDa protein cognate 5 0.5
Q9VNH6 Probable exocyst complex component Sec8 0.5
Q9VL00 Ubiquitin thiolesterase otubain-like protein 0.5
Q9TVQ5 Chromatin protein SPT4 (CG12372-PA) 0.5
P46824 Kinesin light chain (KLC) 0.5
Q24306 Apoptosis 1 inhibitor (Inhibitor of apoptosis 1) 0.3
Q9V498 Calsyntenin-1 precursor 0.3
O77263 Probable tRNA (guanine-N(7)-)-methyltransferase 0.2
Q9GP60 Pol protein 0.01
a The complete list can be found as Supplementary Table 2 (Supporting Information).
MS Reveals Molecular Transformations during Viral Infection research articles
Journal of Proteome Research ¥ Vol. 5, No. 9, 2006 2413
ity of the measurement. Our data revealed that the metabolite
separation was reproducible within 0.16 min and the mass
precision tolerance was below 10 ppm. This was obtained from
a pairwise comparison of replicate injections of 14 selected
molecular ions from two time point samples. These results
imply that a good mass precision and a reproducible chroma-
tography can be obtained which are useful in clustering the
metabolites on the basis of their retention times and masses.
Analysis of the integrated area associated with each molec-
ular ion revealed that over 30 metabolite ions were either up-
or down-regulated. These metabolite ions undergo significant
change in relative intensity during the course of infection and
were targeted for identification by subsequent MS/MS analysis.
Of particular interest were two molecular ions observed at m/z
496 and 524 which decrease markedly during the infection
process (Figure 6B). MS/MS data of these metabolites (Figure
6C) showed a fragmentation pattern typical for the family of
lysophosphatidylcholines (LPC). These ions were identified by
tandem MS/MS in an ion trap mass spectrometer. Product ions
were observed at m/z 184 and 104, a fragmentation pattern
which is typical for all phosphocholine-containing phospho-
lipids.52 The product ions at m/z 184 and 104 correspond to
the phosphocholine and the choline ion, respectively.
LPCs are derived from either plasma membrane phospho-
lipids or lipoproteins as part of normal physiological activity
or disease process. Under physiological conditions, LPCs exist
as micelles, a component of oxidized low-density lipoprotein,
bound to serum proteins, and as ligands to G-protein recep-
tors.53,54 Moreover, their biological role is diverse, which
includes modulating plasma membrane integrity, cell prolifera-
tion, transmembrane signal transduction, inhibiting viral mem-
brane fusion elicited by a number of virus, enhancing resistance
to phytopathogens, and immunoregulation.54-58 LPC has also
been identified in apoptotic cell clearance by functioning as a
soluble “find me” signal and as a membrane-bound “eat me”
signal.59 Thus, monitoring the changes in LPC concentration
in response to viral infection can provide information that is
complementary to proteomics data. The observed down-
regulation of the LPCs (m/z 496 and 524) correlated with the
up-regulation of proteins involved in apoptosis, for example,
croquemort and the Cdc42 homologue, and the down-regula-
tion of the proteins vinculin and CG6811-PA, which are
associated with plasma membrane integrity and membrane
phospholipid exchange, respectively. Thus, the down-regulation
of LPC further reflects the initial stages in FHV viral replication
and cell death.
Figure 5. Functional categories of the differentially expressed host proteins obtained from cICAT FT-MS/MS experiments. Over 1500
proteins were identified and quantified of which (a) 150 proteins increased in expression and (b) 66 proteins decreased in expression.
The 216 proteins were broadly classified based on their biochemical function by GO category. Numbers indicate the percentage fraction
of the proteins in each category.
research articles Go et al.
2414 Journal of Proteome Research ¥ Vol. 5, No. 9, 2006
Conclusions
Mass spectrometry was used to monitor the regulation of
protein and endogenous metabolite in response to two dis-
similar viral infections. Isotope labeling strategies with mass
spectrometry allowed for quantitative analysis of viral proteins,
including the temporal control of viral protein synthesis in
FHV-infected Drosophila cells and changes in the host cell
proteins. Viral protein expression levels were monitored by one-
dimensional tandem MS and DIOS-MS experiments with 16O/
18O labeling. A more comprehensive profile of the cellular
proteins was obtained by using two-dimensional tandem MS
experiments with cICAT labeling. The cICAT was essential for
the quantitative analysis and identification of the 1500 cellular
proteins, of which more than 200 were either up- or down-
regulated. Using an approach without protein labeling, we
monitored relative quantitation of the MV phosphoprotein P
during infection, showing the changes in its expression level
and antibody-induced antigenic modulation in the MV infected
cells. Endogenous metabolite levels at two different times
during FHV infection of Drosophila cells were measured,
showing temporal changes in over 30 metabolites. The down-
regulation of two LPCs correlated with changes in lipid-related
proteins, providing complementary information between the
metabolomic and proteomic data. Changes in metabolite and
protein expression levels were associated with apoptosis,
plasma membrane integrity, and membrane phospholipid
exchange. The vast majority of proteins and metabolites may
be structurally and functionally uncharacterized, suggesting the
enormous potential of this approach for gaining fundamental
biochemical and clinical understanding of biological systems.
Acknowledgment. This work was supported by NIH
Grant GM55775, DOE Grant DE-AC02-05CH11231, and Strate-
gene, Inc. to G.S., and AI036222 to M.B.O.. A.N. is supported
by a postdoctoral fellowship from The Swedish Research
Council (VR). This project was also funded in part with federal
funds from the National Cancer Institute, National Institutes
of Health, under contract N01-CO-12400. The content of this
publication does not necessarily reflect the views or policies
of the Department of Health and Human Services, nor does
mention of trade names, commercial products, or organizations
imply endorsement by the U.S. Government.
Supporting Information Available: A complete list
of the differentially expressed host proteins and the response
to viral infection between 0 and 8 h (Supplementary Table 2).
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at
http://pubs.acs.org.
Figure 6. (A) íLC-ESI-TOF TIC of the metabolite extract from 0 and 12 h post-infection undigested samples. (B) Average integrated
areas of the molecular ions with m/z 496 (red) and 524 (black) from two separate injections. (C) Fragmentation patterns and the
corresponding structures of the lysophosphatidylcholines. The MS/MS fragmentation pattern shows product ions with m/z 104 and
184. Both metabolite ions undergo a significant change in their relative intensity during the course of infection.
MS Reveals Molecular Transformations during Viral Infection research articles
Journal of Proteome Research ¥ Vol. 5, No. 9, 2006 2415
References
(1) Flint, S. J. Principles of Virology Molecular Biology, Pathogenesis,
and Control of Animal Viruses, 2nd ed.; ASM Press: Washington,
DC, 2004.
(2) Mendez, J.; Audicana, A.; Isern, A.; Llaneza, J.; Moreno, B.;
Tarancon, M. L.; Jofre, J.; Lucena, F. J. Virol. Methods 2004, 117
(1), 19-25.
(3) Barry, R.; Soloviev, M. Proteomics. 2004, 4 (12), 3717-3726.
(4) Shieh, B.; Li, C. Retrovirology 2004, 1 (1), 11.
(5) Fruh, K.; Simmen, K.; Luukkonen, B. G.; Bell, Y. C.; Ghazal, P.
Drug Discovery Today 2001, 6 (12), 621-627.
(6) Piersanti, S.; Martina, Y.; Cherubini, G.; Avitabile, D.; Saggio, I.
Am. J. PharmacoGenomics 2004, 4 (6), 345-356.
(7) Snijders, A. M.; Meijer, G. A.; Brakenhoff, R. H.; van den Brule,
A. J.; van Diest, P. J. Mol. Pathol. 2000, 53 (6), 289-294.
(8) Aebersold, R. J. Infect. Dis. 2003, 187, S315-S320.
(9) Flory, M. R.; Gingras, A. C.; Keller, A.; Lee, H.; Li, X. J.; Nesvizhskii,
A.; Ranish, J.; Ye, M. L.; Zhang, H.; Aebersold, R. Eur. J. Cell Biol.
2004, 83, 88.
(10) Tian, Q.; Stepaniants, S. B.; Mao, M.; Weng, L.; Feetham, M. C.;
Doyle, M. J.; Yi, E. C.; Dai, H.; Thorsson, V.; Eng, J.; Goodlett, D.;
Berger, J. P.; Gunter, B.; Linseley, P. S.; Stoughton, R. B.;
Aebersold, R.; Collins, S. J.; Hanlon, W. A.; Hood, L. E. Mol. Cell.
Proteomics. 2004, 3 (10), 960-969.
(11) Sechi, S.; Oda, Y. Drug Discovery Today 2004, 9 (2), S41-S46.
(12) Sechi, S. Proteomics Nephrol. 2004, 141, 59-78.
(13) Ferguson, P. L.; Smith, R. D. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct.
2003, 32, 399-424.
(14) Lill, J. Mass Spectrom. Rev. 2003, 22 (3), 182-194.
(15) Gygi, S. P.; Rist, B.; Gerber, S. A.; Turecek, F.; Gelb, M. H.;
Aebersold, R. Nat. Biotechnol. 1999, 17 (10), 994-999.
(16) Mann, M. Nat. Biotechnol. 1999, 17 (10), 954-955.
(17) Brown, K. J.; Fenselau, C. J. Proteome Res. 2004, 3 (3), 455-462.
(18) Fenselau, C.; Reynolds, K. Chem. Abstr. 2003, 226, U336.
(19) Heller, M.; Mattou, H.; Menzel, C.; Yao, X. D. J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 2003, 14 (7), 704-718.
(20) Yao, X.; Freas, A.; Ramirez, J.; Demirev, P. A.; Fenselau, C. Anal.
Chem. 2001, 73 (13), 2836-2842.
(21) Yao, X. D.; Afonso, C.; Fenselau, C. J. Proteome Res. 2003, 2 (2),
147-152.
(22) Hsu, J. L.; Huang, S. Y.; Chow, N. H.; Chen, S. H. Anal. Chem.
2003, 75 (24), 6843-6852.
(23) Peters, E. C.; Horn, D. M.; Tully, D. C.; Brock, A. Rapid Commun.
Mass Spectrom. 2001, 15 (24), 2387-2392.
(24) Chakraborty, A.; Regnier, F. E. J. Chromatogr., A 2002, 949 (1-
2), 173-184.
(25) Goodlett, D. R.; Keller, A.; Watts, J. D.; Newitt, R.; Yi, E. C.; Purvine,
S.; Eng, J. K.; von Haller, P.; Aebersold, R.; Kolker, E. Rapid
Commun. Mass Spectrom. 2001, 15 (14), 1214-1221.
(26) Smith, R. D.; Anderson, G. A.; Lipton, M. S.; Masselon, C.; Pasa-
Tolic, L.; Udseth, H.; Belov, M.; Shen, Y.; Veenstra, T. D. Adv.
Protein Chem. 2003, 65, 85-131.
(27) Smith, R. D.; Shen, Y.; Tang, K. Acc. Chem. Res. 2004, 37 (4), 269-
278.
(28) Zimmer, J. S.; Monroe, M. E.; Qian, W. J.; Smith, R. D. Mass
Spectrom. Rev. 2006, 25 (3), 450-482.
(29) Callister, S. J.; Barry, R. C.; Adkins, J. N.; Johnson, E. T.; Qian, W.
J.; Webb-Robertson, B. J.; Smith, R. D.; Lipton, M. S. J. Proteome.
Res. 2006, 5 (2), 277-286.
(30) Radulovic, D.; Jelveh, S.; Ryu, S.; Hamilton, T. G.; Foss, E.; Mao,
Y.; Emili, A. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2004, 3 (10), 984-997.
(31) Wang, W.; Zhou, H.; Lin, H.; Roy, S.; Shaler, T. A.; Hill, L. R.;
Norton, S.; Kumar, P.; Anderle, M.; Becker, C. H. Anal. Chem.
2003, 75 (18), 4818-4826.
(32) Silva, J. C.; Denny, R.; Dorschel, C.; Gorenstein, M. V.; Li, G. Z.;
Richardson, K.; Wall, D.; Geromanos, S. J. Mol. Cell. Proteomics
2006, 5 (4), 589-607.
(33) Fang, R.; Elias, D. A.; Monroe, M. E.; Shen, Y.; McIntosh, M.; Wang,
P.; Goddard, C. D.; Callister, S. J.; Moore, R. J.; Gorby, Y. A.; Adkins,
J. N.; Fredrickson, J. K.; Lipton, M. S.; Smith, R. D. Mol. Cell.
Proteomics 2006, 5 (4), 714-725.
(34) Smith, C. A.; Want, E. J.; O’Maille, G.; Abagyan, R.; Siuzdak, G.
Anal. Chem. 2006, 78 (3), 779-787.
(35) Dasgupta, R.; Cheng, L. L.; Bartholomay, L. C.; Christensen, B.
M. J. Gen. Virol. 2003, 84, 1789-1797.
(36) Price, B. D.; Rueckert, R. R.; Ahlquist, P. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 1996, 93 (18), 9465-9470.
(37) Price, B. D.; Roeder, M.; Ahlquist, P. J. Virol. 2000, 74 (24), 11724-
11733.
(38) Schneemann, A.; Reddy, V.; Johnson, J. E. Adv. Virus Res. 1998,
50, 381-446.
(39) Li, H.; Li, W. X.; Ding, S. W. Science 2002, 296 (5571), 1319-1321.
(40) Fujinami, R. S.; Oldstone, M. B. Nature 1979, 279 (5713), 529-
530.
(41) Zambon, R. A.; Nandakumar, M.; Vakharia, V. N.; Wu, L. P. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2005, 102 (20), 7257-7262.
(42) Shen, Z. X.; Thomas, J. J.; Averbuj, C.; Broo, K. M.; Engelhard,
M.; Crowell, J. E.; Finn, M. G.; Siuzdak, G. Anal. Chem. 2001, 73
(3), 612-619.
(43) Fujinami, R. S.; Oldstone, M. B. J. Immunol. 1980, 125 (1), 78-
85.
(44) Johnson, K. L.; Ovsyannikova, I. G.; Poland, G. A.; Muddiman, D.
C. J. Proteome. Res. 2005, 4 (6), 2243-2249.
(45) Friesen, P.; Scotti, P.; Longworth, J.; Rueckert, R. J. Virol. 1980,
35 (3), 741-747.
(46) Friesen P.; Rueckert, R. J. Virol 1981, 37 (2), 876-886.
(47) Fisher, A. J.; McKinney, B. R.; Wery, J. P.; Johnson, J. E. Acta
Crystallogr., B 1992, 48 (Pt 4), 515-520.
(48) Fisher, A. J.; McKinney, B. R.; Schneemann, A.; Rueckert, R. R.;
Johnson, J. E. J. Virol. 1993, 67 (5), 2950-2953.
(49) Royet, J.; Reichhart, J. M.; Hoffmann, J. A. Curr. Opin. Immunol.
2005, 17 (1), 11-17.
(50) Dostert, C.; Jouanguy, E.; Irving, P.; Troxler, L.; Galiana-Arnoux,
D.; Hetru, C.; Hoffmann, J. A.; Imler, J. L. Nat. Immunol. 2005, 6
(9), 946-953.
(51) Chromy, L. R.; Pipas, J. M.; Garcea, R. L. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 2003, 100 (18), 10477-10482.
(52) Brugger, B.; Erben, G.; Sandhoff, R.; Wieland, F. T.; Lehmann,
W. D. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1997, 94 (6), 2339-2344.
(53) Kabarowski, J. H.; Zhu, K.; Le, L. Q.; Witte, O. N.; Xu, Y. Science
2001, 293 (5530), 702-705.
(54) Kabarowski, J. H.; Xu, Y.; Witte, O. N. Biochem. Pharmacol. 2002,
64 (2), 161-167.
(55) Gunther-Ausborn, S.; Praetor, A.; Stegmann, T. J. Biol. Chem.
1995, 270 (49), 29279-29285.
(56) Gunther-Ausborn, S.; Stegmann, T. Virology 1997, 235 (2), 201-
208.
(57) Spivak, S. G.; Kisel, M. A.; Yakovleva, G. A. Russ. J. Plant Physiol.
2003, 50 (3), 293-296.
(58) Korotaeva, A. A.; Cheglakov, I. B.; Morozkin, A. D.; Suslova, I. V.;
Prokazova, N. V. Membr. Cell Biol. 1997, 10 (5), 521-534.
(59) Lauber, K.; Blumenthal, S. G.; Waibel, M.; Wesselborg, S. Mol.
Cell 2004, 14 (3), 277-287.
PR060215T
research articles Go et al.
2416 Journal of Proteome Research ¥ Vol. 5, No. 9, 2006
