Natural Linewidth Chemical Shift Imaging (NL-CSI)
Adil Bashir* and Dmitriy A. Yablonskiy
The discrete Fourier transform (FT) is a conventional method for
spatial reconstruction of chemical shifting imaging (CSI) data.
Due to point spread function (PSF) effects, FT reconstruction
leads to intervoxel signal leakage (Gibbs ringing). Spectral lo-
calization by imaging (SLIM) reconstruction was previously pro-
posed to overcome this intervoxel signal contamination. How-
ever, the existence of magnetic ﬁeld inhomogeneities creates
an additional source of intervoxel signal leakage. It is demon-
strated herein that even small ﬁeld inhomogeneities substan-
tially amplify intervoxel signal leakage in both FT and SLIM
reconstruction approaches. A new CSI data acquisition strat-
egy and reconstruction algorithm (natural linewidth (NL) CSI) is
presented that eliminates effects of magnetic ﬁeld inhomoge-
neity-induced intervoxel signal leakage and intravoxel phase
dispersion on acquired data. The approach is based on ac-
quired CSI data, high-resolution images, and magnetic ﬁeld
maps. The data are reconstructed based on the imaged object
structure (as in the SLIM approach) and a reconstruction matrix
that takes into account the inhomogeneous ﬁeld distribution
inside anatomically homogeneous compartments. Phantom
and in vivo results show that the new method allows ﬁeld
inhomogeneity effects from the acquired MR signal to be re-
moved so that the signal decay is determined only by the “nat-
ural” R2 relaxation rate constant (hence the term “natural line-
width” CSI). Magn Reson Med 56:7–18, 2006. © 2006 Wiley-
Liss, Inc.
Key words: CSI; image reconstruction; magnetic ﬁeld inhomo-
geneities; Gibbs ringing; NL-CSI
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) has proved to be
of considerable value in the detection and management of
several diseases, including cancer, multiple sclerosis, and
psychiatric disorders (1–5). The direct biochemical infor-
mation that is provided by MRS augments our understand-
ing of the underlying disease mechanisms. There are two
major factors that limit the usefulness of in vivo spectros-
copy: 1) the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and 2) the quality
and reliability of spectral localization. In the chemical
shift imaging (CSI) method, a set of free induction decay
(FID) signals is acquired and phase encoding is performed
in the relevant spatial dimensions (6). Two issues limit the
spatial resolution in CSI experiments: First, the clinically
relevant metabolites occur in low concentrations in vivo
and cannot be discriminated from noise when a conven-
tional MR image resolution is used. Second, the need to
phase encode in two dimensions makes the data acquisi-
tion time excessively long if data are obtained at high
spatial resolution (7). Therefore, to improve SNR and keep
experimental time within reasonable limits, MR spectro-
scopic images are often collected and reconstructed from a
small set of low spatial frequencies, e.g., a typical 2D (two
spatial dimensions and one spectral dimension) CSI ex-
periment can have a spatial matrix of 16  16 or 32  32.
The most common approach to spatially reconstruct
phase-encoded CSI data is the discrete Fourier transform
(FT); however, it is well known that the FT is inadequate
for truncated data (8). FT reconstruction of spectroscopic
imaging data leads to a sinc-like point spread function
(PSF) that causes the signal to “ring” away from the main
central lobe and contaminate pixels quite distant from the
actual source. One way to reduce the ringing caused by
truncation is to apodize the k-space data prior to FT. This
approach causes blurring, degrades the spatial resolution,
and reduces the SNR (per unit time) from optimally
achievable levels. Another strategy is to employ a FT series
windowing approach whereby a varying number of exci-
tations are acquired based on a ﬁlter function, usually
Hanning or Blackman functions, and the resulting PSF is
free of side lobes (9–12). These windowing functions also
change the effective spatial resolution and blur the image,
i.e., the spectrum assigned to each voxel is a weighted
average of the spectra from neighboring voxels.
Several alternatives to ﬁltering have been reported to
cope with cross-voxel contamination in MR spectroscopic
imaging (MRSI). One such technique, spectral localization
by imaging (SLIM), proposed by Hu et al. (13), is used to
improve scanning efﬁciency and eliminate intervoxel sig-
nal leakage. This technique uses model-based reconstruc-
tion whereby the spatial coordinates of the boundaries of
several compartments of interest with arbitrary shape are
determined based on a high-resolution MR image. This
information is used to reconstruct the compartmental
spectra from the spectroscopic signals obtained with a
phase-encoding pulse sequence. A modiﬁed version,
called generalized SLIM (GSLIM), was introduced to re-
duce the spectral leakage arising from compartmental in-
homogeneity errors in SLIM (14). In a similar vein, Von
Kienlin and Mejia (15) developed a spatial localization
method, termed spectral localization with optimal point
spread function (SLOOP), which like SLIM reconstruction
also uses prior information available on high-resolution
anatomical MR images to reduce spectral leakage. Simi-
larly, Plevritis and Macovski (16,17) showed that by using
the Papoulis-Gerchberg algorithm and anatomic informa-
tion derived from a proton image, one can produce a
Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, Washington University, St. Louis, Mis-
souri, USA.
Grant sponsor: NIH; Grant numbers: R01-NS41519; P30 NS48056.
*Correspondence to: Adil Bashir, Ph.D., Washington University, Mallinckrodt
Institute of Radiology, Campus Box 8227, 4525 Scott Ave., East Building, St.
Louis, MO 63110.
Received 3 November 2005; revised 6 March 2006; accepted 7 March 2006.
DOI 10.1002/mrm.20917
Published online 23 May 2006 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.
wiley.com).
7© 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 56:7–18 (2006)
FULL PAPERS
spectroscopic image that is better resolved than a zero-
ﬁlled FT image.
Various other groups have also tried to address the prob-
lem of spectral leakage. For example, Hu et al. (18,19)
developed a method in which phase-encoded data are
acquired with various resolutions and degrees of signal
averaging, i.e., a standard MRS data set is acquired with
low spatial resolution and high SNR (many averages), and
high-spatial-resolution data are acquired with low SNR
(few averages). They developed algorithms to combine
these two data sets to improve spectral localization and
preserve the SNR in the MRS data sets. Using these ap-
proaches, Hu et al. (18,19) showed that they could elimi-
nate the leakage of extracranial lipid signal into brain
voxels. However, since the ﬁnal spectroscopic image is
generated by FT, this method and other similar approaches
do not address the issue of signal leakage between more
closely adjacent brain voxels. Non-Fourier encoding meth-
ods, such as wavelet encoding (20), have also been sug-
gested to reduce the ringing artifact associated with Fou-
rier encoding, but their application and use have been
limited to date.
While the above-mentioned techniques have signiﬁ-
cantly contributed to improving the quality of CSI results,
they do not address another source of spectral leakage and
spectral distortion in CSI experiments that, as we will
show later, is associated with the magnetic ﬁeld inhomo-
geneities present in any MRI or MRS experiment. If a
subject is placed in the scanner, magnetic susceptibility
variations within tissues and at air/tissue interfaces cause
distortions in the magnetic ﬁeld and introduce inhomoge-
neities. Some of these inhomogeneities can be removed by
shimming the magnetic ﬁeld, which involves applying
small corrective ﬁeld gradients using a set of specially
designed coils for that purpose (21,22). While these coils
can partially correct for relatively coarse, low-spatial-fre-
quency ﬁeld inhomogeneities, they cannot completely
eliminate magnetic ﬁeld inhomogeneities at the interfaces
of air, tissue, and bone, where the susceptibility changes
rapidly over short distances. MRS studies are increasingly
being performed on high-ﬁeld magnets to improve the
amount, quality, and/or speciﬁcity of the information con-
tent resulting from the increased SNR and chemical shift
dispersion of the signals. However, if the increased static
magnetic ﬁeld inhomogeneities experienced at higher
ﬁelds are not taken into account, they can offset or cancel
the SNR and chemical shift dispersion advantages.
Given the inherent low resolution (large voxel size) of
spectroscopic imaging, it should be recognized that even
after careful shimming these magnetic ﬁeld variations may
be substantial over the extent of the voxel dimensions. In
this paper we show that the presence of magnetic ﬁeld
inhomogeneities can cause severe spectral leakage and
distortion in a CSI experiment. We also demonstrate a new
method that eliminates both these artifacts. First, we out-
line the theory and demonstrate by simulations the spec-
tral leakage effect due to the ﬁeld inhomogeneities in a CSI
experiment. Importantly, we demonstrate that such spec-
tral leakage is present in both FT reconstruction and non-
Fourier-based SLIM reconstruction. We then introduce a
new method to eliminate the effect of magnetic ﬁeld inho-
mogeneity-induced spectral leakage on spectra from all
selected voxels. We show through simulations using this
new approach that ideal (noncontaminated) spectra can be
reconstructed in all selected voxels. Phantom and in vivo
human experiments are also described that demonstrate
the effect of spectral leakage and distortion of spectra due
to magnetic ﬁeld inhomogeneities, and conﬁrm the feasi-
bility of this newly proposed method to reduce this effect.
To simplify the presentation and analysis, all simulations
and results are presented for 1D CSI (one spatial dimen-
sion); however, the technique can be easily extended to
higher dimensions.
THEORY
MR signal acquired in a uniform external magnetic ﬁeld
from a 1D phase-encoded spectroscopic experiment is
given by
S(kn,t)



ℜ
(ℜ,f)ei2(knxft)dℜdf [1]
where ℜ, f  is the spin density function representing the
spatial distribution of the spectral information of the ex-
cited region ℜ, and kn is the reciprocal spatial term corre-
sponding to the applied gradients. In MRS experiments
only N discrete pieces of information for Skn, t are avail-
able at kn  n/FOV for n  N/2, · · ·, N/2  1. In a
conventional CSI experiment, truncated Fourier series re-
construction is used to reconstruct the approximate solu-
tion to ℜ, f  from Skn, t. Since only a small number of
central k-space points are acquired (typically 16–32 in
spectroscopic imaging), a Fourier series reconstruction
leads to severe Gibbs ringing artifact. This ringing causes
intervoxel signal leakage and contaminates the signals
from individual voxels.
As noted above, Hu et al. (13) developed the SLIM
reconstruction technique to reduce scanning time and
avoid spectral leakage caused by truncated Fourier series
reconstruction. The technique is based on the principle
that if the desired object is ﬁrst segmented into a set of
generalized homogeneous compartments, one can then de-
rive the signal from each compartment by ﬁtting the com-
partment model to the measured phase-encoded data. It is
assumed that these homogeneous compartments can be
identiﬁed on a high-resolution proton image obtained from
the same spatial coordinates as the spectroscopic imaging
data. Hu et al. (13) showed that, in principle, a set of only
M (or more) phase-encoding data is sufﬁcient to obtain
spectra from M compartments of arbitrary shape. In an
experiment with N phase-encoding steps and MM  N
homogeneous compartments in the object, they showed
that mathematically this problem can be stated as a set of
linear equations:
sn(t)
m
gnmm(t), m1,. . .,M;n1,. . .,N, [2]
where snt is the nth phase-encoded spectroscopic signal,
mt  

 ℜ, f ei2 ftdf is an FID signal from the m-th
8 Bashir and Yablonskiy
compartment in the absence of phase-encoding gradients,
and gnm is the geometric encoding matrix
gnm
ℜm
ei2knxdℜ, [3]
where the integral is taken over the m-th compartment
volume ℜm. After calculating the geometric encoding ma-
trix, one can obtain the FID signal from each homogeneous
region by solving the set of linear equations given by Eq.
[2] in a least-squares sense.
Both discrete FT reconstruction and SLIM reconstruc-
tion assume that Eq. [1] represents the acquired phase-
encoded spectroscopic imaging data, and ignore the fact
that there are always static susceptibility-induced mag-
netic ﬁeld inhomogeneities present in an MR experiment.
The MR signal in the presence of ﬁeld inhomogeneities is
given by
S(kn,t)



ℜ
(ℜ,f)ei2(knxft)ei	(ℜ,t)dℜdf, [4]
where
	ℜ,t)	o(ℜ)
B(ℜ)t [5]
is the additional phase due to the background magnetic
ﬁeld inhomogeneities, where 	oℜ is due to B1 (RF) inho-
mogeneities, and Bℜ is the main ﬁeld inhomogeneity.
These magnetic ﬁeld inhomogeneities lead to well known
artifacts in routine clinical imaging; however they are not
as severe as in CSI, for two major reasons. First, imaging is
usually done at higher resolution and therefore the phase
dispersion induced by the magnetic ﬁeld inhomogeneities
over dimensions of a voxel is smaller compared to that
encountered in low-resolution CSI. Second, many imaging
applications employ either a spin echo, which refocuses
the magnetic ﬁeld gradients at the echo time (TE) when the
data are acquired, or short-TE gradient-echo imaging in
which this effect is minimized. However, the FID in spec-
troscopic imaging is usually obtained over a data acquisi-
tion time of 0.5–1 s. As phase dispersion across the voxel
linearly increases with time, the signal leakage increases
as acquisition time increases. As we demonstrate in this
paper, even small magnetic ﬁeld inhomogeneities can lead
to severe contamination of the spectral signal in a CSI
sequence if they are not accounted for.
Herein we propose a new method, termed natural line-
width (NL) CSI, which takes these magnetic ﬁeld inhomo-
geneities into account and provides for elimination of their
deleterious effects on voxel spectra. This method is a gen-
eralization of the SLIM compartmental modeling method,
in which we explicitly acknowledge 1) the presence of
susceptibility-induced ﬁeld inhomogeneities in the spatial
encoding matrix in addition to the magnitude and direc-
tion of the phase-encoding gradients, and 2) the size,
shape, and location of the compartments. The new spatial
encoding matrix is now given by
gnm(t)
ℜm
ei2knxei	(ℜ,t)dℜ, [6]
where 	ℜ,t given by Eq. [5] is the phase introduced by
magnetic ﬁeld inhomogeneities. Instead of Eq. [2], a new
equation describing CSI signal can be written in matrix
notation as
St)G(t)(t), [7]
where the encoding matrix G(t) is given by Eq. [6]. The FID
signal can now be obtained for each deﬁned compartment
by solving the set of linear equations given in Eq. [7]. The
important aspect is that the encoding matrix gnmt is now
a function of time and takes into account the presence of
magnetic ﬁeld inhomogeneities. This method allows com-
plete removal of ﬁeld inhomogeneity effects from the ac-
quired MR signal so that the signal decay is determined
only by the R2 relaxation rate constant (hence the term
“natural linewidth” CSI).
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Simulations
To demonstrate the effect of magnetic ﬁeld inhomogene-
ities on data obtained by means of CSI, we conducted
several 1D simulations. The purpose of these simulations
is to demonstrate that even small magnetic ﬁeld inhomo-
geneities can lead to severe spectral leakage of voxel sig-
nals in both FT and SLIM reconstruction, and can be
removed by the proposed NL-CSI method.
We used 1D simulations with the following parameters:
ﬁeld of view (FOV)  256 mm, number of phase-encoding
steps  16, vector size  1024 (in the time domain), and
spectral bandwidth  2000 Hz, resulting in an FID dura-
tion of 0.512 s. We assumed that the phase-encoding gra-
dient duration was 750 s, which would give a maximum
phase-encoding gradient strength of 0.979 mT/m. The
choice of these parameters is within the practical ranges
that are generally used for clinical spectroscopic imaging.
We also introduced a background magnetic ﬁeld gradient
that was 1% of the maximum phase-encoding gradient
strength, i.e., 9.78  10–3 mT/m. This is a very small
gradient, and stronger susceptibility-induced magnetic
ﬁeld inhomogeneities are expected in vivo, especially at
the interfaces of air, tissue, and bone. The direction of the
background magnetic ﬁeld gradient was chosen to be the
same as the phase-encoding gradient. This is to include
both effects of intervoxel signal leakage and intravoxel
signal dispersion. A choice of gradient perpendicular to
the phase-encoding gradient direction would cause only
intravoxel signal dephasing. We considered two kinds of
simulated objects, as shown in Fig. 1a and 2a. In the ﬁrst
case the object perfectly occupies a single voxel (16 mm) in
the FOV (an ideal case when discrete FT reconstruction
results in minimal leakage). In the second case the object
Natural Linewidth Chemical Shift Imaging 9
occupies six voxels (96 mm, approximately on the order of
the size of human brain) in the FOV. Simulated data were
generated by numerical integration over the object, and for
SLIM and NL-CSI reconstruction the object was consid-
ered as discrete with a pixel resolution of 0.5 mm.
In the ﬁrst set of simulations T2 was chosen to be inﬁ-
nite. This was done to emphasize the role of magnetic ﬁeld
inhomogeneities in signal leakage and dispersion. In the
second set of simulations we assumed T2  50ms, which
is typical for in vivo brain spectroscopy at 1.5–3T. The
simulated data were spatially reconstructed using discrete
FT, SLIM reconstruction, and the proposed NL-CSI
method.
Phantom Study
A spherical phantom (10 cm diameter) containing
100 mM NAA, 50 mM KH2PO4, and 56 mM NaOH in
deionized water was prepared and 1% agarose was added
to the mixture to make it gelatinous. All experiments were
done on Siemens 3T Magnetom Allegra system (Siemens
Medical Systems, Erlangen, Germany) and the data were
collected using a circularly polarized head coil. A 1D
spin-echo CSI sequence was developed with an adiabatic
refocusing pulse (23) to improve the slice proﬁle of the
excited region. A 16 mm 16 mm wide region was excited
and spectroscopic imaging experiments were performed
using FOV  256 mm, TR/TE  1000/40 ms. Non-water-
suppressed spectra were acquired with 16 and 32 phase-
encoding steps and eight and four averages, respectively,
giving a Fourier voxel resolution of 16 16 16 mm3 and
16  16  8 mm3. A vector size of 1024 with 2000 Hz
bandwidth was acquired with a data collection time of
0.512 s. To demonstrate the effect of magnetic ﬁeld inho-
mogeneities on CSI, only magnet default values were used
for shimming.
3D high-resolution images from the same spatial coordi-
nates used for the CSI data were also collected using a
multi-gradient-echo pulse sequence with isotropic 1 mm3
resolution at two different TEs of 3 and 20 ms. The mod-
iﬁed sequence acquired k-space data at both TEs with
positive readout gradients to reduce the effect of image
distortions and eddy currents on the phase images. Shim
settings were kept the same as the 1D CSI experiments to
evaluate ﬁeld inhomogeneities needed for NL-CSI recon-
struction of CSI data. Other imaging parameters were as
follows: TR  25 ms, FOV  256  256  40 mm3, and
matrix size  256  256  40, for a total data acquisition
time of 4.5 min. Using phase images, background magnetic
ﬁeld inhomogeneities were calculated as described in the
Data Processing section below.
A localized time domain MR FID signal was also col-
lected using a point-resolved spectroscopy sequence
(PRESS) and used as a standard for comparison with the
reconstructed data. The size of the voxel was 10  10 
10 mm3 and it was placed in the center of the phantom to
reduce magnetic ﬁeld inhomogeneities originating from
the air/phantom interface. The magnet was shimmed man-
ually to achieve a linewidth of 10 Hz. Other parameters
for the single-voxel experiment were TR  1500 ms, TE 
40 ms, BW  2000, vector size  1024, and number of
averages  64.
In Vivo Study
1D CSI was performed on healthy volunteers after they
gave informed consent and the experimental protocol was
approved by the Washington University Medical School
IRB. Non-water-suppressed 1D CSI data were acquired
with an excited region of 16 mm  16 mm, FOV 
256 mm, TR/TE  1500/40 ms, vector size  1024, band-
width  2000 Hz, and data collection time  0.512 s.
Sixteen phase-encoding steps were acquired with 16 aver-
ages giving a Fourier voxel resolution of 16  16 
16 mm3. Shimming was performed over the excited vol-
ume. 3D high-resolution images for ﬁeld mapping were
FIG. 1. a: Location and size of the object (shown in gray) used in the
simulations. The vertical lines represent the CSI voxel locations.
Only voxels 9 and 10 were used as regions for SLIM and NL-CSI
reconstruction. b: FID signal from voxel 9. c: FID signal from voxel
10 using three different spatial reconstruction algorithms. Discrete
FT reconstruction leads to an approximately 10% signal loss at time
zero and a sinc-like signal decay of the FID in voxel 9. The signal in
the voxel 10 exists solely due to the leakage effect and initially
grows with time. SLIM reconstruction recovers the FID signal at time
zero in voxel 9 but resembles FT reconstructed signal for times
greater than zero. NL-CSI reconstruction fully recovers the “inho-
mogeneity-free” FID signal and there is no leakage in neighboring
voxels.
10 Bashir and Yablonskiy
also acquired from the same location with parameters as
described above for the phantom study.
Data Processing
All data were processed by software developed in MAT-
LAB (The Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA). 3D magnitude
and phase images were generated from the raw data set of
the 3D imaging experiment and phase images were un-
wrapped using custom-developed 3D unwrapping algo-
rithms based on mask cut and quality-guided maps (24).
Magnitude images were used as references to segment the
object into homogeneous compartments of approximately
16  16  16 mm3 regions. In order to compare the results
of SLIM and NL-CSI reconstruction with discrete FT re-
construction, we chose the size and location of the regions
to closely match with the voxels deﬁned when the discrete
FT was used to spatially reconstruct the CSI data. 3D phase
maps of each voxel were ﬁtted to second-order polynomi-
als to generate noise-ﬁltered phase maps in order to im-
prove the SNR. These ﬁltered phase maps were then used
to generate the 	o and B (Eq. [5]) distributions in the
voxels to be used in calculating the spatial encoding ma-
trix as given in Eq. [6]. This encoding matrix could then be
used with the phase-encoded 1D CSI data to calculate the
natural linewidth FID signal from each voxel using Eq. [2]
in a least-squares sense by evaluating
min

G(t)(t)S(t)2 [8]
We note that the encoding matrix Gt may become ill-
conditioned such that its true rank cannot be determined
and a least-squares solution may not be an option (25).
Several regularization methods have been developed to
overcome such ill-conditioned problems (26–28). Of these
methods, Tikhonov regularization is the most widely ac-
cepted (26,29). Tikhonov regularization replaces the in-
verse least-squares problem with a constrained least-
squares problem, and the idea is to ﬁnd a regularized
solution that minimizes the weighted combination of the
residual norm and the constraint as follows:
min

Gt)(t)S(t)2
L(t)2 [9]
where L approximates the ﬁrst derivative operator (Tik-
honov ﬁrst-order regularization) and the regularization pa-
rameter  controls the weight given to minimization of
constraint relative to minimization of the residual norm.
The optimal regularization parameter  is usually calcu-
lated by using the L-curve method (30). For this study we
explored two approaches of choosing the regularization
parameter: ﬁrst  was calculated using the L-curve
method, and second the regularization parameter was
made a function of time: (t)    logspace(–1,1, vector
size), i.e., spanning a range from 0.1 to 10. The advan-
tage of this approach is that for the initial parts of the FID
signal where the signal dominates the noise,  is small
(much less than that determined by L-curve) and least-
squares part dominate in Eq. [9]. Conversely, for the later
parts of the FID where noise dominates the signal and little
useful information is present, the side constraint domi-
nates the solution. This regularization approach not only
helps ensure the stability of the solution, it also helps
prevent magniﬁcation of the noise.
Noise Comparison
In previous sections we compared the signal achieved
with the three different reconstruction approaches. The
FIG. 2. a: Location and size of the object
used in the simulations. The size of the ob-
ject is 96 mm and the FOV is 256 mm. The
vertical lines show the location of voxels
when the discrete FT is used for spatial
reconstruction. For SLIM and NL-CSI re-
construction voxels 6–12 were chosen as
regions (total  7). Only half regions of vox-
els 6 and 12 were selected (i.e., where the
object is present). b and c: Reconstructed
signals from voxels 6 and 9 with T2  . FT
and SLIM reconstructions show substan-
tially nonlinear behavior. In voxel 6 the sig-
nal peaks around 70 ms and then decays
rapidly. NL-CSI reconstruction shows con-
stant linear signal with time, as expected. d
and e: Reconstructed signals from voxels 6
and 9 with T2  50 ms. The plots show that
FT and SLIM reconstruction lead to severely
distorted FID signal, whereas NL-CSI re-
construction shows true exponential decay
of the signal.
Natural Linewidth Chemical Shift Imaging 11
effect of these reconstruction approaches on the noise was
also compared for both simulation and in vivo studies. For
simulation studies multivoxel data were generated by add-
ing random noise to the simulated signal. The standard
deviation (SD) of the noise was calculated for the recon-
structed time domain FID signals in each voxel. For sim-
ulation studies the noise was calculated separately for the
ﬁrst and last 25 ms of the reconstructed signal. For in vivo
experiments the noise was calculated only for the last
25 ms of the FID signals, since the lipid and metabolite
signal oscillations have a higher amplitude than the noise
during the ﬁrst 25 ms.
RESULTS
Simulation Results
Figures 1a and 2a show the location of objects and voxels
for 1D simulation experiments. The gray area deﬁnes the
extent of the objects, and the white lines represent the
boundaries of voxels as deﬁned when the discrete FT is
used to spatially reconstruct the spectroscopic imaging
data. Figure 1b shows the reconstructed FID of voxel 9
from the simulated data when the object occupies only one
voxel in the FOV and T2  . With the discrete FT and
SLIM reconstructions, the resulting FID signal intensity
shows a sinc-like decay with time and passes through a
null at approximately 160 ms. At each time point the FT
reconstruction also shows decreased signal compared to
SLIM reconstruction; for example, at time point zero the
relative FT-reconstructed FID signal is 0.9 as compared
to 1.0 for SLIM reconstruction. This difference is due to
Gibbs ringing, which is inherent to FT reconstruction and
is present at every time point of the FID signal. This Gibbs
ringing is removed by SLIM reconstruction at time point
zero; however, background magnetic ﬁeld (inhomogene-
ity) gradients lead to signal decay with increasing time in
SLIM reconstruction. This signal decay is usually inter-
preted as T*2 decay due to intravoxel signal phase disper-
sion in the presence of ﬁeld inhomogeneities. In fact, this
interpretation is not quite correct, because signal spread-
out to the surrounding voxels substantially contributes to
the signal formation if FT or SLIM reconstruction is em-
ployed (see Discussion). Using NL-CSI reconstruction,
which takes into account the background magnetic ﬁeld
inhomogeneities, the ideal FID, which is unity for all time,
is recovered. Figure 1c shows a reconstructed signal in
voxel 10 of Fig. 1a where no object is present. This plot
demonstrates the spectral leakage of signal from voxel 9
when FT or SLIM reconstructions are used. When NL-CSI
reconstruction is used there is no leakage signal in neigh-
boring voxels. SLIM reconstruction has this property only
at t  0, when the contribution of ﬁeld inhomogeneity is
not present.
When the object occupies several voxels of the FOV, the
background magnetic ﬁeld inhomogeneities can lead to
erratic signal leakage (“contamination”) with both SLIM
and FT reconstruction. Figure 2b and c show representa-
tive FID signals from two voxels (6 and 9 in Fig. 2a), with
T2  . Contrary to the expected T*2-like decay, both SLIM
and FT reconstruction show “unusual” oscillatory inten-
sity behavior for short times and rapidly decaying inten-
sity at longer times. For example, in voxel 6 the signal
actually demonstrates a twofold intensity increase over the
ideal signal at 70 ms, followed by an almost exponential
intensity decrease with time. NL-CSI reconstruction repro-
duces the ideal signal, is not affected by ﬁeld inhomoge-
neities, and is constant with time, having an intensity of
0.5 in voxel 6 and 1.0 in voxel 9.
The results obtained with the same simulated object but
with T2  50 ms are shown for voxels 6 and 9 in Fig. 2d
and e. In both voxels the signal shows substantial devia-
tions from true exponential decay when discrete FT or
SLIM reconstruction is used for spatial reconstruction.
When NL-CSI reconstruction is used with the same simu-
lated data, the results produce true exponential decay.
Phased absorption mode spectrum of the simulated signal
from voxel 9 reconstructed with all three methods is
shown in Fig. 3. With FT and SLIM reconstruction the
spectrum is distorted, and these distortions are removed
when NL-CSI reconstruction is used.
Experimental Results
Figure 4 shows on a semi-log scale the magnitude of the
FID signal vs. acquisition time. When 16 phase-encoding
steps are used for data acquisition, both FT (Fig. 4a) and
FIG. 3. Absorption mode spectra from voxel 9 in Fig. 2a of the multivoxel simulation experiment using (a) FT, (b) SLIM, and (c) NL-CSI
reconstruction.
12 Bashir and Yablonskiy
SLIM (Fig. 4b) reconstruction show that the magnitude of
the FID signal decays in a non-monoexponential fashion
(i.e, it is distorted) even though the voxel (voxel 1, Fig. 4a
inset) is near the center of the phantom. The FID signal
after NL-CSI reconstruction (Fig. 4c) shows that most of
the distortions are removed and the signal compares favor-
ably with the reference spectrum (Fig. 4d) obtained using
a PRESS sequence. This conﬁrms that the distortions seen
in the FID signal with the FT and SLIM reconstructions are
due to the background magnetic ﬁeld inhomogeneities and
can be mostly eliminated using the NL-CSI approach.
When 32 phase-encoding steps are used for a CSI exper-
iment, the resultant voxel dimension is reduced by half,
and hence the magnetic ﬁeld variation across the voxel is
also reduced. Even in this case the FT (Fig. 4e) and SLIM
(Fig. 4f) reconstructions show distortions of the FID signal
from a selected voxel (voxel 2, Fig. 4e inset). However, this
distortion is signiﬁcantly reduced compared to the exper-
iment with 16 phase-encoding steps. NL-CSI (Fig. 4g) re-
construction in this case leads to almost perfect recon-
struction of the signal, and the results exactly match the
reference single-voxel spectroscopy data (Fig. 4h).
Figure 5 (left column) shows the phased absorption
mode water spectrum of voxel 1 indicated in Fig. 4a.
Spectral distortions are visible with the FT (Fig. 5a) and
SLIM (Fig. 5b) methods of spatial reconstruction, whereas
NL-CSI (Fig. 5c) almost completely removes these distor-
tions and agrees with the reference spectrum from the
PRESS sequence (Fig. 5d). Figure 5e (FT), f (SLIM), g
(NL-CSI), and h (PRESS) show the spectrum after water
peak was removed using the SVD ﬁlter in the JMRUI (31)
package, and the scale is expanded to show the spectrum
from the metabolite resonances. NL-CSI reconstruction
demonstrates marked improvement in the lineshape of the
metabolite spectra and improved discrimination of the two
peaks at 2.7 ppm.
In Vivo Results
Figure 6a shows a gradient-echo scout image overlaid with
the location of the 16 mm  16 mm 1D interrogated CSI
region and resultant FT voxels. For SLIM and NL-CSI
reconstruction, the skull and scalp were chosen as two
compartments and the brain was segmented into compart-
ments to closely match the FT voxels. Figure 6b–d show
the magnitude of FIDs plotted on a semi-log scale from
voxels marked in Fig. 6a. FT- and SLIM-reconstructed
signals from three representative voxels clearly show sig-
nal distortions as compared to the NL-CSI-reconstructed
signal. In all three voxels the NL-CSI approach effectively
removes the distorting effects of ﬁeld inhomogeneities,
leading to almost pure monoexponential signal decay,
which is seen as linear decay on the semi-log scale. High-
frequency oscillations are visible on the FT-reconstructed
signal at short times due to the extracranial lipid signal
that leaks into the signal from brain voxels when FT re-
construction is used. This extracranial lipid signal leakage
is also eliminated with NL-CSI reconstruction, resulting in
uncontaminated FID signal from the voxels.
Figure 7 shows the representative spectrum from the
voxel marked as “c” in Fig. 6a. The water peak was re-
moved and the scale was expanded to show the spectrum
from the metabolite resonances. No line-broadening was
applied to the signal. FT reconstruction (Fig. 7a) shows
that even halfway into the brain there is extracranial lipid
leakage. It can be seen that both SLIM (Fig. 7b) and NL-CSI
FIG. 4. Images of the spherical phantom showing the 1D CSI grid and FT voxel locations with 16 and 32 phase encodes are shown as
insets. For SLIM and NL-CSI reconstruction, multiple regions were selected only in the phantom, and the regions closely matched the FT
voxel locations and size. The magnitude of the FID signal from voxels 1 and 2 plotted on a semi-log scale is shown: (a and e) FT
reconstruction, (b and f) SLIM reconstruction, (c and g) NL-CSI reconstruction, and (d and h) PRESS FID signal from a well-shimmed
single-voxel spectroscopy experiment. FT and SLIM reconstructions show nonlinear behavior of the FID signal. NL-CSI-reconstructed
signal shows linear behavior, which agrees very well with the reference single-voxel spectroscopy signal.
Natural Linewidth Chemical Shift Imaging 13
(Fig. 7c) are very effective in removing this extracranial
lipid spectral leakage, but the lineshape is improved with
NL-CSI.
Noise Comparison
Table 1 shows the noise calculated for all three reconstruc-
tion approaches. Simulation studies show that both SLIM
and NL-CSI have similar noise for the ﬁrst 25 ms of the
FID, which is slightly higher than the noise in the FT-
reconstructed data. For the last 25 ms of the FID (when the
signal has decayed to zero and only the noise remains), the
NL-CSI shows signiﬁcantly increased noise levels over FT
and SLIM reconstruction, but regularization appreciably
reduces this noise. The in vivo data also show similar
noise performance, and NL-CSI reconstruction with regu-
larization has noise values comparable to those of the
discrete FT and SLIM reconstructions.
DISCUSSION
The presence of a person or an object in the MR scanner
causes magnetic ﬁeld inhomogeneities even in an ideal
magnet. Careful shimming can reduce these ﬁeld inhomo-
geneities but cannot fully eliminate them. These ﬁeld in-
homogeneities are signiﬁcant at the interfaces of air, tissue,
blood, and bone, where the susceptibility changes rapidly
over short distances. In this paper we have shown both
theoretically and experimentally that even very small
background magnetic ﬁeld inhomogeneities can lead to
severe spectral leakage between voxels and contaminate
the quantitative results when FT is used for spatial recon-
struction of CSI data. As in vivo MRS moves to higher-
ﬁeld-strength magnets to take advantage of greater SNR
and chemical shift dispersion, these higher ﬁeld strengths
are also accompanied by increased magnetic ﬁeld inhomo-
geneities. Our results show that if these background ﬁeld
inhomogeneities are not taken into account, the advan-
tages of moving to higher ﬁeld may be compromised. We
have introduced a non-FT-based reconstruction method
(NL-CSI) that eliminates or reduces signal distortions re-
sulting from these magnetic ﬁeld inhomogeneities, and
thus produces near ideal (by content and lineshape) spec-
tra from each voxel.
In a CSI experiment, phase encoding is performed for
spatial localization and the FID signal is recorded in the
absence of any externally applied ﬁeld gradients. In a
spin-echo CSI sequence (the most commonly used CSI
sequence), the data acquisition usually starts at the middle
of the spin echo and continues for typically 0.5–1 s after
the echo. At the spin echo, the phase accumulated due to
background static ﬁeld inhomogeneities is refocused and
the contribution of Bℜt term in Eq. [5] to the measured
signal is nulled. However, this contribution increases lin-
early with time. The effect of this term is twofold: First, it
produces phase dispersion inside each voxel, leading to a
well-known effect of signal decay in each voxel (T*2-type
phenomena). Second, if the magnetic ﬁeld gradient has a
component along a phase-encoding direction, it intro-
duces an additional time-dependent phase. When FT is
performed to spatially localize the phase-encoded data,
this additional phase dispersion can lead to a situation in
which spins in a particular voxel are mapped to neighbor-
ing voxels, resulting in contamination of their signal and
vice versa. This contamination effect increases as signal
acquisition progresses and is in addition to the previously
well-documented sinc-like PSF behavior inherent to dis-
crete FT.
Simulations show that even when a small linear back-
ground ﬁeld gradient is present, FT reconstruction leads to
a sinc-like signal decay with time. When the object occu-
pies only one voxel in the FOV, the effect is easily predict-
FIG. 5. The left column shows the absorption mode spectra (water
peak only) from voxel 1 shown in Fig. 4. (a) FT and (b) SLIM spatial
reconstructions of the phase-encoded data show distortions of the
spectrum. (c) NL-CSI reconstruction leads to removal of this distor-
tion, as shown by improvement of the lineshape, and agrees with
the (d) PRESS-acquired spectrum. In the right column the scale is
expanded to show the metabolite peaks in the spectrum: (e) FT, (f)
SLIM, (g) NL-CSI, and (h) PRESS. NL-CSI reconstruction show
signiﬁcantly improved lineshape over FT and SLIM reconstructions.
14 Bashir and Yablonskiy
able from Eq. [1]. However, objects that occupy a single
voxel in the FOV are not generally encountered in real-life
experiments. For an object occupying multiple voxels,
even the presence of a small linear background ﬁeld gra-
dient leads to a complicated signal behavior. When FT
reconstruction is used (Fig. 3), signals from different vox-
els severely contaminate each other. The background ﬁeld
inhomogeneities in this case can cause additional signal
leakage, leading to near doubling of the actual signal from
a given voxel at a speciﬁc time. This result is rather unex-
pected because it is usually assumed that magnetic ﬁeld
inhomogeneities lead to increased signal decay, not am-
pliﬁcation.
In real experiments, heterogeneous objects cause back-
ground ﬁeld inhomogeneities that are nonlinear and the
strength of these inhomogeneities can be much larger than
what we chose for our simulations, especially near tissue,
air, and bone interfaces. In this scenario there can be
severe signal contamination in spectroscopic imaging ex-
periments if these ﬁeld inhomogeneities are not taken into
account while the phase-encoded data are reconstructed,
and the resulting quantitative estimates of the metabolite
signals may be erroneous. We have already discussed and
demonstrated how this effect manifests itself in phantom
studies. Our in vivo results also clearly demonstrate this
point. The signal decay obtained with FT reconstruction is
highly nonlinear on a semi-log scale, demonstrating that it
is contaminated and distorted due to ﬁeld inhomogene-
ities. For example, the signal can decrease more rapidly
(Fig. 6c and d) or increase above (Fig. 6b) the true brain
FIG. 6. (a) Gradient-echo reference image
of a head, showing the location of 16 mm 
16 mm 1D excited region and FT voxel lo-
cations. Parts b–d show on a semi-log
scale the magnitude of the FID signals from
voxels marked in a. The FT-reconstructed
signals from three representative voxels
show nonlinear signal decay due to ﬁeld
inhomogeneities. The NL-CSI recon-
structed signal in all three voxels demon-
strates the effectiveness of the technique in
removing the ﬁeld inhomogeneity. High-fre-
quency oscillations are clearly visible on the
FT-reconstructed signal due to the ex-
tracranial lipid signal that leaks into the sig-
nal of brain voxels when FT reconstruction
is used.
FIG. 7. Absorption mode spectra after (a)
FT, (b) SLIM, and (c) NL-CSI spatial recon-
struction of CSI data from voxel “c” shown
in Fig. 6a. No line-broadening was applied.
FT reconstruction leads to signiﬁcant ex-
tracranial lipid signal leakage even into a
voxel near the center of the brain. SLIM and
NL-CSI are very effective in removing the
lipid leakage (see Discussion), and NL-CSI
provides better lineshape than SLIM recon-
struction.
Natural Linewidth Chemical Shift Imaging 15
signal. The signal in a given voxel can only increase if the
signals from neighboring voxels bleed into this given
voxel, an effect that can be seen from the simulation stud-
ies. When FT reconstruction is used, static ﬁeld inhomo-
geneities often lead to increased rates of signal decay. The
signal from voxel “c,” for example, is decaying very rap-
idly due to the presence of a large blood vessel, seen in the
scout image (Fig. 6a), which causes marked ﬁeld inhomo-
geneities. The NL-CSI method is very effective in removing
effects of such ﬁeld inhomogeneities and recovers the
“natural” signal from the voxel. When the JMRUI software
package (31) was used to quantify the spectroscopy data
using the Hankel Lanczos singular values decomposition
ﬁlter (HLSVD) signal quantitation algorithm (32), water
and NAA decay rates showed a decrease of 23% and 52%,
respectively, compared to the FT-reconstructed data.
Another advantage of the proposed technique is the
removal of extracranial lipid signal that leaks into brain
voxels when FT reconstruction is used, as shown in Fig.
7a. There are two sources of intervoxel signal leakage in FT
reconstruction: a sinc-like PSF and ﬁeld inhomogeneities.
Even for a voxel in the center of the brain, there are
signiﬁcant amounts of lipid spectral leakage, which can
dominate the signals from metabolites. The most common
approach to reduce lipid leakage is to use outer volume
suppression pulses to saturate the lipid magnetization.
Although this approach may eliminate the lipid spectral
leakage, it cannot prevent intervoxel signal contamination
from water and metabolite signals, which will compromise
quantitative results. Both SLIM and NL-CSI are very effec-
tive in removing the lipid spectral leakage. SLIM is effec-
tive in removing the lipid leakage because T*2 of lipids is
signiﬁcantly shorter than that of water and metabolites.
The source of spectral leakage in SLIM reconstruction
arises only from ﬁeld inhomogeneities, since most of the
lipid signal decays before the signal distortion due to ﬁeld
inhomogeneities starts to dominate. However, SLIM still
allows spectral leakage of water and metabolite signals due
to ﬁeld inhomogeneities, as can be seen by the nonlinear
FID signal decay on semi-log plots (Fig. 6). The NL-CSI
approach is very effective in removing both these sources
of signal leakage.
It is important to note that spectral distortions are not
only present in voxels near the phantom or tissue/air in-
terfaces, where ﬁeld inhomogeneities are greatest; signiﬁ-
cant signal distortions also occur in voxels in the center of
a spherical phantom or the brain. With NL-CSI reconstruc-
tion the ideal signal is nearly restored as compared to a
single-voxel spectroscopy experiment, which is used as a
benchmark in this study. Following application of NL-CSI,
only very small signal deviations from the reference FID
signal are visible on plots (Fig. 4c and g). This may be due
to errors in the phase maps or incorrect localization of the
region of interests (ROIs) on the phase maps. With better
phase-mapping sequences and localization techniques,
these small distortions can be further reduced.
For any technique involving spectroscopic imaging, the
SNR is always of great concern. Our data show that direct
NL-CSI reconstruction can lead to higher noise at the end
of the reconstructed FID signal (i.e., where the signal has
decayed to the noise level). The reason for this increased
noise is a decrease of the matrix coefﬁcients of the NL-CSI
encoding matrix (Eq. [6]) with time. Thus a least-squares
solution to (Eq. [7]) leads to a higher noise in the recon-
structed FID signal. It is also demonstrated that using
regularization the noise is appreciable reduced and a more
stable solution to Eq. [7] is obtained. It is important to note
that this increased noise is observed when the signal has
decayed to the level of noise and there is not much useful
information present in the FID signal. For the initial part of
the FID signal (where the SNR is high), the noise in NL-CSI
reconstruction is similar to that in SLIM reconstruction
and comparable to that in FT reconstruction.
Also, it should be noted that in this study we used a
simple regularization approach. A variety of different reg-
ularization approaches are available to solve such systems
of linear equations, and they need to be evaluated to de-
termine the best possible approach that will maximize the
SNR and reduce errors introduced by reconstruction. We
propose to use the Twomey regularization method that
minimizes the difference between the solution and some
estimate of the solution (33). A simple Lorentzian model
can be used for this estimated signal in Twomey regular-
ization. Using this approach and a good choice for the
modeled signal, high SNR can be achieved without sacri-
ﬁcing the accuracy of the results. Another elegant ap-
proach was proposed by Webb et al. (34), who used phase
information over a voxel to estimate the R*2 signal decay
rate, and a model-based approach to estimate the ampli-
tudes of the peaks. There are two main advantages of this
approach: First, they were able to estimate the decay rate
and used this information to account for the phase disper-
sion in the voxel. Second, since all of the data are used to
evaluate a small number of model parameters, the method
is highly effective in cases with low SNR. An extension of
this approach coupled with NL-CSI can be used to directly
Table 1
Noise Comparison*
Fourier SLIM
NL-CSI
a b c
Simulation
First 25 ms 0.49  0.06 0.62  0.09 0.62  0.05 0.33  0.03 0.60  0.04
Last 25 ms 0.45  0.04 0.57  0.05 15.9  6.8 2.4  0.35 2.5  0.01
In vivo
Last 25 ms 0.5  0.35 0.51  0.34 4.5  3.7 0.6  0.12 0.45  0.12
*Noise is shown as mean  SD for all voxels and all the noise values are scaled by 104. a  NL-CSI solution with no regularization, b 
NL-CSI with regularization coefﬁcient , c  NL-CSI with regularization parameter (t) as described in Methods.
16 Bashir and Yablonskiy
evaluate the resonances in a spectroscopic imaging se-
quence. With this approach, complete phase-encoded data
and a time-dependent geometric encoding matrix (Eq. [6])
can be used to evaluate the model parameters. This could
present a robust and efﬁcient means of analyzing the data.
One approach to further improve these results is to use
higher-spatial-resolution acquisition strategies previously
used with FT reconstruction (35). A smaller voxel size
results in reduced ﬁeld inhomogeneity-induced phase dis-
persion across the voxel, and therefore improved spectral
quality for MRSI. Increased resolution also leads to re-
duced leakage and contamination of the FID signal as
compared to low-spatial-resolution spectroscopic images.
However, signiﬁcant leakage/contamination can still be
present in a high-resolution CSI experiment, as can clearly
be seen as nonlinear signal behavior on the semi-log plots
in Fig. 4e (FT) and 4f (SLIM). For absolute quantiﬁcation of
resulting metabolite signals, this high-resolution approach
coupled with discrete FT reconstruction of phase-encoded
spectroscopic imaging data may still lead to unacceptable
signal contamination. However, this high-spatial-resolu-
tion strategy coupled with NL-CSI reconstruction elimi-
nates intervoxel signal contamination, resulting in near-
idealized voxel spectra (Fig. 4g). A potential disadvantage
of using this high-spatial-resolution acquisition strategy is
a reduced SNR ratio per unit time, but the accuracy of the
results and improved spectral lines can more than com-
pensate for this. As demonstrated by Li et al. (36), reducing
the voxel dimensions may increase T*2 and partially com-
pensate for signal loss with decreased voxel volume. How-
ever, this high-resolution approach cannot be extended
indeﬁnitely, as eventually the reduced SNR will make
identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of metabolite resonances
impractical.
Hu et al. (13) proposed SLIM reconstruction as an alter-
native to FT reconstruction to overcome the limitations of
the FT approach and to speed up imaging time by reducing
the number of phase-encoding steps. The SLIM approach
exploits the structural information available from a high-
resolution MR image to reconstruct the spectroscopic im-
aging data. As shown in Figs. 2 and 3, at time zero (when
ﬁeld inhomogeneities are refocused in a spin-echo exper-
iment), SLIM reconstruction results in the true signal from
each voxel. Thus, at time zero, SLIM reconstruction is
effective in eliminating the Gibbs ringing artifact inherent
to the FT approach. However, in the presence of back-
ground ﬁeld inhomogeneities, SLIM reconstruction also
leads to severe signal contamination due to the intervoxel
signal leakage. This contamination can be even more se-
vere than that encountered with the FT reconstruction, as
shown in Fig. 2. This effect is due to violation of the
primary assumption in the SLIM approach, speciﬁcally
that the voxel is homogeneous. Even if the original voxel
has a homogeneous spin density, the presence of magnetic
ﬁeld inhomogeneities compromises this homogeneity in a
time-dependent manner. NL-CSI uses a modiﬁed spatial
encoding matrix that incorporates information on back-
ground ﬁeld inhomogeneities to signiﬁcantly reduce or
even eliminate signal contamination, and thus produces
near-ideal signal from selected voxels or ROIs.
Although we have shown that NL-CSI technique is very
effective in producing noncontaminated voxel spectra, it
should be noted that it is based on certain assumptions
and can produce erroneous results if the assumptions are
violated. One important constraint for the NL-CSI ap-
proach to be effective is the requirement that segmented
compartments should be homogeneous. Liang and Lauter-
bur (37) previously showed that compartmental inhomo-
geneity can lead to intervoxel signal leakage when SLIM
reconstruction is used. To reduce the effects of intervoxel
signal contamination due to compartmental inhomogene-
ities in SLIM reconstruction, Liang and Lauterbur (14)
introduced GSLIM reconstruction approach for spectro-
scopic imaging data. They showed that with the use of
GSLIM, intervoxel signal leakage due to compartmental
inhomogeneities can be signiﬁcantly reduced. In this
study we did not address the issue of compartmental in-
homogeneity, since our focus was to demonstrate the effect
of ﬁeld inhomogeneity on intervoxel signal leakage. Com-
partmental inhomogeneity was not an issue for the simu-
lation and phantom studies because the compartments
were truly homogeneous. For the in vivo study, the com-
partments were chosen to be aligned with FT voxels to
facilitate direct comparison. Although this violates the
condition that the compartments should be homogeneous,
the results demonstrate that even with this selection of
compartments, NL-CSI resulted in signiﬁcantly improved
lineshapes and an almost complete removal of extracranial
lipid leakage as compared to FT reconstruction. Further
improvements can be achieved by careful automatic seg-
mentation of the high-resolution images. Also, the NL-CSI
technique can be incorporated with GSLIM reconstruction
to improve the results presented herein and reduce the
effect of compartmental inhomogeneity.
Obviously, this approach can be used in addition to, but
not as a substitute for a good shimming of the magnetic
ﬁeld. Strong magnetic ﬁeld inhomogeneities can cause
geometric distortions of the gradient-echo images used to
obtain the high-resolution base images and to determine
the ﬁeld maps used for data reconstruction. This may lead
to inaccurate spatial and phase information in the encod-
ing matrix, leading to erroneous results. In addition, a
highly inhomogeneous ﬁeld will cause the FID signal to
decay below the noise level very quickly, and no recon-
struction approach will be able to recover it. It should also
be noted that ﬁeld mapping adds additional time to the
study; in this study approximately ﬁve additional minutes
were needed to acquire complete data sets for NL-CSI.
However, we believe that this additional time is certainly
not prohibitive in clinical settings and can easily be incor-
porated into the protocol.
CONCLUSIONS
Even the small magnetic ﬁeld inhomogeneities that are
present during any spectroscopic imaging experiment can
lead to severe contamination of spectroscopic data if the
discrete FT is used for spatial reconstruction. A new
method, NL-CSI, takes into account magnetic ﬁeld inho-
mogeneities and produces spectral maps that are nearly
free of intra- and intervoxel contamination, and have sig-
niﬁcantly improved lineshape.
Natural Linewidth Chemical Shift Imaging 17
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. Joseph Ackerman and Dr. Xiang He (Wash-
ington University, St. Louis) for helpful discussions and
constructive suggestions during the course of this work.
REFERENCES
1. De Stefano N, Bartolozzi ML, Guidi L, Stromillo ML, Federico A.
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy as a measure of brain damage in
multiple sclerosis. J Neurol Sci 2005;233:203–208.
2. Gillies RJ, Morse DL. In vivo magnetic resonance spectroscopy in
cancer. Annu Rev Biomed Eng 2005;7:287–326.
3. Law M. MR spectroscopy of brain tumors. Top Magn Reson Imaging
2004;15:291–313.
4. Lyoo IK, Renshaw PF. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy: current and
future applications in psychiatric research. Biol Psychiatry 2002;51:
195–207.
5. Narayana PA, Wolinsky JS, Rao SB, He R, Mehta M. Multicentre proton
magnetic resonance spectroscopy imaging of primary progressive mul-
tiple sclerosis. Mult Scler 2004;10(Suppl 1):S73–S78.
6. Brown TR, Kincaid BM, Ugurbil K. NMR chemical shift imaging in
three dimensions. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1982;79:3523–3526.
7. de Graff RA. In vivo NMR spectroscopy: principles and techniques.
Chichester/New York: Wiley; 1998.
8. Oppenheim AV, Schaffer RW. Discrete-time signal processing. Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall; 1989.
9. Garwood M, Schleich T, Bendall MR, Pegg DT. Improved Fourier series
windows for localization in in vivo NMR spectroscopy. J Magn Reson
1985;65:510–515.
10. Garwood M, Schleich T, Ugurbil K. The Fourier-series window method
for spatially localized NMR-spectroscopy—implementation with com-
posite pulses and multiple coils. Ann NY Acad Sci 1987;508:512–515.
11. Brooker HR, Mareci TH, Mao JT. Selective Fourier transform localiza-
tion. Magn Reson Med 1987;5:417–433.
12. Mareci TH, Brooker HR. High resolution magnetic resonance spectra
from a sensitive region deﬁned with pulsed ﬁeld gradients. J Magn
Reson 1983;57:157–163.
13. Hu X, Levin DN, Lauterbur PC, Spraggins T. SLIM: spectral localization
by imaging. Magn Reson Med 1988;8:314–322.
14. Liang ZP, Lauterbur PC. A generalized series approach to MR spectro-
scopic imaging. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 1991;10:132–137.
15. Kienlin MV, Mejia R. Spectral localization with optimal pointspread
function. J Magn Reson 1991;94:268–287.
16. Plevritis SK, Macovski A. MRS imaging using anatomically based k-
space sampling and extrapolation. Magn Reson Med 1995;34:686–693.
17. Plevritis SK, Macovski A. Spectral extrapolation of spatially bound
images. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 1995;14:487–497.
18. Hu X, Patel M, Ugurbil K. A new strategy for spectroscopic imaging. J
Magn Reson B 1994;103:30–38.
19. Hu X, Patel M, Chen W, Ugurbil K. Reduction of truncation artifacts in
chemical-shift imaging by extended sampling using variable repetition
time. J Magn Reson B 1995;106:292–296.
20. Weaver JB, Xu Y, Healy DM, Driscoll JR. Wavelet-encoded MR imaging.
Magn Reson Med 1992;24:275–287.
21. Webb P, Macovski A. Rapid, fully automatic, arbitrary-volume in vivo
shimming. Magn Reson Med 1991;20:113–122.
22. Wen H, Jaffer FA. An in vivo automated shimming method taking into
account shim current constraints. Magn Reson Med 1995;34:898–904.
23. Garwood M, DelaBarre L. The return of the frequency sweep: designing
adiabatic pulses for contemporary NMR. J Magn Reson 2001;153:155–
177.
24. Ghiglia DC. Two-dimensional phase unwrapping: theory, algorithms,
and software. New York: Wiley; 1998.
25. Bojorck A. Constrained least squares problems. In: Ciarlet PG, Lions JL,
editors. Handbook of numerical analysis, Vol I: Finite difference
methods: solutions of equations in Rn. New York: Elsevier; 1990. p
589–615.
26. Morozov VA. Regularization methods for ill-posed problems. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press; 1993.
27. Skilling J, Gull SF. Algorithms and applications. In: Smith CR, Grandy
Jr WT, editors. Maximum-entropy and Bayesian methods in inverse
problems. Boston: D. Reidel; 1985. p 83–132.
28. Hansen PC. Rank-deﬁcient and discrete ill-posed problems.
Philadelphia: SIAM; 1998.
29. Tikhonov AN, Arsenin VY. Solutions of ill-posed problems. Washing-
ton, DC: Winston and Sons; 1977.
30. Hansen PC, O’Leary DP. The use of L-curve in the regularization of
discrete ill-posed problems. SIAM J Scientiﬁc Comput 1993;14:1487–
1503.
31. Naressi A, Couturier C, Devos JM, Janssen M, Mangeat C, de Beer R,
Graveron-Demilly D. Java-based graphical user interface for the MRUI
quantitation package. MAGMA 2001;12:141–152.
32. Laudadio T, Mastronardi N, Vanhamme L, Van Hecke P, Van Huffel S.
Improved Lanczos algorithms for blackbox MRS data quantitation. J
Magn Reson 2002;157:292–297.
33. Twomey S. On the numerical solution of Fredholm integral equations
of the ﬁrst kind by inversion of the linear system produced by quadra-
ture. J Assoc Comput Mach 1963;10:97–101.
34. Webb P, Spielman D, Macovski A. Inhomogeneity correction for in vivo
spectroscopy by high-resolution water referencing. Magn Reson Med
1992;23:1–11.
35. Ebel A, Maudsley AA. Improved spectral quality for 3D MR spectro-
scopic imaging using a high spatial resolution acquisition strategy.
Magn Reson Imaging 2003;21:113–120.
36. Li BS, Regal J, Gonen O. SNR versus resolution in 3D 1H MRS of the
human brain at high magnetic ﬁelds. Magn Reson Med 2001;46:1049–
1053.
37. Liang ZP, Lauterbur PC. A theoretical analysis of the SLIM technique.
J Magn Reson Ser B 1993;102:54–60.
18 Bashir and Yablonskiy
