Veterinary Research Communications, 29(Suppl. 2) (2005) 215–219
DOI: 10.1007/s11259-005-0046-9 C© Springer 2005
A Proteomic Approach to Investigate Immunity
Against R. Equi in Foals
P. Roncada1,2,∗, L. Bonizzi3, R. Fortin2, M.L. Menandro3 and G.F. Greppi2
1Lea Biotech srl, Milan; 2Department of Veterinary Clinical Science, University of Milan;
3Department of Public Health, Compared Pathology and Veterinary Hygiene Legnaro PD,
Italy
∗Correspondence: E-mail: roncadap@unimi.it
Roncada, P., Bonizzi, L., Fortin, R., Menandro, M.L. and Greppi, G.F., 2005. A proteomic approach to investigate
immunity against R. equi in foals. Veterinary Research Communications, 29(Suppl. 2), 215–219
Keywords: proteomic, immunity, rhodococcosis, foals
Abbreviations: 2DE, two dimensional electrophoresis; CHAPS, [3-[(3-Cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-
1-propanesulfonate; DTT, dithiotreythol; IAA, iodoacetamide; SDS-PAGE, sodium dodecyl sulphate gel
electrophoresis
INTRODUCTION
Rhodococcus equi is a soil organism distributed worldwide. The major infection caused
by R.equi is a granulomatous pneumonia often fatal in foals aged between one and six
months (Cornish and Washington, 1999). While R. equi is present in most horse breeding,
virulence in foals is highly associated to breeding management, the immune response of
the foal and the espression of the VAP gene (virulence associated protein) by the micro-
organism. R. equi has emerged as an important human pulmonary pathogen, particularly
in HIV-infected and immunocompromised patients (Drancourt et al., 1992; Emmons et
al., 1991). The major feature of the pathogenesis of R. equi infections is the ability of
the organism to survive and replicate inside alveolar macrophages (Hietala and Ardans,
1987; Zink et al., 1987). Experimental data suggest that R. equi is capable of inhibiting
the oxidative bactericidal functions of polymorphonuclear cells. Electron microscopy of R.
equi in equine macrophages show the capability of the organism to survive by interfering
with phagosome-lysosome fusion. The exact mechanism of infection and how and why this
micro-organism mainly affects newborn foals is still unknown. These questions can only be
answered only by a better understanding of the biology and epidemiology of R. equi infection
(Taouji et al., 2002). Proteomics, which allows analysis of the entire protein complement
of a genome, (Wasinger et al., 1995) could be useful to elucidate the biology of the micro-
organism and to detect the diagnostic and prognostic markers involved in the pathogenesis
of infection. The aim of this work was to compare two dimensional electrophoresis (the
starting point of a typical proteome project) of equine serum to evaluate protein differences
due to the different immune responses (active and passive) against R. equi in foals. The
identification of proteins is performed by matching (overlap with a published database of
equine serum) and mass spectrometry MALDI-TOF.
215
216
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals: the animals used in this study were from a R. equi enzootically-affected breeding.
Two foals (A, B) were born from mothers immunized with an inactivated vaccine prepared
with virulent R. equi strains isolated from clinical infections present in breeding (Menandro
et al., 2004) and fed with the colostrum of their mothers. Foal C was born from a mother
which had not been vaccinated.
Sera of foals were collected at seven and ninety days of age to verify the presence of
specific antibodies against R. equi and used for proteome analysis. Foal B showed the
classical symptoms of the disease and subsequently recovered. Another serum sample was
thus collected from foal B after recovery. Serological examination: serum antibodies were
identified by immunodiffusion (AGID, Rhodovac, Buenos Aires).
Proteomic analysis: 50 µl of each sample of equine serum was diluted 1:10 in a solution
containing 8 M urea, 4% CHAPS, 1.6 Ampholine 3–10, 1% DTT. The first dimension,
which consists of separation of proteins based on their net charge, was performed with im-
mobilized pH gradient strips 3–10 NL, 18 cm long, 0.5 mm thick (Amersham Biosciences)
which had been previously reswollen in a solution of the same dilution. Isoelectrofocusing
was performed overnight, at 18◦C, with a total applied voltage of 45000 V/h. After equi-
libration steps with DTT and IAA to permit separation of proteins with conservation of
their reduced form, the IPG strips were placed on a vertical system for SDS electrophoresis
(ETTAN DALT SIX, Amersham Biosciences). The second separation steps, based on ap-
parent molecular weight, were performed simultaneously. After the runs, gels were stained
with colloidal Coomassie Blue G. Image analysis was performed using Image Master 2D
platinum software (Amersham Biosciences). Identification of proteins was performed both
by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry as published by Miller et al. (2004).
RESULTS
Upon the first serum collection the foals A and B (born from vaccinated mothers) showed
specific antibodies against R. equi, and upon the second collection all animals were negative.
The ‘B’ foal, was further bled after the R. equi infection. Figure 1 shows the characteristic
electrophoretogram of serum seven days after birth and relative protein identifications.
The immature organization of the immune system is evident; this is clearly improved after
second serum collection at 90 days (Figure 2). This 2D map shows the up-regulation of
heavy and light immunoglobulins chains for the second collection. The proteomic profiles
of sera of foal B during the infection are shown in Figures 3 and 4.
DISCUSSION
All samples from newborn foals at seven days show a low concentration of Ig proteins, due
only to passive immunity. In fact, the second samples show reorganization and an active
immune system, with increasing levels and complexity of Ig proteins. Moreover, the same
pattern is evident during the infection. Notably, the affected foal shows an increased level
217
Figure 1. Two dimensional electrophoresis of foal serum, taken seven days after birth
Figure 2. Two dimensional electrophoresis of foal serum, taken 90 days after birth
218
Figure 3. Two dimensional electrophoresis of foal serum, taken in the acute-phase of infection
Figure 4. Two dimensional electrophoresis of foal serum, taken on clinical recovery
219
of transferrin and presence of transthyretin dimer that also persists after clinical recovery.
The occurrence of transthyretin dimers rather than tetramers can be explained by an altered
oligomerization state due to a high serum concentration of homocysteine, which is well
known to occur during pulmonary inflammation, such as rhodococcosis. To our knowledge
our data represent the first serum proteomic approach in the study on the research into
immune response against the R. equi infection in newborn foals.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by grants from LEA BIOTECH srl and MIUR (ex-60% National
Coordinator Prof. L. Bonizzi).
REFERENCES
Cornish, N. and Washington, J.A., 1999. Rhodococcus equi infections: Clinical features and laboratory diagnosis.
Current Clinical Topics in Infectious Diseases, 19, 198–215
Drancourt, M., Bonnet, E., Gallais, H., Peloux, Y. and Raoult, D., 1992. Rhodococcus equi infections in patients
with AIDS. Journal of Infections, 24, 123–131
Emmons, W., Reichwein, B. and Winslow, D.L., 1991. Rhodococcus equi infection in the patients with AIDS:
literature review and report of unusual case. Review of Infectious Disease, 13, 91–96
Hietala, S.K. and Ardans, A.A., 1987. Neutrophil phagocytic and serum opsonic response of the foal to Corynebac-
terium equi. Veterinary Immunology and Immunopathology, 14(3), 279–294
Menandro, M.L., Pasotto, D., Luini, M., Rognoni, C., Rubei, M. and Martini, M., 2004. Applicazione in campo di un
piano di immunoiprofilassi contro la rodococcosi equina. Atti della Societa` Italiana delle Scienze Veterinarie,
58, 86–87
Miller, I., Friedlein, A., Tsangaris, G., Maris, A., Fountoulakis, M. and Gemeiner, M., 2004. The serum proteome
of Equus caballus. Proteomics, 4, 3227–3234
Taouji, S., Breard, E., Peyret-Lacombe, A., Pronost, S., Fortier, G. and Collobert-Laugier, C., 2002. Serum and
mucosal antibodies of infected foals recognized two distinct epitopes of VapA of Rhodococcus equi. FEMS
Immunology and Medical Microbiology, 34(4), 299–306
Wasinger, V.C., Cordwell, S.J., Cerpa-Poljak, A., Yan, J.X., Gooley, A.A., Wilkins, M.R., Duncan, M.W., Harris,
R., Williams, K.L. and Humphery-Smith, I., 1995. Progress with gene-product mapping of the Mollicutes:
Mycoplasma genitalium. Electrophoresis, 16, 1090–1094
Zink, M.C., Yager, J.A., Prescott, J.F. and Fernando, M.A., 1987. Electron microscopic investigation of intracellular
events after ingestion of Rhodococcus equi by foal alveolar macrophages. Veterinary Microbiology, 14(3),
295–305
