Qualitative management
accounting research: rationale,
pitfalls and potential
Juhani Vaivio
Helsinki School of Economics, Helsinki, Finland
Abstract
Purpose – The paper aims to provide an overview of the rationale for qualitative research in
management accounting. It discusses how qualitative research could serve the development of theory,
and provides guiding principles for qualitative investigation. It also seeks to identify common
problems in qualitative studies and lays out avenues for further qualitative inquiry.
Design/methodology/approach – The paper relies on critical reflection and deductive logic in its
discussion, drawing on a wide range of theoretical pronouncements and methodological literature, as
well as on some illustrative field studies in management accounting.
Findings – The paper opens a broad panorama: it emphasizes field research as a necessary
counterweight to textbook appreciations of management accounting, to idealized economic models and
to consultancy-oriented agenda. It identifies how field research serves theory development in different
ways, providing a set of practical principles which assist qualitative efforts. The paper also specifies
pitfalls in qualitative studies and shows areas where the future potential of qualitative investigations
can be focused.
Practical implications – This is a paper that motivates the “qualitative” management accounting
scholar. But it also assists in a pragmatic way the qualitatively oriented management accounting
scholar – especially someone with little prior experience in empirical fieldwork and in the theoretical
interpretation of qualitative data.
Originality/value – The paper provides a source of inspiration, an instructive reflection and a
practical guide for the qualitatively oriented, but still somewhat hesitant, management accounting
scholar.
Keywords Qualitative research, Management accounting
Paper type General review
Introduction: why do we need qualitative research on management
accounting?
Qualitative research is a messy and time-consuming affair. Any academic who has
been involved in the production of a case or field-study would probably recall the same
difficulties: identifying relevant theory, formulating the research objectives, gaining
access, finding the key people, getting your hands on documents, observing without
disturbing, drowning in data, being puzzled by conflicting interpretations, trying to
find theoretical sense, and writing an argument which is not only novel and intriguing,
but also credible. After the intensive hours in the field, and the countless lonely hours
The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/1176-6093.htm
This paper is adapted from: Vaivio, J. (2007) “Qualitative research on management accounting:
achievements and potential” in Hopper, T., Northcott, D. and Scapens, R. (Eds), Issues in
Management Accounting (3rd ed.), Pearson Education, London. The author and QRAM
gratefully acknowledge Pearson Education Limited for granting permission for this version to
appear in QRAM.
QRAM
5,1
64
Qualitative Research in Accounting &
Management
Vol. 5 No. 1, 2008
pp. 64-86
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited
1176-6093
DOI 10.1108/11766090810856787
in front of the computer screen, the “qualitative” management accounting scholar
inevitably faces a painful, almost existential question – does qualitative research in
management accounting really matter?
This paper argues that the answer is positive: it does matter, for three key reasons.
First, qualitative research takes us beyond a narrow and functionalist view of
the management accounting phenomenon, which we call here the textbook view.
Second, qualitative research protects us against a scientific imperialism that reduces
management accounting to an issue of mere economic choice; this we call the economics
view. Third, qualitative research critically scrutinizes normative prescriptions for
improving management accounting, which can be labeled the consultancy view.
By qualitative research, we suggest broadly the entire interpretive research
tradition in accounting, especially case-based research that relies on rich empirical
material collected from a single target organization or a handful of case-organizations.
Qualitative research strives towards theoretically valuable interpretations. It uses
multiple sources of evidence, such as interviews, documents and other texts) as well as
forms of participant observation within the research site.
The paper is structured as follows: below, we first discuss in more detail the
achievements of qualitative research in “rescuing” the management accounting
phenomenon from being overwhelmed by the abovementioned three perspectives. In
the paper’s second section, a fundamental issue, the role of qualitative study in theory
development, will be addressed. The third section offers a number of more pragmatic
guiding principles for actually doing qualitative research in practice within the
management accounting field. Next, the paper identifies some common problems in
qualitative management accounting studies. The paper closes with a discussion of
future potential in qualitative management accounting research in the fifth section,
offering intriguing avenues of further qualitative inquiry.
“Rescuing” the management accounting phenomenon
Beyond the textbook view
In the textbook view, management accounting is a practical technology – a collection
of practical tools that practical people employ in practical situations, especially when
they have business and money in mind. Cost allocations, profitability analyses of
available options, long-run investment appraisals, traditional budgeting methods and
non-financial performance measurements are all needed to manage the everyday life of
the organization. By applying management accounting tools, this everyday life
becomes much more formalized and systematic. Managerial practices run beyond
personal belief or emotion and are not at the mercy of mere speculation, whim and
intuition. With the assistance of management accounting instruments, the organization
thinks before it acts. It remains under coordinated control and heads steadily in the
designated direction (Horngren et al., 2003; Merchant and van der Stede, 2003).
Many assumptions underlie the textbook view. The organization is considered able
to position itself in an “environment” and identify its boundaries as an autonomous
entity. It knows its preferences, and employs a central agent – a responsible
management. It has specific goals, on which its participants broadly agree. It carefully
plans its future before rushing into action, asking for “hard” data and formally
processed information. When the organization acts, this action is coupled to routinized
monitoring, documentation and follow-up. Hence, the organization has two important,
Rationale for
qualitative
research
65
constantly ongoing problems. The first is rational decision-making – how to choose
the best available course of action as a result of a logical sequence of events that we
know as the “decision-making process.” The second is rational control – how to
implement “decisions” and steer the organization by comparing specified outcomes
with specified objectives.
Management accounting, as a functional technology that helps acting management,
is connected to both of these assumed problems. It assists rational decision making by
providing quantitative information, economic analysis and financial evaluation
that support informed, sound choices. It assists rational control by measuring and
monitoring the organization’s progress towards specific, quantified financial and
non-financial objectives, and allowing “management by exception,” which triggers
immediate corrective action. Summing up, management accounting is seen as a
practical medium that serves rational management purposes. It is a flexible and neutral
technical instrument, or formal system that can be moulded to the functional aims of
its users.
One could almost wish this were the case. Everyday organizational life would be
much more predictable! However, the organizational reality we usually encounter does
not match the implicit ontological simplifications of the textbook view. When we enter
a real organization, and a real business firm in particular, we soon realize that we are
very far from the instructively appealing abstractions of textbooks. The organization
operates in multiple competitive and institutionalized environments (DiMaggio and
Powell, 1991). It faces conflicting demands. Sometimes the organization is powerful
enough to design and engineer its own “environment.” For instance, a giant
multinational enterprise is far from being a passive adaptor to imposed circumstances
(Galbraith, 1978). The boundaries of many organizations are fuzzy, especially in the
network-economy of our times. Participation of organizational agents is fluid.
Organizational agents and different coalitions within the firm may have contradictory
goals (Cyert and March, 1963). Often the organization acts before it thinks; the cost of
pausing to think may outweigh the benefits of planning and “rational”
decision-making since prompt action, without paralyzing analysis, may be needed to
secure the commitment of key agents. Alternatively, the organization might act in
order to discover its preferences, trying to learn what it actually wants in a highly
ambiguous and dynamic situation (Brunsson, 1989, 1982).
Decision processes are rarely rational and linear. Rather, they are complex bundles
of interconnected, loosely coupled events that bounce back and forth. They involve
many actors who represent diverse opinions, interests, biases, hidden agendas and
competencies. Decision-making often gets interrupted, marginalized, diverted,
restarted or merged with another stream of urgent concerns. Moreover, rational
control – on closer empirical examination – is also an illusion. What the officially
sealed decision in fact suggests in terms of concrete operational action cannot be
articulated with precision. Targets are imperfect approximations of what the
organization seeks and are interpreted in different ways by biased local agents
(Mintzberg, 1973; Mintzberg and Westley, 2001; Donaldson and Lorsch, 1983).
Consequently, those seeking a deeper understanding of the management accounting
phenomenon “from a distance,” while avoiding the need for a longer involvement with
the mundane practice of business, can learn a lot from the interpretive tradition and
from the qualitative research literature and its documented illustrations of practice.
QRAM
5,1
66
Management accounting is not a compact “toolbox” of functional techniques and
neutral systems to assist rational choice and control (Hopwood, 1983; Burchell et al.,
1980). Rather, it is a loose assembly of calculative practices that are used selectively, in
a bewildering variety of ways, by a multitude of agents within a broad range of
organizational processes and situations. For instance, instead of serving internal
decision or control needs, the numbers provided by management accountants may be
used for merely cosmetic purposes, projecting an image of up-to-date management
practice. Or they may be used as a substitute for action, to lure external parties into
believing that a major transformation is occurring where none in fact exists
(Kasurinen, 2002; Malmi, 1997; Vaivio, 2006).
Furthermore, qualitative research has revealed that cost data may be used to gain a
better negotiating position with a partner-supplier. Where cost data is used within the
unstructured chaos of a decision process, it is often manipulated by key agents to
serve local, perhaps sub-optimal ends. Competing expert-groups within a company can
use management accounting information to gain the upper hand in internal battles for
power and resources. Investment calculations might be used to legitimate ex post a
large investment decision that was taken rather quickly, after subjective but
“strategic” considerations. A bold market move, a “shot in the dark,” may be
post-rationalized with management accounting figures to look like a premeditated,
carefully analyzed decision. Budgets and performance measurements can produce
unintended consequences if they are misunderstood, fail to reflect real intentions, are
subject to game-playing, or are deliberately manipulated. And management
accounting professionals can take many different roles – they are not always
boring “bean counters” but may become powerful strategic change-agents (Covaleski
and Dirsmith, 1988; Markus and Pfeffer, 1983; Bariff and Galbraith, 1978; Lumija¨rvi,
1990; Granlund and Lukka, 1997; Vaivio and Kokko, 2006).
Thus, qualitative research serves an important educational and pedagogic purpose
by offering a deeper perspective into the subject of management accounting. It probes
beyond textbook idealization to expose management accounting as an imperfect
practice, used in a variety of different ways to become de facto organizational reality.
A counterweight to the economics view
The educational and pragmatic textbook view has borrowed much from the theoretical
tradition underlying the economics view – a perspective that dominates important
streams of academic enquiry in management accounting. With its roots in neoclassical
economics, and the micro-economic theory of the firm in particular, the economics view
offers an analytically powerful research perspective. The strength of this framework
lies in its conceptual clarity, parsimony and elegance, as well as in its universal
character. It attempts to explain management accounting in abstract and often
mathematically modeled terms that defy the constraints of time and place. This
perspective offers, therefore, a “general” theory.
Under this view, “the firm” is an abstract productive entity, a “black box” where
inputs factors become efficiently transformed into an output to maximize profits.
Management accounting is seen as a rational tool of self-interested economic agents of
“the firm,” which operates under conditions of scarce resources and opportunity costs.
These agents possess considerable computational skills and use them to maximize
their utility. They operate in many different markets that tend, at least in the long run,
Rationale for
qualitative
research
67
towards equilibrium, and can obtain reliable information about market prices. The
preferences of these agents are exogenously given and known. Hence, management
accounting becomes coupled to marginal decision-making – to the impartial weighing
of marginal utility against marginal cost. Furthermore, the relationships between these
rational agents are primarily transactional, but these transactions come at a cost.
Recently, the economics view has drawn on concepts of the principal, the agent,
contracting, moral hazard and asymmetric information to analyze management
accounting techniques and economic incentives for the rational control of economic
undertakings (Lambert, 2001).
In management accounting research, the merits of the economics view, and its
substantial impact on the North American theoretical tradition, are undeniable. It has
allowed us to analyze problems of organizational control, i.e. the problems of
evaluating the performance of different actors and tying suitable incentives to
performance measurements. However, the limits of the somewhat imperialistic
economics view need to be acknowledged (Lazear, 2000; Luft and Shields, 2002).
We should avoid closure in our theoretical paradigm and a premature shift into what
Kuhn (1962) called “normal science”. Here, qualitative research has served in a
remarkable role. In simple terms, it can be claimed that the largely European tradition
of qualitative management accounting research has acted as a necessary
counterweight to North American theoretical influences, preserving both theoretical
and methodological pluralism.
The achievements of qualitative research are twofold. First, it has rejected the
economist’s notion of the organization as a “black box.” After all, the microeconomic
theory of “the firm” was never intended to become an accurate description of what
happens inside firms. The theory of “the firm,” its rational agents and its marginalism,
was meant to be a building block in a much wider macroeconomic theory, the general
theory of market equilibrium, designed to explain vast classes of economic phenomena.
“The firm” was constructed as a theoretical firm – it was never meant to portray the
empirical firm[1]. Qualitative management accounting research has penetrated the
economists’ “black box,” seeking the how and why of organizational affairs, and
discarding the stereotyped actors and their stylized economic transactions assumed in
the economics view.
Qualitative studies have documented how management accounting instruments
become intermingled with intricate political processes, in which the distribution of
organizational power plays a central role. They have illustrated how budgeting
procedures introduce organizational segmentation and tension. They have exposed
how accounting measurements create disciplinary spaces for governing economic life.
They have identified the ritualistic and symbolic value of financial controls in
transforming an organization’s dominant culture. They have described how
management accounting “talk” becomes intertwined with other forms of
organizational and managerial knowledge. They have identified the routinization
and institutionalization of outdated management accounting techniques. They have
reminded us that management accounting can be synonymous with exploitation
(Baxter and Chua, 2003; Dent, 1991; Miller and O’Leary, 1994, 1987; Ahrens, 1997;
Burns and Scapens, 2000; Wickramasinghe and Hopper, 2005; Vaivio, 1999a).
But the foremost message of these qualitative investigations is that management
accounting does not reflect any single, given economic reality. And it is not the passive
QRAM
5,1
68
consequence of economic conditions. It is an active, constitutive phenomenon. With
management accounting, we make reality (Hopwood, 1986, 1983). Management
accounting calculations create urgency and relevance around particular issues whilst
marginalizing or discrediting others. They drive organizational initiatives into
predefined alleys. Measurements determine what receives managerial attention, and so
create a certain visibility within the organization. For instance, cost and profit centres
order and partition activity, thereby shaping actors’ understandings of how operations
are structured and how various elements are interlinked. Management accounting also
maintains conformity in these perceptions by, e.g. standardizing reporting formats.
Second, qualitative research has demonstrated that we need more than a “general
theory,” based on economic analysis, if we want to understand the management
accounting phenomenon. The universalism of the economics view must be
complemented with a fundamentally different philosophy of what counts as
legitimate “theory” in management accounting research. In qualitative research,
“theory” is primarily a local description and explanation as well as a temporal creation.
This suggests a different ontology and a different epistemology. “Theory” emerges
from a local context and is limited by the particular characteristics (in space and time)
of this context. It is not supposed to be a universally valid construct, generalizable in a
statistical sense from a sample to a wider population, across a broad range of empirical
contexts, from one place to another. And it is not supposed to be an eternal
construction that stands firm against the ravages of time. Instead, theories are born,
have a lifespan and die[2].
Qualitative studies can be credited with introducing management accounting as a
context-bound phenomenon. Empirically, management accounting is not a
homogenous set of calculative practices, but is highly contingent and situationally
specific. Moreover, qualitative research provides evidence that management
accounting is a dynamic, organizationally embedded social phenomenon.
Organizational agents continually re-interpret management accounting in particular
situations, creating subjective meanings around specific forms of calculus and formal
control. Thus, the shared making of this reality, which later may become objectified, is
in a constant state of flux. Management accounting instruments are not stable and
fixed, but are often complex, temporary and fragile.
This is not to imply, however, that regularities, parallels and general tendencies
between management accounting phenomena cannot be observed across contexts.
Management accounting does not materialize “case-by-case,” as an entirely
idiosyncratic, isolated and unique phenomenon, as shown by qualitative case and
field studies (Kakkuri-Knuuttila et al., 2008a, b). But an examination of qualitative
research warns us against sweeping generalizations across contexts. Such “general”
theories, while empirically supported across a larger population of organizations, are
often uninteresting and empty in substantive content. Such theories are “general”
because they tell us so little.
Problematizing the consultancy view
A pragmatic perspective on management accounting is offered by what can broadly be
described as the consulting industry. It is important to acknowledge that commercial
interests are at play here, in a market where significant financial gains can be realized.
Consulting agencies, multinational accounting firms, educational institutions with
Rationale for
qualitative
research
69
a consultancy orientation and “branded” academics operating as part-time consultants
are the suppliers of progressive management products. Amongst other product
offerings, these agencies include management accounting in their repertoire of
fashionable “packaged solutions” (Jackson, 2001; Clegg and Palmer, 1996). They are
rhetorically persuasive and logically appealing prescriptions of what should be done
with “new” management accounting technologies. Such normative statements should,
however, be kept apart from scholarly research findings on how management
accounting appears as an empirical phenomenon.
The consultancy view of management accounting draws on a vocabulary of reform
and improvement coupled with illustrative examples, testimonies by leading
authorities and selectively documented “success stories.” Often, existing
management accounting practice is portrayed as something orthodox and
inadequate to be fundamentally questioned and reformed. For instance,
activity-based costing has been advanced as a remedy to the problems of
conventional overhead allocation. Or a more compact set of key figures is marketed
as a solution to the recognized problems of current, bureaucratic budgeting routines.
Also, a “new” management accounting technique may be put forth as a response to
wider managerial concerns, just as the balanced scorecard, for example, has been
proposed as a means of translating the organization’s strategic plans into grass-root
operational action. Hence, in the consultancy view, management accounting is a
practical technology that should be radically amended (Johnson and Kaplan, 1987;
Cooper and Kaplan, 1988; Kaplan and Norton, 2001, 1996; Hope and Fraser, 2003).
Qualitative research has traced the external origins and discursive underpinnings of
organizational management accounting practices. It has linked the seemingly technical
and impartial calls for management accounting reform with much wider societal
programs of efficiency and rationalization. It reminds us here of the big picture; we
should be aware of the often implicit societal ideals and political aspirations where the
consultancy view is at play (Miller and O’Leary, 1994, 1987; Bhimani, 1993). But
perhaps the most significant contribution of qualitative research has been to question
the prescriptions of the consultancy view. It has brought these normative schemes
under intensive, critical examination in various empirical settings. Their workings
have been observed in real organizations and within the complex and shifting, socially
constructed contexts in which “new” management accounting technologies are
implemented. It appears that these real-life contexts – where management accounting
is redesigned, “new” techniques are launched and the benefits of new calculations
should materialize – are far removed from the idealized conditions assumed in the
consultancy view. In reality, management accounting change progresses slowly.
It takes unexpected turns and twists and it produces unintended consequences. Also
management accounting change seems to be contextually limited. Success in one
setting cannot be easily replicated in another setting (Kasurinen, 2002; Granlund, 2001;
Jazayeri and Hopper, 1999; Burns and Vaivio, 2001; Vaivio 1999a, b).
Management accounting change has been shown to be smaller and less significant
than is presumed within the consultancy view. On closer examination, some
organizations implementing “new” calculative techniques make only marginal
refinements in their practices or achieve only isolated, local changes (for instance,
where only a minor unit in a larger organization succeeds in implementing ABC
costing). Also, change might remain at the level of top management intention, or people
QRAM
5,1
70
at the corporate centre and the organizational periphery may have different
perceptions of the speed and impact of change. Many impediments to change have
been identified, ranging from the sedimentation of prevailing accounting routines and
lack of data systems support to employee resistance in the lower echelons of the
organization (Briers and Chua, 2001; Major and Hopper, 2005; Ahrens and Chapman,
2002; Ezzamel, 1994; Malmi, 1997).
Resistance to change has been identified as a considerable hindrance to the
implementation of “new” management accounting technologies (Scapens and Roberts,
1993). Resistance can take overt and articulated forms, or can dwell below the surface
of organizational action – in silent, more subtle practices of non-compliance. New
measurements may be rejected by a rebellious expert group that fears a violation of its
decision rights. Or, a balanced scorecard, for example, can be pushed to the sidelines by
a prolonged lack of real organizational commitment, when organizational members
fear the prospect of detailed surveillance, and newborn Taylorism, in its non-financial
measurements of process-time. Overall, qualitative research has contributed to our
appreciation of management accounting change as a hazardous and non-linear process
(Baxter and Chua, 2003; Andon et al., 2007) in which “success” is a debatable and
relative concept. Further change in management accounting must be contrasted with
its stability (Granlund, 2001; Lukka, 2007). A new initiative can run into problems,
coming eventually to a standstill. The remnants of an “old” technology, after a long
dormant period, can be rediscovered and reused (Vaivio, 1999b). Key agents may leave,
carrying the zeal of change with them. Focused change is buried under more
comprehensive reforms.
Besides, critically examining the implementation of advocated “new” management
accounting techniques, qualitative research has uncovered an even more fundamental
problem with the consultancy view. Taken together, qualitative studies have alerted us
to the homogenizing influence of normative prescriptions. While illustrating and
explaining the adoption of fashionable management accounting solutions, qualitative
research has revealed a tendency towards uniformity in contemporary practice. By
embracing “packaged solutions” organizations make themselves vulnerable. First, it is
questionable whether proposed designs and templates offer genuine competitive
advantage since these solutions are freely available in the market. Second, and more
importantly, a packaged solution also contains a definition of what is to be reformed,
i.e. it suggests a “packaged problem.” Hence, adopting organizations may lean towards
conformism as their understandings of what counts as an urgent managerial concern
become more homogenous. But are the deficiencies of cost accounting, or the
imperfections of performance evaluation, really the organization’s most pressing
issues? Or do more acute problems perhaps threaten the firm’s survival? The
standardization of vision within an industry may open the opportunity to the
newcomer – to the venture that builds on self-generated management innovation.
Qualitative research and theory development
Having summarized the achievements of qualitative research, we now turn to its
epistemological foundations and methodological justification. How does qualitative
research help to develop a theoretical body of knowledge in management accounting?
And how can we distinguish between different kinds of qualitative studies in these
terms? Of course, qualitative studies can be categorized in several ways. For instance,
Rationale for
qualitative
research
71
we can distinguish between descriptive, illustrative, experimental, exploratory and
explanatory studies (Scapens, 1990). Alternatively, Keating (1995) suggests a
framework that categorizes case and field studies according to their different
theoretical purposes. It is based on the notion of “research scope,” i.e. what the findings
of a study suggest in theoretical terms. Keating differentiates between theory
discovery, theory refinement and theory refutation studies.
A qualitative study aimed at theory discovery can be compared to an exploration of
an unknown territory. The imagery of an eighteenth century explorer-adventurer, who
sails off into uncharted waters, returning later to The Royal Society to report the first
observations of previously unknown reptiles and exotic plants, captures the purpose of
this genre of case or field study. The research seeks to explain a new phenomenon of
interest, for which the boundaries may be unclear and only rudimentary patterns can
be discerned. The study may be a revealing, rich description and first mapping of the
research phenomenon, with little explanation of its connections with other known
phenomena or of the more specific mechanisms operating within it. Where little prior
theory exists, inductive and exploratory “discovery studies” lead to preliminary theory
that emerges from the empirical observations (Keating, 1995, pp. 73-7, on Simons (1987)
and Merchant (1987)).
For example, the novel application of a management accounting technique, say a
target costing system, is studied in a novel institutional and cultural setting which has
had little contact with any management accounting practices. This kind of study leads
to a preliminary interpretation of how the phenomenon of interest is shaped and
behaves. It builds a set of concepts and informed descriptions, or perhaps advances
more formal hypotheses of causal connections. Or, it may produce an illuminating,
well-documented narrative that increases our understanding of the studied
phenomenon. The findings of theory discovery studies can be used as first
building-blocks in further investigations, such as more focused qualitative studies, or
survey studies that test the validity of preliminary hypotheses across a larger
population.
Many other qualitative management accounting studies have sought theory
refinement. While theory discovery studies proceed from a limited theoretical starting
point and rely on emerging insights from field data, theory refinement studies start
with a clear theoretical focus and objective. In a sense, before entering the field, the
researcher has already decided which theoretical “goggles” to wear in observing the
phenomenon of interest. This does not suggest, however, that empirical observations
are forced into a predetermined framework. Theory is being developed through novel,
empirically-embedded interpretations. Some theoretical elements are corroborated and
strengthened; other elements become more clearly specified. As a consequence, of this
empirically substantiated refinement, theory may be partially rebuilt, as more
appropriate constructs replace those with less explanatory power.
According to Keating (1995) this broad category of refinement studies can be further
divided into studies that illustrate a particular theory (Keating, 1995, pp. 77-9,
on Ansari and Euske (1987) and Dent (1987)), and those that specify an established
theory. A case study that, for instance, uses a particular social theory to explain the
power effects of management accounting systems may be viewed as an illustration of
this wider theoretical perspective. It demonstrates the capacity of the social theory to
explain phenomena in the management accounting domain, for instance when
QRAM
5,1
72
management accounting measurements and power considerations get intertwined.
Such a study also reinforces the plausibility of the power-related social theory by
showing that the generic theoretical framework applies in the investigation of
accounting-related puzzles. Arguably, an illustrative study should also go a step a
further and identify aspects of the adopted social theory that could be developed in the
light of the empirical evidence.
Qualitative management accounting studies that specify (i.e. further develop) an
existing theory bring a theoretical starting point under the loop of empirical
examination and critical evaluation (Keating, 1995, pp. 79-81, on Simons (1991) and
Macher (1987)). The concepts and causal connections within the theoretical framework
are partially revised to improve theory’s application within a specific organizational,
social, or institutional context. The theory can even be radically reformulated in light of
the researcher’s iterative interpretations of fresh new field evidence. For instance, an
initial theory about how senior managers use monitoring systems for strategic control
might be further refined when applied within specific organizational contexts. Or, a
theory that explains the mechanisms of management accounting change may be
elaborated by applying it to a case study that reveals factors that inhibit or delay
change.
Finally, the interpretation of evidence from a case or field study may reveal that
practice does not match established management accounting theory. Instead of
illustrating how the theory works in the study’s context or refining the theory, the
investigation contradicts the applied framework – i.e. it is a theory refutation study
(Keating, 1995, pp. 81-3, on Young and Selto (1993) and Macintosh and Scapens (1990)).
It should be noted that the refuted “theory” might be a normative construction – a
prescribed “solution” that claims certain causal relationships, for instance, between the
adoption of a management accounting technique and specific financial or strategic
benefits. This, of course, applies also to theory refinement studies, which may have a
normative starting point. An example of a theory refutation study would be one that
finds dysfunctional consequences from “strategic” non-financial measurement in an
artistic organization that shuns bureaucratic formalism, thereby contradicting a
popular theory on the effects of a “new” management accounting technology.
Doing qualitative research: some guiding principles
How should we proceed in actually doing qualitative research in management
accounting? It is important to note that qualitative research is affected by unforeseen
events and stochastic factors – it is a bold jump into the unknown. A study addressing
a well focused, theoretically sound research question within an intriguing empirical
site can suddenly run into problems and produce poor results. The phenomenon of
interest may not be captured, being too tightly entangled with other organizational
elements and dynamic social processes. The researcher may fail in data collection,
gathering for instance only “official” views about the role of a new accounting practice,
or otherwise biased accounts. Access to critical locales may be denied. Or, the emerging
interpretations can remain uninteresting and lacking in theoretical novelty. To
minimize such problems, qualitative researchers need to follow some broad guiding
principles about how to conduct successful case or field studies.
Rationale for
qualitative
research
73
Research design
First, there is the question of research design. Is the research question relevant
from theoretical and practical points of view, well formulated and sufficiently focused?
An overly pragmatic approach may result in findings that are deemed overly technical
or functional from an academic perspective. In contrast, an overly theoretical approach
may produce findings that are welcomed by a small scientific community, but which
have little practical value. A poorly articulated research question can lead to sloppy
data collection, yielding general and uninformative conclusions. A research objective
that lacks focus may lead the researcher to observe “the whole world” inside an
organization. But an overly focused research question may, in the worst case scenario,
leave the researcher empty-handed, wondering whether the phenomenon of interest
exists at all (Ferreira and Merchant, 1992).
A key decision in the design of a qualitative study concerns the extent to which
prior theory should inform the research question and data collection (Eisenhart, 1989;
Dyer and Wilkins, 1991[3]). Some conceptualization, and a clear a priori theoretical
orientation, is needed to guide empirical observation to the right context and specific
locales of interest. It assists in crafting interview themes and later in filtering the
masses of research evidence. It should be noted that no researcher’s mind is an empty
canvas, a tabula rasa. We approach phenomena with some implicit assumptions about
what we expect to see, casting a “net” over the facts we wish to capture. A strong
theoretical orientation and strict adherence to pre-specified constructs may, however,
force preordained theoretical perspectives onto the observations, suffocating any
potential empirical insights. For instance, a researcher might perceive an
organization’s performance appraisal practices solely in terms of the suggested
dichotomy between diagnostic and interactive control systems. He or she may then fail
to notice different local uses of accounting measurements that do not fit this
categorization, but which provide a better explanation of organizational practice.
Hence, empirical sensitivity should not be sacrificed in the name of prior theoretical
focus (Ahrens and Dent, 1998).
Another key issue in qualitative research design concerns the dilemma of depth
versus breadth. Should the study be a deep-probing investigation of a single
organization or other unit of analysis? Or, should it seek to theorize about a
management accounting phenomenon that exists across multiple case study
organizations? In the single case study, the phenomenon of interest is examined in
its detailed context, against a rich background of organizational processes, tensions
and competing sectional interests, which are reflected in management accounting
calculations and practices. This contextual understanding, together with the
contrasting observations within the case, allow for an appreciation of the social
dynamics that surround the studied phenomenon. This provides a plausible,
contextually rich explanation of the research phenomenon that has theoretical value.
In a multiple case study, comparisons across organizational contexts are sought, so
each organization can be studied less intensively. This approach usually draws on
well-specified prior theoretical constructs, research instruments and protocols.
Although the within-case analysis may be less detailed, visiting several empirical
sites does provide an opportunity to examine cross-case patterns and search for
similarities and differences in the studied phenomenon. The juxtaposition of the
different case contexts can challenge simplistic a priori expectations and generates a
QRAM
5,1
74
more sophisticated theoretical understanding (Eisenhart, 1989). For example, this
approach might reveal that dissimilar organizations experience similar difficulties in
the implementation of a “new” management accounting technique, indicating potential
flaws in the normative design that has been applied.
Data collection
Second, besides giving sufficient attention to research design, successful qualitative
studies in the management accounting field have been built on reliable and valid
empirical evidence obtained via professionally executed, meticulous data collection
(McKinnon, 1988). Brief and superficial “site visits,” allowing for only one or two
interviews, should be distinguished from genuine case or field studies. The latter
involve the researcher for longer periods in the field. Generally, the longer the
researcher spends in the studied context, the less vulnerable the study is to factors that
jeopardize its reliability and validity. Some moderation is advisable, however. The
notorious tale of the sociologist being finally rediscovered in a Borneo jungle wearing a
hula-hula skirt and a ring in his nostril warns us about the threat of “going native.”
Researchers undertaking qualitative studies must maintain an appropriate distance
from the studied context.
Once in the field, even the best research design is unfortunately no protection
against the obstacles the researcher faces within a real, working organization.
Typically, a good qualitative management accounting study, which succeeds in
building a strong theoretical argument, is the product of careful underlying fieldwork.
If interviews are the primary data source, they must be sufficiently extensive within
the unit under study. They must have been thoroughly prepared, and the researcher
acts in a particular way during them, trying for instance to minimize respondent bias.
It is not enough to interview only senior management about an activity-based costing
implementation, for example, since people on the “shop-floor” may have a totally
different story to tell. The independent nature of the study must be explained to
interviewees, to avoid any perception that the researcher is acting as a “management
spy.” The researcher must know the background of each interviewee and must address
topics relevant to that person. She or he must avoid using scientific jargon and speak
instead the “language” of the interviewees. The researcher must not lead the discussion
along preconceived paths, but must have the sensitivity and skill to steer the
discussion away from clearly irrelevant topic areas, to maintain focus on the
phenomenon under study. At the same time, interesting leads should be followed with
further probing questions. The researcher should not express his or her own opinions
during the interview, or take sides in any way, otherwise the fieldwork may become
“politicized.”
Extensive interviews are often the primary, but not the only, source of data.
A thorough qualitative study will complement interviews with other data sources.
Triangulation between different empirical materials is sought to increase the reliability
of the evidence. For instance, a study examining non-financial management accounting
measurement within an organizational improvement program should seek critical
documentary material, such as internal memos, reports, manuals, written instructions
and official newsletters. Participant observation of critical management meetings
provides another source of evidence to compare with interview transcripts and internal
documents. Here, again, the researcher must show thoughtful conduct in the field,
Rationale for
qualitative
research
75
trying not to interfere in a way that alters the behaviour of organizational members,
but also avoiding the threatening, mute behaviour of a police detective who sits in the
corner and makes “observations” (McKinnon, 1988).
Interpretation
Third, a successful qualitative study in management accounting can be distinguished
by the theoretically oriented interpretations it produces. The investigation should have
uncovered the intriguing organizational processes that are entwined with a particular
management accounting phenomenon. Often, it will document a chain of interlocking
events, and capture the multiple and shifting meanings that different actors give to
uses of management accounting in specific contexts.
Even after all of this empirical work to discover the “reality” under investigation,
the study is still only half way to completion! What remains is to give theoretical sense
to the masses of illuminating, perhaps even thrilling, evidence from the case or field
study. We may have an intriguing narrative here, but why does it matter? What do we
learn from it? Here, the role of interpretation is crucial.
Without bold interpretation and theorizing, the qualitative study is just a collection
of engaging field detail. In practice, theoretically valuable interpretation requires
numerous iterations between theory and evidence. The layers of collected, often
contradictory, pieces of field evidence gradually become more organized and things
start to make sense. Some observations appear more important and more credible than
others, and some pieces of evidence are pushed aside as irrelevant. A preliminary
storyline takes shape. The first theoretically anchored patterns emerge. But the
researcher must not jump to hasty conclusions. Maybe some additional evidence must
be collected on curious empirical instances that stand out, asking for further
explanation. And a new theoretical angle, perhaps from beyond the management
accounting literature, might be discovered. It may develop the explanation of the
observed instances and events, but without being harshly “glued on” the data.
Alternative explanations and conflicting voices from the field should be considered,
elaborating the study’s logic. No story should be forced onto the evidence, however.
With patience, a documented and plausible rich account is constructed – not a
sanitized, intellectually corrupt version of events that twists evidence into the
simplistic formats of normative prescriptions (Ahrens and Dent, 1998). Finally, after
multiple iterations between theory and data, a theoretically oriented interpretation can
be extracted and then reported.
Common problems in qualitative management accounting studies
Although the qualitative research tradition in management accounting has produced
significant theoretical advances, some individual studies exhibit weaknesses.
Of course, the same criticism can be leveled at any methodological approach and
any research method. Still, a brief mapping of common weaknesses of qualitative
research is worthwhile since, in any scientific domain, a fair amount of self-criticism
promotes improvement.
Often, a disappointing qualitative study starts with a disappointing theoretical
framework that fails to provide focus and guide the fieldwork. Instead, the theoretical
framework might be a loose assemblage of reviewed literature that points at pieces of
theory here and there. Some of its elements might be incompatible because they
QRAM
5,1
76
represent different streams of prior inquiry, proceeding from different ontological,
epistemological and methodological assumptions. For instance, a study may try in vain
to borrow both from economics-based agency theory and sociologically grounded
interpretive ethnography. This can be thought of as the mixed salad problem of
qualitative enquiry.
The digestion of such a disorientating theoretical mix can be difficult. The real
disappointment, however, lies further ahead, when the study fails to fully utilize the
theory it has introduced in its empirical and interpretive phase. Why this heavy
theoretical “frontload,” the reader grumbles. A meandering storyline and the absence
of an explanatory backbone reflect the more fundamental problem: wearing too many
theoretical “goggles” may be no better than walking blind and may suggest to the
reader that the empirical work was also muddled.
Another common problem arises when a study fails to reconnect with its theoretical
starting point, even when this point is sufficiently clear and focused. The study may
introduce an interesting narrative, interspersed with interview quotes and
documentary material that give verisimilitude to the description of, for example, a
management accounting change process. But, its theoretical interpretation and
conclusions will fail to meet academic standards if they do not explain how the
empirical evidence enriches our theoretical understanding of management accounting
change. Since, the phenomenon of interest is already theorized to some extent, how is
this theory refined, specified or partially refuted by the interpretation of the field
observations? If the study’s empirical findings about the change process are not
appropriately compared with previous theoretical contributions, its conclusions will be
rather myopic. It may even claim to discover something that has already been
demonstrated in other studies, thus falling victim to the rediscovering the wheel
problem of qualitative investigation (Laughlin, 1995).
It is also common for qualitative management accounting studies to draw on social
theory or socio-philosophical meta-frameworks. Such an approach explicitly
acknowledges that management accounting is not just a universal, neutral and
functional technology, but is a context-bound practice that has social, disciplinary, and
political dimensions. However, such studies often serve to illustrate only one particular
social theory. A generic social theory, which was designed to explain a wide range of
social phenomena and corresponding societal dynamics on a macro-scale, becomes
empirically illustrated and verified in the context of a specific organization’s
management accounting practices. This can lead to what we call the it fits, it fits!
Problem of qualitative studies.
When a novel social theory is first imported into the management accounting
domain, such illustrative studies are well justified. But once the social theory has
become established, the replication of purely illustrative studies becomes
counterproductive. Instead, an attempt should soon be made to use the field or case
study insights to challenge and refine the social theory, since – irrespective of their
status and reputation – all theories should be treated as provisional and incomplete.
Furthermore, qualitative studies that draw on a social theory should also examine the
contingent nature of contemporary management accounting practice (Malmi and
Granlund, 2006; Humphrey and Scapens, 1996). They should provide novel insight into
specific applications of management accounting techniques.
Rationale for
qualitative
research
77
The uncritical illustration of a theoretical starting point also occurs in another
category of qualitative management accounting studies – those that seek empirical
confirmation of a normative management accounting solution that has arisen from
the consultancy view. The researcher, especially if inexperienced, may be unaware of
this underlying motivation. Since, popular normative arguments are generally easy to
grasp, and since management accounting practice seems to follow the latest normative
recommendations, an inexperienced researcher may be attracted to the consultancy
view as a “theoretical framework” to guide the study. In qualitative management
accounting research, this may be termed the Windsurfer Problem.
Uncritical empirical illustrations of popular “management products” often build
on questionable fieldwork, failing to observe the guiding principle of professional
data collection, discussed earlier. Convinced by the force of his/her popular wind,
the researcher “surfs” the field, collecting only superficial evidence. Those
interviewees who freely speak out are often those agents who are promoting the
new practice and who have an organizational interest in it. Their voices may come
to dominate the interview data while the skeptics remain in the background,
avoiding interview or daring only to relate a “sanitized” opinion to the researcher.
Also, if the full impact of the new practice has not yet been felt, the views of many
agents may be premature and may change later. Reliance on a consultancy view
“theoretical framework” can also result in observer bias, where the new
management accounting technique is perceived to signify “progress” within the
empirical site. The researcher may look for positive evidence of its implementation,
ignoring or marginalizing its more problematic aspects. Consequently, the findings
of such studies tend to be unsurprising, uncritical and somewhat thin accounts of
how, in yet another setting, a new approach (such as the balanced scorecard) has
been adopted almost as its original blueprint suggested.
Finally, qualitative management accounting researchers can be prone to
over-generalizing their findings. Having presented management accounting as a
contextualized practice within a unique case study setting, some researchers then
suddenly suggest that the findings can be generalized, in a statistical sense, to a
larger organizational population. This inappropriate claim constitutes the misplaced
universalism problem. It stands as another pitfall of qualitative management
accounting research, which stems from a positivist or modernist conception of
science.
The desire to look beyond a particular study to discover something more
“general” is to be applauded. But we have to be careful about what we mean by
“generalization.” The aim of qualitative management accounting research is not to
produce generalizations of a statistical nature, or make inferences to a broader
population. A single case study is not a statistical study with a sample of one, and
it is a mistake to seek this kind of “universal” generalization in it. Qualitative
studies can, however, arrive at a different kind of generalization – theoretical
generalizations (Lukka and Kasanen, 1995). They can bring theories into contact
with empirical reality, thus exposing their strengths and weaknesses and modifying
or even refuting them. In addition, exploratory qualitative studies can, as mentioned
earlier, serve an important theory discovery role, building initial hypothesis for use
in further studies that seek universal generalizations and higher external validity
within larger populations.
QRAM
5,1
78
The future potential of qualitative management accounting research
Qualitative research that pays attention to the above problems and strives towards
high-academic standards has a lot to offer for the further development of management
accounting theory. At its best, a qualitative study is a theoretically informed, focused,
intensive, well-documented and plausible analysis that increases our understanding of
how management accounting operates in different societal, cultural, institutional and
organizational settings. Because it explains management accounting practice as a
context-bound and dynamic phenomenon, a qualitative study can probe beyond
economic models and normative idealizations. It builds an understanding of
management accounting as something very real – as something that affects the
lives of countless individuals in their workplaces.
Hence, qualitative research has the potential to enhance our appreciation of how
management accounting practices shape, and are shaped by, the unique contexts in
which they are applied. Second, despite their contextual nature and historical
specificity, management accounting practices do exhibit regularity and predictability
across different contexts. Arguably, under these ontological assumptions we can apply
qualitative methods better, harnessing their full potential to build research and theory
that connect with the actual challenges facing the organizations and societies of our
time.
Qualitative studies can address fundamental, practical problems related to how
management accounting is used and transformed in different settings. These studies
could, however, draw on existing management accounting theory, rather than seeking
to illustrate a “grand” social meta-theory. The findings of a previous case study in the
same topic area can be a solid basis for the design of a new field study. Can we partly
replicate this study in another empirical context, or partly refute it? Can we develop it
further, perhaps adding some new explanatory dimensions, extending it to other
organizational contexts, or learning something more specific about the conditions that
must be met before a certain management accounting practice can be usefully
deployed?
A well-positioned qualitative study can also take a recent survey study as a point of
departure, for instance a study that maps current uses of different techniques. It can
examine unexpected, inconclusive or oddly distributed survey results, or investigate
an intriguing correlation that requires further explanation. For example, why is the
adoption of formal controls so popular in a particular sub-category of enterprises,
against our expectations? Can we explain the delayed implementation of management
accounting reforms under certain strategic and organizational conditions? Can we
explain dysfunctional practices that surprise us in a subset of enterprises?
At a minimum, a qualitative study should contribute to coherent management
accounting theory by comparing its findings with those of other relevant studies and
looking for cross-case patterns. It should identify the theoretical dimensions that
differentiate it from other studies that have examined similar management accounting
practices. This promotes theoretical generalization and may increase the external
validity of the study’s findings.
The external validity and theoretical insights of a qualitative study can be further
improved by complementing it with a large-sample statistical study, using hypotheses
that emerged from the qualitative study. Construct validity in such a survey is high,
since the operational definitions of theoretical concepts, and measurement instruments
Rationale for
qualitative
research
79
used in the survey, are based on the inductive empirical findings from the qualitative
study. For example, it is easier to design a meaningful questionnaire about investment
post audit in the energy sector if we can build on the findings of a case study that
examined the detailed dynamics of post-audit processes in an oil company.
A qualitative study can also be complemented by a laboratory study that is
designed to simulate the sort of “natural setting” observed in the case or field study. Or,
it can be followed by mathematical modeling that formalizes key relationships
uncovered in a field setting (Modell, 2005; Birnberg et al., 1990). The use of multiple
methods, combined with tolerance and mutual respect within the research community,
can help us to develop a less fragmented body of management accounting knowledge.
In particular, the potential of qualitative management accounting research should
be applied to contemporary concerns of practice. Although we must guard against
overly pragmatic and instrumentalist demands, qualitative research conducted in
“academic isolation” may have little to contribute beyond a narrow scholarly debate.
Thus, qualitative research should continue to question the emerging ideas that
organizations embrace in the hope of improving their management practices. We must
critically examine the latest consultancy views, probing their foundations and their
implications, since their evaluation is too important an issue to be left to consultants!
Qualitative research can caution managers and accounting practitioners against the
deficiencies and dysfunctional consequences of normative schemes and identify the
conditions under which these prescriptions are likely to work best. And, it can suggest
how to modify and improve them. The tension between qualitative scholars and
consultants should, therefore, fuel a constructive dialogue with current practice.
Important contemporary topics facing qualitative management accounting
researchers include globalization, hybridity and the “network society” (Baxter and
Chua, 2003). Globalization often means that management accounting practices are
uprooted from their original context, becoming diffused to other remote locations. Yet
our knowledge of how these technologies are transferred, and what problems arise,
remains limited. Hybridity, a related concept, suggests that we have to examine the
workings of management accounting in conditions that mix traditional and new
elements such as the local and the global, rivalry and partnership. How is management
accounting used by organizations that combine, for example, the private and the
public, as happens in educational institutions? Finally, it has been suggested that
we now live in the “network society,” a technologically advanced, digitized
“surveillance society,” where management accounting can make visible almost any
form of action. Using qualitative studies, we can ask whether management accounting
is engaged in the creation of a “superpanopticon,” an open space where somebody can
watch our every move (Baxter and Chua, 2003).
This leads us to how the potential of qualitative investigation can help us to
examine the quantification of organizational life. As a consequence, of political
agendas and normative prescriptions, such as the balanced scorecard and
measurements of customer satisfaction and quality, as well as because of continual
advances in information systems and data networks, organizational reality is
increasingly dominated by both financial and non-financial measurements (Llewellyn
and Northcott, 2005). This is fundamentally transforming how organizations perceive
themselves and their environments, how they negotiate, and how they act upon issues
and events. Recently, even the smallest aspects of organizational activity have become
QRAM
5,1
80
transparent and open to evaluation via management accounting measures.
Organizational members can no longer escape ongoing surveillance as benchmarks
and uniform standards are increasingly applied (Vaivio, 2006, 2005).
What are the implications of this increasing quantification within post-modern
organizations? We know little about how it affects people in their jobs. Will they
eventually become obedient, passive and risk-averse instead of being creative actors
who promote learning and innovation? Will increasing quantification change how
decisions are made? Will it drive out the influences of intuition, practical experience
and judgment? Will “hard” numbers overwhelm “soft” talk?
These questions should not be overlooked in qualitative management accounting
research. They are important to the successful management of contemporary
organizations, since they impact a range of issues, from the formulation of competitive
strategy to organizational learning and operational flexibility. They are also important
from a broader societal point of view. The quantification of organizational life is not
only a narrow management concern. Its implications run much deeper and concern
how the everyday reality of the post-modern individual is being shaped. Qualitative
research in management accounting must not loose sight of its societal duty. It should
continue to provide theoretical and empirical insights that protect the individual
against impersonal, institutionalized forces that go against their interests. Qualitative
research needs to explore the social, the societal and the political in management
accounting, reminding us of the larger picture and revealing the ideals and motivations
that lie beneath the surface of contemporary practice.
Conclusion
In summary, this paper has presented a broad panorama of ideas about qualitative
research in management accounting. First, it emphasized the importance of qualitative
research as a counterweight to textbook idealizations, formalized economic models and
consultancy products. It examined how qualitative study contributes, in different
ways, to the construction of management accounting theory. It then presented a
practical “road map” to guide the eager management accounting scholar who wants to
use case or field study methods. The reader was then alerted to the common problems
in existing qualitative research, in the hope that this will improve future efforts.
Finally, the potential of these future studies was illustrated across a number of
possibilities, all of which could lead us towards a more coherent, valid, relevant and
emancipating body of knowledge in management accounting.
Notes
1. For a classic argument around the theory of the firm, and on the need to keep the theoretical
and empirical firms apart, see Machlup (1967).
2. For a recent debate on the theoretical purposes and methodology of interpretive/qualitative
management accounting research, see Kakkuri-Knuuttila et al. (2008a, b), Ahrens (2007) and
Ahrens and Chapman (2006), as well as Armstrong (2007).
3. These papers provide a sharp debate around Eisenhart’s view that well-developed
constructs should be applied whilst “in the field.”
Rationale for
qualitative
research
81
References
Ahrens, T. (1997), “Talking accounting: an ethnography of management knowledge in British
and German brewers”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 22, pp. 617-36.
Ahrens, T. (2007), “Overcoming the subjective-objective divide in interpretive management
accounting research”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 33, pp. 292-7.
Ahrens, T. and Chapman, C. (2002), “The structuration of legitimate performance measures and
management: day-to-day contests of accountability in a UK restaurant chain”,
Management Accounting Research, Vol. 13 No. 2, pp. 151-71.
Ahrens, T. and Chapman, C. (2006), “Doing qualitative field research in management accounting:
positioning data to contribute to theory”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 31
No. 8, pp. 819-41.
Ahrens, T. and Dent, J. (1998), “Accounting and organizations: realizing the richness of field
research”, Journal of Management Accounting Research, Vol. 10, pp. 1-39.
Andon, P., Baxter, J. and Chua, W.F. (2007), “Accounting change as relational drifting: a field
study of experiments with performance measurement”, Management Accounting
Research, Vol. 18, pp. 273-308.
Ansari, S. and Euske, K. (1987), “Rational, rationalizing and reifying uses of accounting data in
organizations”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 12 No. 6, pp. 549-70.
Armstrong, P. (2007), “Calling out for more: comment on the future of interpretive accounting
research”, Critical Perspectives on Accounting (in press).
Bariff, M. and Galbraith, J. (1978), “Intraorganizational power considerations for designing
information systems”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 3 No. 1, pp. 15-27.
Baxter, J. and Chua, W.F. (2003), “Alternative management accounting research – whence and
whither”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 28, pp. 97-126.
Bhimani, A. (1993), “Indeterminacy and the specificity of accounting change: Renault 1898-1938”,
Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 18 No. 1, pp. 1-39.
Birnberg, J., Shields, M. and Young, S. (1990), “The case for multiple methods in empirical
management accounting research (with an illustration from budget setting)”, Journal of
Management Accounting Research, Fall, pp. 33-66.
Briers, M. and Chua, W.F. (2001), “The role of actor-networks and boundary objects in
management accounting change: a field study of an implementation of activity-based
costing”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 26, pp. 237-9.
Brunsson, N. (1982), “The irrationality of action and action rationality: decisions, ideologies and
organizational actions”, Journal of Management Studies, Vol. 19, pp. 29-44.
Brunsson, N. (1989), The Organization of Hypocrisy, Wiley, Chichester.
Burchell, S., Clubb, C., Hopwood, A. and Hughes, J. (1980), “The roles of accounting in
organizations and society”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 5, pp. 5-27.
Burns, J. and Scapens, R. (2000), “Conceptualizing management accounting change:
an institutional framework”, Management Accounting Research, Vol. 11, pp. 3-25.
Burns, J. and Vaivio, J. (2001), “Management accounting change”, Management Accounting
Research, Vol. 12, pp. 389-402.
Clegg, S. and Palmer, G. (Eds) (1996), The Politics of Management Knowledge, Sage, London.
Cooper, R. and Kaplan, R. (1988), “Measure cost right: make the right decision”, Harvard Business
Review, September/October, pp. 96-103.
QRAM
5,1
82
Covaleski, M. and Dirsmith, M. (1988), “The use of budgetary symbols in the political arena:
a historically informed field study”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 13 No. 1,
pp. 1-24.
Cyert, R.M. and March, J.G. (1963), The Behavioral Theory of the Firm, Prentice-Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, NJ.
Dent, J. (1987), “Tension in the design of formal control systems: a field study in a computer
company”, in Bruns, W. Jr and Kaplan, R. (Eds), Accounting and Management: Field Study
Perspectives, Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA, pp. 119-45.
Dent, J. (1991), “Accounting and organizational cultures: a field study of the emergence of a new
organizational reality”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 16 No. 8, pp. 705-32.
DiMaggio, P. and Powell, W. (1991), “The iron cage revisited: institutional isomorphism and
collective rationality in organizational fields”, in Powell, W. and DiMaggio, P. (Eds),
The New Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis, University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL, pp. 63-82.
Donaldson, G. and Lorsch, J. (1983), Decision Making at the Top: The Shaping of Strategic
Direction, Basic Books Inc., New York, NY.
Dyer, W.G. and Wilkins, A.L. (1991), “Better stories, not better constructs, to generate better
theory: a rejoinder to Eishenhart”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 16 No. 3,
pp. 613-9.
Eisenhart, K. (1989), “Building theories from case study research”, Academy of Management
Review, Vol. 14, pp. 532-50.
Ezzamel, M. (1994), “Organizational change and accounting: understanding the budgeting
system in its organizational context”, Organization Studies, Vol. 15, pp. 213-40.
Ferreira, L. and Merchant, K. (1992), “Field research in management accounting and control:
a review and evaluation”, Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 5 No. 4,
pp. 3-34.
Galbraith, J. (1978), The New Industrial State, Penguin Press, New York, NY.
Granlund, M. (2001), “Towards explaining stability in and around management accounting
systems”, Management Accounting Research, Vol. 12 No. 2, pp. 141-66.
Granlund, M. and Lukka, K. (1997), “Towards increasing business orientation: Finnish
management accounting culture in transition”, The Finnish Journal of Business
Economics, Vol. 3, pp. 203-55.
Hope, J. and Fraser, R. (2003), “Who needs budgets?”, Harvard Business Review, February,
pp. 108-15.
Hopwood, A. (1983), “On trying to study accounting in the contexts in which it operates”,
Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 8, pp. 287-305.
Hopwood, A. (1986), “Management accounting and organizational action: an introduction”, in
Bromwich, M. and Hopwood, A. (Eds), Research and Current Issues in Management
Accounting, Pitman, London, pp. 9-30.
Horngren, C., Datar, S. and Foster, G. (2003), Cost Accounting – A Managerial Emphasis, 11th ed.,
Pearson Education, Harlow, NJ.
Humphrey, C. and Scapens, R. (1996), “Methodological themes – theories and case studies of
organizational accounting practices: limitation or liberation?”, Accounting, Auditing and
Accountability Journal, Vol. 9 No. 4, pp. 86-106.
Jackson, B. (2001), Management Gurus and Management Fashions, Routledge, London.
Rationale for
qualitative
research
83
Jazayeri, M. and Hopper, T. (1999), “Management accounting within world class manufacturing:
a case study”, Management Accounting Research, Vol. 10, pp. 263-301.
Johnson, H. and Kaplan, R. (1987), Relevance Lost: The Rise and Fall of Management Accounting,
Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.
Kakkuri-Knuuttila, M-L., Lukka, K. and Kuorikoski, J. (2008a), “Straddling between paradigms:
a naturalistic philosophical case study on interpretive research in management
accounting”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 33 Nos 2/3, pp. 267-91.
Kakkuri-Knuuttila, M-L., Lukka, K. and Kuorikoski, J. (2008b), “No premature closures of
debates, please: a response to Ahrens”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 33
Nos 2/3, pp. 298-301.
Kaplan, R. and Norton, D. (1996), “Using the balanced scorecard as a strategic management
system”, Harvard Business Review, January/February, pp. 75-85.
Kaplan, R. and Norton, D. (2001), The Strategy Focused Organization. How Balanced Scorecard
Companies Thrive in the New Business Environment, Harvard Business School Press,
Boston, MA.
Kasurinen, T. (2002), “Exploring management accounting change: the case of a balanced
scorecard implementation”, Management Accounting Research, Vol. 13, pp. 323-43.
Keating, P. (1995), “A framework for classifying and evaluating the theoretical contributions of
case research in management accounting”, Journal of Management Accounting Research,
Fall, pp. 66-86.
Kuhn, T. (1962), The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 2nd ed., University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL.
Lambert, R. (2001), “Contracting theory and accounting”, Journal of Accounting and Economics,
Vol. 32, pp. 3-87.
Laughlin, R. (1995), “Methodological themes – empirical research in accounting: alternative
approaches and a case for ‘middle-range’ thinking”, Accounting, Auditing and
Accountability Journal, Vol. 8 No. 1, pp. 63-87.
Lazear, E.P. (2000), “Economic imperialism”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, February,
pp. 99-146.
Llewellyn, S. and Northcott, D. (2005), “The average hospital”, Accounting, Organizations and
Society, Vol. 30 No. 6, pp. 555-83.
Luft, J. and Shields, M. (2002), “Zimmerman’s contentious conjectures: describing the present and
prescribing the future of empirical management accounting research”, The European
Accounting Review, Vol. 11 No. 4, pp. 795-803.
Lukka, K. (2007), “Management accounting change and stability: loosely coupled rules and
routines in action”, Management Accounting Research, Vol. 18, pp. 76-101.
Lukka, K. and Kasanen, E. (1995), “The problem of generalizability: anecdotes and evidence in
accounting research”, Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal, Vol. 8 No. 5,
pp. 71-90.
Lumija¨rvi, O-P. (1990), Gameplaying in Capital Budgeting, Turku School of Economics and
Business Administration, Turku, Series A-7.
McKinnon, J. (1988), “Reliability and validity in field research: some strategies and tactics”,
Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal, Vol. 1, pp. 34-54.
Macher, M. (1987), “The use of relative performance evaluation in organizations”, in Burns, W. Jr
and Kaplan, R. (Eds), Accounting and Management: Field Study Perspectives, Harvard
Business School Press, Boston, MA, pp. 295-315.
QRAM
5,1
84
Machlup, F. (1967), “Theories of the firm: marginalist, behavioral, managerial”, American
Economic Review, reprinted in Microeconomics – Selected Readings, Mansfield, E. (Eds),
4th ed., 1982. W.W. Norton & Company, New York, NY, pp. 93-108.
Macintosh, N. and Scapens, R. (1990), “Structuration theory in management accounting”,
Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 15 No. 5, pp. 455-77.
Major, M. and Hopper, T. (2005), “Managers divided: implementing ABC in a Portuguese
telecommunications company”, Management Accounting Research, Vol. 16, pp. 205-29.
Malmi, T. (1997), “Towards explaining activity-based costing failure: accounting and control in a
decentralized organization”, Management Accounting Research, Vol. 8 No. 4, pp. 459-80.
Malmi, T. and Granlund, M. (2006), “In search of management accounting theory”, paper
presented at the Annual Conference of the European Accounting Association, Dublin,
March.
Markus, M. and Pfeffer, J. (1983), “Power and the design and implementation of accounting and
control systems”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 8, pp. 205-18.
Merchant, K. (1987), “How and why firms disregard the controllability principle?”, in Bruns, W. Jr
and Kaplan, R. (Eds), Accounting and Management: Field Study Perspectives, Harvard
Business School Press, Boston, MA, pp. 316-38.
Merchant, K. and van der Stede, W. (2003), Management Control Systems: Performance
Measurement, Evaluation and Incentives, Pearson Education, Harlow.
Miller, P. and O’Leary, T. (1987), “Accounting and the construction of the governable person”,
Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 12, pp. 235-65.
Miller, P. and O’Leary, T. (1994), “Accounting, “economic citizenship” and the spatial reordering
of manufacture”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 19, pp. 15-43.
Mintzberg, H. (1973), The Nature of Managerial Work, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Mintzberg, H. and Westley, F. (2001), “Decision making: it’s not what you think”, MIT Sloan
Management Review, Spring, pp. 89-93.
Modell, S. (2005), “Triangulation between case study and survey methods in management
accounting research: an assessment of validity implications”, Management Accounting
Research, Vol. 16, pp. 231-54.
Scapens, R. (1990), “Researching management accounting practice: the role of case study
methods”, British Accounting Review, Vol. 22, pp. 259-81.
Scapens, R. and Roberts, J. (1993), “Accounting and control: a case study of resistance to
accounting change”, Management Accounting Research, Vol. 4, pp. 1-32.
Simons, R. (1987), “Planning, control and uncertainty: a process view”, in Burns, W. Jr and
Kaplan, R. (Eds), Accounting and Management: Field Study Perspectives, Harvard
Business School Press, Boston, MA, pp. 339-62.
Simons, R. (1991), “Strategic orientation and top management attention to control systems”,
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 12, pp. 49-62.
Vaivio, J. (1999a), “Examining ‘the quantified customer’”, Accounting, Organizations and Society,
Vol. 24, pp. 689-715.
Vaivio, J. (1999b), “Exploring a ‘non-financial’ management accounting change”, Management
Accounting Research, Vol. 10, pp. 409-37.
Vaivio, J. (2005), “‘Strategic’ non-financial measurement in an organizational context: a critique”,
Accounting in Scandinavia – The Northern Lights, Liber & Copenhagen Business School
Press, Kristianstad.
Rationale for
qualitative
research
85
Vaivio, J. (2006), “The accounting of ‘the meeting’: examining calculability within a ‘fluid’ local
space”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 31, pp. 735-62.
Vaivio, J. and Kokko, T. (2006), “Counting big: re-examining the concept of the bean counter
controller”, The Finnish Journal of Business Economics, Vol. 1, pp. 49-74.
Wickramasinghe, D. and Hopper, T. (2005), “A cultural political economy of management
accounting controls: a case study of a textile mill in a traditional Sinhalese village”, Critical
Perspectives on Accounting, Vol. 16, pp. 473-503.
Young, S. and Selto, F. (1993), “Explaining cross-sectional workgroup performance differences in
a JIT facility: a critical appraisal of a field-based study”, Journal of Management
Accounting Research, Fall, pp. 300-26.
Corresponding author
Juhani Vaivio can be contacted at Juhani.Vaivio@hse.fi
QRAM
5,1
86
To purchase reprints of this article please e-mail: reprints@emeraldinsight.com
Or visit our web site for further details: www.emeraldinsight.com/reprints
