Validation of Endogenous Peptide Identifications Using a Database
of Tandem Mass Spectra
Maria Fa¨lth,† Marcus Svensson,† Anna Nilsson,† Karl Sko¨ld,† David Fenyo¨,‡ and
Per E. Andren*,†
Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Medical Mass Spectrometry, Biomedical Centre, Box 583, Uppsala University,
SE-75123 Uppsala, Sweden, and The Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York, New York 10065
Received January 16, 2008
Abstract: The SwePep database is designed for endog-
enous peptides and mass spectrometry. It contains infor-
mation about the peptides such as mass, pI, precursor
protein and potential post-translational modifications.
Here, we have improved and extended the SwePep
database with tandem mass spectra, by adding a locally
curated version of the global proteomemachine database
(GPMDB). In peptidomic experiment practice, many pep-
tide sequences contain multiple tandem mass spectra
with different quality. The new tandem mass spectra
database in SwePep enables validation of low quality
spectra using high quality tandem mass spectra. The
validation is performed by comparing the fragmentation
patterns of the two spectra using algorithms for calculat-
ing the correlation coefficient between the spectra. The
present study is the first step in developing a tandem
spectrum database for endogenous peptides that can be
used for spectrum-to-spectrum identifications instead of
peptide identifications using traditional protein sequence
database searches.
Keywords: bioinformatics • neuropeptides • peptidomics
• peptide identification • MS/MS database
Introduction
The recent advances in both mass spectrometers and as-
sisting software have made the sequencing and identification
of proteins, using enzymatically cleaved peptides, somewhat
straightforward. However, the identification of endogenous
peptides still remains a difficult and time-consuming task,
because endogenous peptide precursors are often processed
in several steps by different enzymes.1 Some of these enzymes
have unknown specificity, making it difficult to accurately
predict the sequences of mature endogenous peptides. There-
fore, when searching for endogenous peptides using tandem
mass spectrometry data, the entire proteome is often cleaved
assuming an enzyme with no specificity (i.e., cleaving between
any pair of amino acids). This creates a very large search space,
decreasing the sensitivity of identification, and peptides can
only be identified when there is strong experimental evidence.
In a typical peptidomics experiment, many hundreds of pep-
tides are detected,2 but only an order of magnitude less are
identified confidently.
Many peptides are identified over and over again from
different experiments by searching experimental spectra against
sequence collections with search engines such as X! Tandem3
and Mascot.4 Since only a small amount of the generated
tandem mass spectra in a typical peptidomics experiment are
assigned to a sequence, the time and effort should be used to
identifying those spectra instead of identifying the same
peptides repeatedly. A possible solution for this problem is to
collect tandem mass spectra and then use spectral library
algorithms5,6 to match experimental spectra to already identi-
fied spectra. This is a fast way to reidentify already identified
peptides and the effort can instead be put into identifying
sequences for the large part of the spectra that never get
assigned to a sequence. To make these algorithms useful, it is
necessary to have large collections of spectra. In fact, a growing
number of tandem mass spectra from peptides are publicly
available in databases.7–9 However, these databases mainly
contain proteolytic peptides produced by trypsin digestion and
are not designed for endogenously processed peptides.
The SwePep (www.swepep.org) database was established to
alleviatetheidentificationproblemsforendogenouspeptides.10,11
Here, we report the extension of SwePep to include collision
induced dissociation (CID) tandem mass spectra to allow for
easier validation of identification results for endogenous pep-
tides. The MS/MS database was created by adding a locally
curated version of the global proteomemachine database.7 This
is also a first step toward spectrum-to-spectrum identifications
of endogenous peptides. In the future it is envisioned that the
MS/MS database will be further extended with additional CID
mass spectra and the complementary ETD/ECD12–14 mass
spectra.
The SwePep Database. SwePep is a database for endogenous
peptides. The database contains information about the peptide
precursors, pI, their post-translational modifications as well as
references from the literature. To ensure that the information
in the SwePep database is reliable, all peptides stored in
SwePep are sorted into three different classes: (i) biologically
active peptides, (ii) potentially biologically active peptides, and
(iii) uncharacterized peptides. The group of biologically active
peptides contains neuropeptides and hormones with previously
* To whom correspondence should be addressed: Dr. Per E. Andre´n,
Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Medical Mass Spectrometry,
Uppsala University, Box 583 Biomedical Centre, SE-75123 Uppsala, Sweden.
Tel., +46 18 471 7206; fax, +46 18 471 4422; e-mail, per.andren@bmms.uu.se.
† Uppsala University.
‡ The Rockefeller University.
10.1021/pr800036d CCC: $40.75  XXXX American Chemical Society Journal of Proteome Research XXXX, xxx, 000 A
Published on Web 06/13/2008
described and documented biological functions. Peptides that
are classified as potentially biologically active peptides are
identified peptides, from samples that have been instantly
proteolytically inactivated post mortem or post sampling,2,15,16
with characteristics similar to the neuropeptides and hormones;
that is, they have specific convertase processing sites1,17,18 and/
or modifications such as C-terminal amidation and N-terminal
acetylation, that are common on bioactive peptides.17 However,
their potential biological function and activity require inves-
tigation. The last group, uncharacterized peptides, contain
peptides which are confidently identified but do not fulfill the
criteria of the groups above.
SwePep has been used in different ways for identifying
endogenous peptides from complex tissue samples utilizing
mass spectrometry. In the first study,10 the masses obtained
from experimental peptides were compared with the masses
of annotated peptides in SwePep and then the identities were
verified using tandem mass spectrometry. Performing large
database searches using unspecific cleavage and allowing for
a number of different post-translational modifications is time-
consuming and the result of the search is often poor. However,
when comparing the experimental peptide masses against the
theoretical peptide masses using SwePep it was possible to add
different modifications. This allowed for rapid selection of
potentially modified peptides. The selected candidates could
then be verified by tandemmass spectrometry. This procedure
was very time-efficient compared to the standard approach
since only a small number of tandem mass spectra need to be
inspected.
In the second study,11 the SwePep database was used to
construct three targeted sequence collections that mimic the
peptidomic samples: SwePep precursors, SwePep peptides, and
SwePep predicted. The neuropeptide searches against these
three sequence collections were compared with searches
against the entire mouse proteome, which is commonly used
to identify neuropeptides. Three times as many peptides were
identified, with a false positive rate <1%, from these new
sequence collections compared to the mouse proteome. The
new sequence collections also made it possible to identify 27
previously uncharacterized peptides and potentially bioactive
neuropeptides. These novel peptides were cleaved from the
peptide precursors at sites that are characteristic for pro-
hormone convertases,1,17,18 and some of them have post-
translational modifications that are characteristic for neuropep-
tides.17
In the present study, we have extended the SwePep database
to include tandem mass spectra of identified endogenous
peptides. Tandem mass spectra of 219 unique peptides that
have been identified with a significant score have been added
to the SwePep database and the peptides are linked to their
corresponding tandem mass spectra. In total, there are 2700
tandem mass spectra identified using X! Tandem, from 389
unique peptides, and 219 of them have a score over the
significance threshold suggested by the search engine. The
tandem mass spectra with a below threshold score are only
stored in the MS/MS database, but are possible to search for
according to mass or sequence. The tandem mass spectra in
SwePep can be used for validating peptide identification results
and for designing targeted experiments to monitor selected
peptides.
Material and Methods
Software Architecture. SwePep is a Java Enterprise Edition
(J2EE) application. It consists of a dynamic Web interface, a
relational database and a business tier, which uses the client-
input from the Web interface to construct and execute queries
to the database. The Web interface was developed using HTML
and the dynamic content using Java ServerPages (JSP).
Data Model. The SwePep database is implemented as a
relational database using MySql database management system.
SwePep is specifically designed for endogenous peptides. Every
peptide in the database is connected to the following informa-
tion: name, sequence, precursor protein, position in precursor
sequence, modifications, location, organisms, reference, mass
and isoelectric point (pI).
Information Collection. The information in SwePep is
collected from three different sources: experimental data,2,11
peptide information from UniProt19 (version 54.0, released July
2007), and peer reviewed publications. The database is updated
continuously. For all the peptides in the SwePep database,
monoisotopic mass, average mass, and pI20 have been calcu-
lated according to their amino acid sequences.
Peptide and precursor protein data have been collected from
UniProt by downloading the UniProt database in XML format.
The XML file was searched for entries which had one or more
annotated peptide. All entries with annotated peptides were
saved into a new file which was used to automatically insert
the entries into SwePep.
The SwePep database is also populated with uncharacterized
peptides from brain tissue, identified in our laboratory from
Figure 1. Correlation coefficients for the y-ions and b-ions series
between high score tandemmass spectra and low score tandem
mass spectra plotted against the X! Tandem score. (A) The
correlation coefficients for the peptide SANSNPAMAPRE and (B)
the peptide RPKPQQFFGLM-amide.
technical notes Fälth et al.
B Journal of Proteome Research • Vol. xxx, No. xx, XXXX
different species, mainly mouse. For this data set, SwePep
contains information about the experimental conditions such
as sample information (i.e., species, treatment) and tandem
mass spectra.
Peptide Identification Using Tandem Mass Spectrometry.
The Global Proteome Machine Database7 (gpmDB) is used to
visualize tandem mass spectra of endogenous peptides. The
gpmDB is an open-source system developed for efficient storing
and sharing proteomics data. The gpmDB was used to store
search result from X! Tandem.3
The CID tandem mass spectra stored in SwePep were
collected from analysis of different brain regions from the
mouse. They were analyzed on an LTQ (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) mass spectrometer by capillary liquid chromatog-
raphy electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry
(nanoLC-ESI MS/MS)2,11,21 and identified by searching the
spectra against SwePep Mouse precursors11 using X! Tandem.
All identifications are stored in the database, even if the scores
are below the suggested threshold (log(e) > -2).
Statistical Analysis. Spectrum validation was performed by
calculating the Pearson correlation coefficient22 between two
spectra. The correlation coefficient was calculated for the b-
and y-ions series separately by taking the log intensities of the
b- and y-ions that were detected in both spectra. A perl script
for calculating the correlation between two tandem mass
spectra is downloadable from the SwePep Web page.
Figure 2. (A) Tandem mass spectrum of the peptide YGGFMRSL, derived from the Proenkephalin precursor, which was identified with
high confidence, log(e) ) -4.0. (B) Tandem mass spectrum that has been assigned with the same sequence, but the score of the
peptide-spectrum match is log(e) ) -1.4, which is below the threshold suggested by the search engine. (C) The correlation of the y-ion
and the b-ion intensities of these two spectra. The Pearson correlation coefficients were 0.978 for the y-ions and 0.914 for the b-ions.
Endogenous Peptide Tandem Mass Spectra Database technical notes
Journal of Proteome Research • Vol. xxx, No. xx, XXXX C
Results and Discussions
The tandemmass spectra stored in the SwePep database can
be used as references when verifying poor fragmented spectra
or spectra containing unassigned peaks. One possible way to
verify a low score spectrum is by comparing the abundance of
y-ions and b-ions for both the low score spectrum and a high
score spectrum. Then the correlation coefficient between ion
series of the spectra is calculated to establish the similarity
between their fragmentation patterns. To investigate if the
correlation coefficient is a good measurement of the similarity
between spectra, the correlation coefficient was calculated for
spectra assigned with the same sequence. This procedure was
used for two different peptide sequences, SANSNPAMAPRE
(SMS 28(1-12)) (Figure 1A) and RPKPQQFFGLM-amide (Sub-
stance P) (Figure 1B). All spectra were compared with the
spectrum with the highest score, by calculating the correlation
coefficient22 between the log(intensities) of the y- and b-ion
series. Since Substance P has two basic amino acids close to
the N-terminal of the peptide, the b-ions are more abundant
than the y-ions,23 and therefore, only the b-ions are used for
calculating the correlation between the spectra. The correlation
between the spectra were high even when the score decreased,
which suggests that the correlation coefficient is a good
measure for the similarity of two spectra and that this proce-
dure can be used for verification of the peptide sequence.
Another strength of the SwePep database was demonstrated
when one peptide was identified with high confidence tandem
mass spectrum in one experiment, while in another experi-
ment, the peptide was identified with a below threshold score
(Figure 2A,B). By comparing the fragmentation patterns of the
two spectra, it was clear that they were very similar except for
the noise peaks in the second spectrum which lowered its score
because of their relatively high abundance. Using the present
method, the correlations coefficients22 were 0.98 for the y-ions
and 0.91 for the b-ions, inferring a high similarity between the
two spectra (Figure 2C). One could verify the second identifica-
Figure 3. Two tandemmass spectra assigned to the peptide QYDGVAELDQLLHY (log(e))-8.2) in (A) and Pyro-Glu(Q)YDGVAELDQLLHY
(log(e) ) -2.6) in (B), derived from the Secretogranin I precursor. (C) The intensity of the y-ion series of the modified and unmodified
peptides plotted against each other and the Pearson correlation coefficient is calculated to be 0.959.
technical notes Fälth et al.
D Journal of Proteome Research • Vol. xxx, No. xx, XXXX
tion because the fragmentation pattern is similar between the
two spectra. The major difference between the two spectra is
that the second spectrum contains some unidentified peaks.
By looking at the sum of the intensities of the y- and b-ions in
the tandemmass spectra (180 516 for the MS/MS with the high
score and 329 for the MS/MS with the lower score), it becomes
clear that the noise in the second spectrum was due to the
overall low intensity in the spectrum. Without having the high
quality spectrum at hand, it would not be possible to verify
the noise contaminated spectrum using the standard method
for peptide identification.
Many of the peptide sequences are assigned to multiple
spectra in the SwePep database, which makes it possible to
study the fragmentation pattern for a specific peptide. Some
of the peptides are identified in more than one charge state
and both with and without post-translational modifications.
This information could be used for comparing fragmentation
patterns of peptides.
The peptide QYDGVAELDQLLHY derived from the Secre-
togranin I precursor is often identified both with (Figure 3A)
and without (Figure 3B) a pyro-glutamine acid at the N-
terminal. The modified peptide was identified with a lower
score than the unmodified peptide and needed to be validated.
One possible way to validate the identity of the modified
peptide is by comparing the intensities of the y-ion series of
the modified and unmodified peptide. By plotting the log(in-
tensities) of both y-ion series against each other and calculating
the correlation coefficient, it was possible to determine if the
y-ion series are the same or not. The correlation coefficient
was 0.96 which indicated that the y-ion series have a strong
correlation and it was most likely that the identity of the
modified peptide was correct.
Conclusions
In the present study, CID tandem mass spectra of endog-
enous peptides have been added to the SwePep database. These
spectra can be used for validation of other experimentally
derived spectra or for studying fragmentation patterns of
peptides without specific enzymatic cleavage sites. This is also
the first step in developing a tandem spectrum database for
endogenous peptides that can be used for spectrum-to-
spectrum identifications instead of peptide identifications using
database searches.
Acknowledgment. This study was sponsored by the
Swedish Research Council (VR), Grant No. 2004-3417, 621-
2007-4686, 521-2007-3017, the K&A Wallenberg Foundation,
and the Karolinska Institutet Centre for Medical Innovations,
Research Program in Medical Bioinformatics.
References
(1) Steiner, D. F. The proprotein convertases. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol.
1998, 2, 31–39.
(2) Svensson, M.; Skold, K.; Svenningsson, P.; Andren, P. E. Pepti-
domics-based discovery of novel neuropeptides. J. Proteome Res.
2003, 2, 213–219.
(3) Craig, R.; Beavis, R. C. TANDEM: matching proteins with tandem
mass spectra. Bioinformatics 2004, 20, 1466–1467.
(4) Perkins, D. N.; Pappin, D. J.; Creasy, D. M.; Cottrell, J. S. Probability-
based protein identification by searching sequence databases
using mass spectrometry data. Electrophoresis 1999, 20, 3551–3567.
(5) Craig, R.; Cortens, J. C.; Fenyo, D.; Beavis, R. C. Using annotated
peptide mass spectrum libraries for protein identification. J.
Proteome Res. 2006, 5, 1843–1849.
(6) Lam, H.; Deutsch, E. W.; Eddes, J. S.; Eng, J. K.; King, N.; Stein,
S. E.; Aebersold, R. Development and validation of a spectral library
searching method for peptide identification from MS/MS. Pro-
teomics 2007, 7, 655–667.
(7) Craig, R.; Cortens, J. P.; Beavis, R. C. Open source system for
analyzing, validating, and storing protein identification data. J.
Proteome Res. 2004, 3, 1234–1242.
(8) Desiere, F.; Deutsch, E. W.; King, N. L.; Nesvizhskii, A. I.; Mallick,
P.; Eng, J.; Chen, S.; Eddes, J.; Loevenich, S. N.; Aebersold, R. The
PeptideAtlas project. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006, 34, D655–658.
(9) Falth, M.; Savitski, M. M.; Nielsen, M. L.; Kjeldsen, F.; Andren, P. E.;
Zubarev, R. A. SwedCAD, a database of annotated high-mass
accuracy MS/MS spectra of tryptic peptides. J. Proteome Res. 2007,
6, 4063–4067.
(10) Falth, M.; Skold, K.; Norrman, M.; Svensson, M.; Fenyo, D.; Andren,
P. E. SwePep, a database designed for endogenous peptides and
mass spectrometry. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2006, 5, 998–1005.
(11) Falth, M.; Skold, K.; Svensson, M.; Nilsson, A.; Fenyo, D.; Andren,
P. E. Neuropeptidomics strategies for specific and sensitive
identification of endogenous peptides.Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2007,
6, 1188–1197.
(12) Savitski, M. M.; Kjeldsen, F.; Nielsen, M. L.; Zubarev, R. A.
Complementary sequence preferences of electron-capture dis-
sociation and vibrational excitation in fragmentation of polypep-
tide polycations. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl. 2006, 45, 5301–5303.
(13) Syka, J. E.; Coon, J. J.; Schroeder, M. J.; Shabanowitz, J.; Hunt, D. F.
Peptide and protein sequence analysis by electron transfer dis-
sociation mass spectrometry. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2004,
101, 9528–9533.
(14) Zubarev, R. A.; Kelleher, N. L.; McLafferty, F. W. Electron capture
dissociation of multiply charged protein cations. A nonergodic
process. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1998, 120, 3265–3266.
(15) Skold, K.; Svensson, M.; Kaplan, A.; Bjorkesten, L.; Astrom, J.;
Andren, P. E. A neuroproteomic approach to targeting neuropep-
tides in the brain. Proteomics 2002, 2, 447–454.
(16) Skold, K.; Svensson, M.; Norrman, M.; Sjogren, B.; Svenningsson,
P.; Andren, P. E. The significance of biochemical and molecular
sample integrity in brain proteomics and peptidomics: Stathmin
2-20 and peptides as sample quality indicators. Proteomics 2007,
7, 4445–4456.
(17) Fricker, L. D. Neuropeptide-processing enzymes: applications for
drug discovery. AAPS J. 2005, 7, E449–455.
(18) Zhou, A.; Webb, G.; Zhu, X.; Steiner, D. F. Proteolytic processing
in the secretory pathway. J. Biol. Chem. 1999, 274, 20745–20748.
(19) UniProt Consortium. The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt).
Nucleic Acids Res. 2007, 35, D193-197.
(20) Bjellqvist, B.; Hughes, G. J.; Pasquali, C.; Paquet, N.; Ravier, F.;
Sanchez, J. C.; Frutiger, S.; Hochstrasser, D. The focusing positions
of polypeptides in immobilized pH gradients can be predicted
from their amino acid sequences. Electrophoresis 1993, 14, 1023–
1031.
(21) Svensson, M.; Sko¨ld, K.; Nilsson, A.; Fa¨lth, M.; Nydahl, K.; Sven-
ningsson, P.; Andre´n, P. Neuropeptidomics: MS Applied to the
Discovery of Novel Peptides from the Brain. Anal. Chem. 2007,
79, 14–21.
(22) Pearson, K. Mathematical contributions to the theory of evolution:
III. Regression, heredity, and panmixia. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. London
1896, 187, 253–318.
(23) Tabb, D. L.; Huang, Y.; Wysocki, V. H.; Yates, J. R. 3rd, Influence
of basic residue content on fragment ion peak intensities in low-
energy collision-induced dissociation spectra of peptides. Anal.
Chem. 2004, 76, 1243–1248.
PR800036D
Endogenous Peptide Tandem Mass Spectra Database technical notes
Journal of Proteome Research • Vol. xxx, No. xx, XXXX E
