SMART 4.0: towards genomic data integration
Ivica Letunic, Richard R. Copley1, Steffen Schmidt, Francesca D. Ciccarelli,
Tobias Doerks, JoÈ rg Schultz2, Chris P. Ponting3 and Peer Bork*
EMBL, Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69012 Heidelberg, Germany, 1Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics,
Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK, 2Bioinformatik, Biozentrum, Am Hubland, University of Wuerzburg,
97074 Wuerzburg, Germany and 3MRC Functional Genetics Unit, Department of Human Anatomy and Genetics,
University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QX, UK
Received September 17, 2003; Revised and Accepted October 6, 2003
ABSTRACT
SMART (Simple Modular Architecture Research
Tool) is a web tool (http://smart.embl.de/) for the
identi®cation and annotation of protein domains,
and provides a platform for the comparative study
of complex domain architectures in genes and
proteins. The January 2004 release of SMART con-
tains 685 protein domains. New developments in
SMART are centred on the integration of data from
completed metazoan genomes. SMART now uses
predicted proteins from complete genomes in its
source sequence databases, and integrates these
with predictions of orthology. New visualization
tools have been developed to allow analysis of gene
intron±exon structure within the context of protein
domain structure, and to align these displays to
provide schematic comparisons of orthologous
genes, or multiple transcripts from the same gene.
Other improvements include the ability to query
SMART by Gene Ontology terms, improved struc-
ture database searching and batch retrieval of
multiple entries.
INTRODUCTION
The SMART database (http://smart.embl.de; http://smart.ox.
ac.uk) provides a tool to identify and annotate the signalling
domains found in many eukaryotic proteins (1). The database
consists of a library of Hidden Markov Models that are used to
provide statistically robust inferences of the presence of
speci®c domains in a particular sequence, and multiple
sequence alignments of user query sequences with domains.
The database provides extensive annotation for each domain,
and is a comprehensive source of information on which
proteins each is found in.
The primary motivation for the development of SMART
was as a tool to study the evolution of function within multi-
domain proteins. The availability of completed metazoan
genomes, and increasing accuracy of prediction of gene
structures and their multiple splice variants (2), has enabled us
to create new extensions to SMART, allowing detailed
overlaying of gene intron and exon structure with protein
domain organization. This is coupled with a cross-referencing
of orthologous genes in multiple genomes, collections of
multiple splice variants of individual genes and new
visualization tools to show schematic alignments of multiple
gene structures. These new developments make SMART an
ideal tool for studies of the evolution of gene and protein
function.
PRE-CALCULATED RESULTS FOR COMPLETED
METAZOAN GENOMES
In addition to the Swiss-Prot and spTrembl databases (3),
which have been used by SMART since its inception,
SMART's source sequence databases now include all avail-
able Ensembl proteomes (2). We compare sequences from all
sources and generate a non-redundant set of proteins with
multiple identi®ers per sequence. Sequences are retrievable,
and linkable, via any of the original identi®ers.
IMPROVED DOMAIN COVERAGE
SMART continues to expand its domain coverage, with more
than 70 new domains in the latest release, bringing the total
close to 700. The rate of new, widespread domain discovery is
falling, primarily as their numbers are limited (4). However,
we continue to identify new domains of interest e.g. (5,6), and
establish new links between others e.g. (7).
NEW DATABASE FEATURES
The core of SMART is a relational database management
system (RDBMS) which stores information on SMART
domains. In addition to previously available features (1,8),
the SMART database now includes information on Pfam (9)
domains in all proteins in NRDB. Users can now query the
database for proteins that contain speci®c combinations of
Pfam and SMART domains.
In addition to standard `Domain selection' querying, it is
now possible to ®nd proteins based on Gene Ontology (GO)
(10) terms associated with domains. Associations of domains
with GO are taken from Interpro (11). GO querying is a two-
step process. In the ®rst step, the user obtains a list of domains
matching the GO terms entered. After selecting the domains of
interest from the list, proteins containing those domains are
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +49 6221 387 526; Fax: +49 6221 387 517; Email: bork@embl-heidelberg.de
D142±D144 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkh088
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 32, Database issue ã Oxford University Press 2004; all rights reserved
displayed. As with standard domain querying, results can be
limited to speci®c taxonomic ranges.
SEQUENCE IDENTIFICATION
SMART uses the CRC64 algorithm to calculate checksums for
all user-supplied sequences. If a matching checksum is found
in the SMART database, pre-calculated results are displayed.
Approximately 45% of all user-submitted sequences are
identi®ed in this way, resulting in shorter queues and much
faster response times for all users.
Since user-supplied sequences can now be identi®ed,
several important new features have been introduced into
SMART:
(i) Batch access: the SMART batch access facility allows
users to submit multiple sequence identi®ers or actual
sequences, either by directly pasting the data into their web
browser, or by uploading a ®le to the SMART server. If the
user supplies plain sequences, their CRC checksums are
calculated, and those with matches in the SMART database
are displayed.
(ii) Intron positions shown in schematic protein ®gures:
for proteins that match any of the Ensembl predictions,
SMART will show intron positions as vertical coloured lines
in graphical representations (Fig. 1). This information is
retrieved from a pre-calculated mapping of Ensembl gene
structures to protein sequences.
(iii) Extra information in the main results page: in cases
where multiple IDs are associated with the same sequence,
users get a list of all IDs with links to corresponding
source databases. Since SMART now incorporates Ensembl
genomes, users also get a list of alternative splices of the gene
encoding the analysed protein (if there are any). It is possible
to either display SMART protein annotation for any of the
alternative splices, or get a graphical multiple sequence
alignment of all of them.
IMPROVED SEARCHING OF STRUCTURE
DATABASES
User sequences can now be searched against pro®les derived
from the SCOP database, using RPS-Blast (12,13). As well as
detecting homologues of known structure, this enables easy
Figure 1. SMART representation of human enteropeptidase precursor (ENSP00000284885). Intron positions are represented by vertical lines, showing intron
phase and exact position in AA. Intron positions are taken from Ensembl gene predictions.
Figure 2. SMART representation of an orthologous group alignment. User-supplied proteins are aligned using ClustalW. Domains, intrinsic features and
introns are mapped onto the alignment with their positions adjusted according to gaps (black boxes). This tool allows easy visual comparison of intron
positions and their relations to protein features.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue D143
identi®cation of the evolutionary superfamily to which any
domains belong, and complements the links provided in
domain annotation pages.
ORTHOLOGY INFORMATION
SMART provides orthology information for all Ensembl
predicted proteins. These relationships are distinct from those
provided by Ensembl. There are two separate sets of
orthologues for each protein: 1:1 reciprocal best matches in
other genomes and orthologous groups with reciprocal best
hits from all genomes analysed (i.e. each of these proteins has
exactly one orthologue in all six genomes). Orthologous
groups are displayed as graphical multiple sequence align-
ments (Fig. 2). All orthology information is extracted from all-
against-all Smith±Waterman (14) similarities for combined
proteomes, using a previously described method (15).
CONCLUSIONS
With the growing number of completely sequenced eukaryotic
genomes, the scienti®c community requires tools for easy
comparative and large-scale analyses. With recent additions,
we have expanded SMART's capabilities to accommodate the
needs of many different types of user.
REFERENCES
1. Schultz,J., Milpetz,F., Bork,P. and Ponting,C.P. (1998) SMART, a
Simple Modular Architecture Research Tool: identi®cation of signaling
domains. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 95, 5857±5864.
2. Clamp,M., Andrews,D., Barker,D., Bevan,P., Cameron,G., Chen,Y.,
Clark,L., Cox,T., Cuff,J., Curwen,V. et al. (2003) Ensembl 2002:
accommodating comparative genomics. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 38±42.
3. Bairoch,A. and Apweiler,R. (2000) The SWISS-PROT protein sequence
database and its supplement TrEMBL in 2000. Nucleic Acids Res., 28,
45±48.
4. Heger,A. and Holm,L. (2003) Exhaustive enumeration of protein domain
families. J. Mol. Biol., 328, 749±767.
5. Ciccarelli,F.D., Bork,P. and Kerkhoff,E. (2003) The KIND module: a
putative signalling domain evolved from the C lobe of the protein kinase
fold. Trends Biochem. Sci., 28, 349±352.
6. Ciccarelli,F.D., Proukakis,C., Patel,H., Cross,H., Azam,S., Patton,M.A.,
Bork,P. and Crosby,A.H. (2003) The identi®cation of a conserved
domain in both spartin and spastin, mutated in hereditary spastic
paraplegia. Genomics, 81, 437±441.
7. Maurer-Stroh,S., Dickens,N.J., Hughes-Davies,L., Kouzarides,T.,
Eisenhaber,F. and Ponting,C.P. (2003) The Tudor domain `Royal
Family': Tudor, plant Agenet, Chromo, PWWP and MBT domains.
Trends Biochem. Sci., 28, 69±74.
8. Letunic,I., Goodstadt,L., Dickens,N.J., Doerks,T., Schultz,J., Mott,R.,
Ciccarelli,F., Copley,R.R., Ponting,C.P. and Bork,P. (2002) Recent
improvements to the SMART domain-based sequence annotation
resource. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 242±244.
9. Bateman,A., Birney,E., Cerruti,L., Durbin,R., Etwiller,L., Eddy,S.R.,
Grif®ths-Jones,S., Howe,K.L., Marshall,M. and Sonnhammer,E.L.
(2002) The Pfam protein families database. Nucleic Acids Res., 30,
276±280.
10. Ashburner,M., Ball,C.A., Blake,J.A., Botstein,D., Butler,H., Cherry,J.M.,
Davis,A.P., Dolinski,K., Dwight,S.S., Eppig,J.T. et al. (2000) Gene
Ontology: tool for the uni®cation of biology. The Gene Ontology
Consortium. Nature Genet., 25, 25±29.
11. Mulder,N.J., Apweiler,R., Attwood,T.K., Bairoch,A., Barrell,D.,
Bateman,A., Binns,D., Biswas,M., Bradley,P., Bork,P. et al. (2003) The
InterPro Database, 2003 brings increased coverage and new features.
Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 315±318.
12. LoConte,L., Brenner,S.E., Hubbard,T.J., Chothia,C. and Murzin,A.G.
(2002) SCOP database in 2002: re®nements accommodate structural
genomics. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 264±267.
13. Altschul,S.F., Madden,T.L., Schaffer,A.A., Zhang,J., Zhang,Z.,
Miller,W. and Lipman,D.J. (1997) Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a
new generation of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res.,
25, 3389±3402.
14. Smith,T.F. and Waterman,M.S. (1981) Identi®cation of common
molecular subsequences. J. Mol. Biol., 147, 195±197.
15. Zdobnov,E.M., von Mering,C., Letunic,I., Torrents,D., Suyama,M.,
Copley,R.R., Christophides,G.K., Thomasova,D., Holt,R.A.,
Subramanian,G.M. et al. (2002) Comparative genome and proteome
analysis of Anopheles gambiae and Drosophila melanogaster. Science,
298, 149±159.
D144 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue
