Detection of single DNA molecules by multicolor
quantum-dot end-labeling
Aure´lien Crut1, Be´ne´dicte Ge´ron-Landre2, Isabelle Bonnet1, Ste´phane Bonneau1,3,
Pierre Desbiolles1 and Christophe Escude´2,*
1Laboratoire Kastler Brossel, Unite´ de Recherche de l’Ecole Normale Supe´rieure et de l’Universite´ Pierre
et Marie Curie, associe´e au CNRS, De´partement de Physique, 24 rue Lhomond, F-75005 Paris, France,
2Laboratoire ‘Re´gulation et Dynamique des Ge´nomes’, De´partement ‘Re´gulations, De´veloppement et
Diversite´ Mole´culaire’, USM 0503 Muse´um National d’Histoire Naturelle, CNRS UMR5153, INSERM U565,
Case Postale 26, 43 rue Cuvier, F-75231 Paris Cedex 05, France and 3CEREMADE, Universite´
Paris IX -Dauphine, F-75775 Paris, France
Received April 13, 2005; Revised and Accepted May 31, 2005
ABSTRACT
Observation of DNA–protein interactions by single
molecule fluorescence microscopy is usually
performed by using fluorescent DNA binding agents.
However, such dyes have been shown to induce
cleavage of the DNA molecule and perturb its interac-
tions with proteins. A new method for the detection
of surface-attached DNA molecules by fluorescence
microscopy is introduced in this paper. Biotin- and/or
digoxigenin-modified DNA fragments are covalently
linked at both extremities of a DNA molecule via
sequence-specific hybridization and ligation. After
the modified DNA molecules have been stretched
on a glass surface, their ends are visualized by mul-
ticolor fluorescence microscopy using conjugated
quantum dots (QD). We demonstrate that under
carefully selected conditions, the position and
orientation of individual DNA molecules can be
inferred with good efficiency from the QD fluores-
cence signals alone. This is achieved by selecting
QD pairs that have the distance and direction expec-
ted for the combed DNA molecules. Direct observa-
tion of single DNA molecules in the absence of
DNA staining agent opens new possibilities in the
fundamental study of DNA–protein interactions.
This work also documents new possibilities regard-
ing the use of QD for nucleic acid detection and
analysis.
INTRODUCTION
Over the past several years, single-molecule experiments have
provided new insights into the dynamics and function of DNA.
The physical properties of this natural polymer have been
investigated in detail, and there is a growing interest in under-
standing its interactions with proteins (1). Single molecule
studies of DNA typically involve enzymatic reactions along
extended molecules. These molecules are stretched by anchor-
ing one end so that individual DNA segments can be extended
and manipulated by various small forces such as electric or
dielectric force, viscous drag, surface tension, magnetic force
or optical force (2). One method for manipulating DNA is to
attach latex or magnetic beads to the molecules. The move-
ment of these beads also allows one to deduce the magnitude
of the force exerted on the molecules. Another approach
consists of visualizing the entire DNA molecule after staining
with a fluorescent dye such as the cyanine dimer YOYO-1 or
the groove binding agent SybrGreen. The processes of
condensation, denaturation and cleavage of the DNA shorten
the molecules sufficiently to be visible, thereby permitting
the observation of the action of a protein without visualiz-
ing the protein itself. This approach has been used to study
chromatin assembly (3), digestion by exonucleases (4) and
endonucleases (5), and denaturation induced by DNA
helicases (6).
In the absence of DNA staining organic dyes, observation of
enzymatic activity is still possible. A helicase activity has been
studied by using a combination of a surface immobilization
scheme and fluorescence resonance energy transfer between
two short end-labeled oligonucleotides (7). Another approach
consists in observing the incorporation of fluorescently
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +33 1 40793774; Fax: +33 1 40793705; Email: escude@mnhn.fr
Correspondence may also be addressed to Pierre Desbiolles. Tel: +33 1 44323380; Fax: +33 1 44323434; Email: pierre.desbiolles@lkb.ens.fr
The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors
 The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 11 e98
doi:10.1093/nar/gni097
labeled nucleotides. This has been done in two separate studies
for DNA (8) and for RNA (9) polymerases. In both studies,
DNA was elongated in a process resembling molecular
combing. This commonly used technique extends DNA
molecules linearly on a modified glass surface using a
receding meniscus (10). This method has proven extremely
useful for molecular cytogenetics or DNA replication studies.
Nevertheless, the level of overstretching (which can reach
50%) and the way the DNA molecule is attached to the surface
are critical factors when combed DNA molecules are used
as substrate for DNA binding proteins. We have recently
devised a method derived from molecular combing whereby
a DNA molecule, one end of which is attached to a surface, is
elongated by a water stream. The other end also eventually
attaches to the surface (11) resulting in an elongated, but not
overstretched molecule, the majority of which is free of the
surface.
This study and others emphasized two main drawbacks of
the use of DNA staining agents. The first is a decrease of
fluorescence over time (photobleaching). This process results
in the release of free radicals which induce cleavage of the
double-stranded DNA molecule. Although the duration of
fluorescence can be extended by reducing light intensity
and/or using oxygen radical scavengers, dynamic studies of
DNA–protein interactions require high illumination intensity
and long observation times to achieve both spatial and tem-
poral resolutions. The second drawback is that the presence of
these dyes results in changes in the electrostatic, structural and
mechanical properties of DNA which are likely to modify its
interaction with proteins. Enzymatic inhibition has been repor-
ted for restriction endonucleases (5,12) or exonucleases (4).
Moreover, these dyes are flushed away from DNA under
sodium and magnesium concentrations consistent with enzym-
atic activity (13). These limits constrain the use of this labeling
method for DNA–protein interaction studies.
Direct observation of a fluorescently labeled protein acting
on dye-free DNA has been reported only twice to our know-
ledge (14,15). In the first study, the movements of an RNA
polymerase were examined on a bundle of electrically aligned
DNA molecules. Sliding of the proteins along the DNA
molecules resulted in the deviation of proteins from bulk
flow. In the second study, total internal reflection microscopy
was used to observe the interactions of an RNA polymerase
with a DNA molecule which was positioned and elongated on
an engineered surface by using two optical traps. The com-
plexity of these experimental approaches plausibly explains
why they were not further exploited. Visualization of fluores-
cently labeled proteins interacting with combed DNA
molecules would present an interesting alternative if per-
formed in the absence of DNA staining agents.
In this paper, we report a new strategy for localizing single
DNA molecules in the absence of DNA-binding organic
fluorophores. The DNA molecules are labeled with biotin
or digoxigenin at both ends before they are combed onto a
glass surface. The detection scheme uses streptavidin- or
antibody-conjugated fluorescent quantum dots (QD). The
use of two different colored labels provides information
regarding the orientation of DNA molecules. Scanning of
the surface and selection of spatially concordant QD pairs
can be used to detect DNA molecules in the absence of
organic dye.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
DNA preparation
The following primers were synthesized by Eurogentec
(Seraing, Belgium): 50-CGCTTGGTCTCTGGGACGGTAT-
CAGCTCACTCAAAG-30 (fwB), 50-CGCTTGGTCTCTCT-
GGCGGTATCAGCTCACTCAAAG-30 (fwD) and 50-GGC-
GATAAGTCGTGTCTTAC-30 (rv). Primer fwB carries a
biotin at the 50 end and primer fwD carries a digoxigenin.
Their concentration was calculated using a nearest-neighbor
model for absorption coefficients. DNA fragments containing
multiple biotin or digoxigenin were synthesized by PCR by
mixing the fwD or fwB, respectively primer and the rv primer
(1.6 mM each) in 50 ml of Taq buffer (Promega) with 2 mM
MgCl2; 50 mM of dATP, dCTP and dGTP each; 33 mM of
dTTP; 17 mM of biotin–dUTP or digoxigenin–dUTP, respect-
ively (Roche); 10 pg/ml of pBluescript SK+ as a template; and
0.1 U/ml of Taq polymerase (Promega). After 30 cycles of
amplification in three stages (30 s at 94C, 30 s at 61C and
1 min at 72C, increasing the last stage by 10 s per cycle) and a
concluding extension of 10 min at 72C, primers and unin-
corporated dNTP were removed using PCR purification kits
(Qiagen). Then the PCR products were digested overnight at
50C with 50 U BsaI (New England Biolabs) in a total volume
of 50 ml. The modified extremities and the non-digested frag-
ments were removed using anti-digoxigenin- or streptavidin-
coated magnetic beads (Dynabeads) for the biotin- and
digoxigenin-modified fragments, respectively. The labeled
fragments were then ethanol precipitated and quantified on
an agarose gel containing ethidium bromide. The number of
biotin or digoxigenin incorporated into the DNA fragment
should be 75 based on a best efficiency calculation. This
number was corroborated by measurements obtained with a
dot-blot assay, as described in (16). Briefly, different con-
centrations of the DNA fragments that contained biotin or
digoxigenin were spotted on a nylon membrane (Hybond
N+, Amersham). Biotin or digoxigenin were detected with
streptavidin or anti-digoxigenin linked to alkaline phosphatase
(Roche), respectively. Alkaline phosphatase was then detected
by a colorimetric assay using nitro-blue-tetrazolium chloride
and 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate toluidine salt
(Roche). The number of incorporated modified nucleotides
was evaluated by comparison with various dilutions of a stand-
ard sample of known concentration, which consisted of either
an oligonucleotide or the same DNA fragment carrying a
single biotin or digoxigenin attached to its 50 end. This assay
provided a number of incorporated modified nucleotides
between 50 and 100. A fragment that contained fewer biotin
was also prepared using the same protocol except that the PCR
was carried out in the presence of 50 mM dTTP and 2 mM
biotin–dUTP, i.e. the solution contained nine times less biotin.
The dot blot assay provided evidence for 5–10 incorporations
in this case. Another biotin-containing fragment was synthes-
ized by using the fwB primer, i.e. in order to produce a biotin-
modified fragment that has the same cohesive end as the
digoxigenin-modified fragment. In this case, the modified
extremity was removed using a PCR purification kit (Qiagen).
Labeled fragments were ligated to the 6.3 kb DNA by
incubating 25 ng (7.5 nM) of labeled fragments with 100 ng
of 6.3 kb DNA (2.5 nM) and 100 U of T4 DNA ligase
(New England Biolabs) in 10 ml of the recommended buffer
e98 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 11 PAGE 2 OF 9
overnight at 20C. Removal of excess labeled fragments was
performed using the previously described spermidine precip-
itation procedure (16). Briefly, the ligation mix was diluted to
a final volume of 50 ml in a buffer containing 40 mM Tris,
pH 8.0, 80 mM NaCl and 16 mM MgCl2. Then, 50 ml of 40 mM
ice-cold spermidine were added. The sample was incubated
for 30 min at room temperature and centrifuged for 15 min
at 14 000 r.p.m. The resulting pellet was rinsed with 100 ml
of a 1:1 v:v mix of isopropanol and a solution containing
600 mM NaCl, 20 mM MgCl2 and 50 mM EDTA. It was
resuspended in 10 ml of TE supplemented with 1.5 mM
YOYO-1 (Molecular Probes) at a ratio of 1–10 bp.
Combing and detection of DNA molecules
DNA combing was carried out on hydrophobic glass cover-
slips at low pH. Coverslips were first cleaned using a Plasma
Cleaner (Harrick Scientific, USA). They were then spin-coated
with polystyrene (5% w:v in toluene) and baked at 100C for at
least 1 h. Ten nanograms of YOYO-1 stained DNA (at a dye to
bp ratio of 1–10) were added in a reservoir containing 3 ml of
50 mM MES, pH 5.5, 1 mM EDTA. Combing was achieved by
dipping a coverslip into the reservoir for 5 min and then slowly
removing. At appropriate pH, DNA molecules in the reservoir
bind to the coverslip’s surface by one of their extremities.
As the coverslip is pulled up out of the reservoir, the DNA
molecules are aligned and uniformly overstretched (by 50%)
by the receding meniscus (10).
In order to reduce non-specific interactions of QD with
the surface during subsequent incubations, the coverslips
were incubated for 10 min with blocking reagent (Roche)
1.5 mg/ml in 5 mM MES, pH 5.5, 1 mM EDTA. Coverslips
were then washed twice with washing solution (borate 40 mM,
pH 8.3). For the digoxigenin labeling scheme, the coverslips
were first incubated for 10 min with mouse anti-digoxigenin
(Roche) 200 ng/ml in revelation solution (40 mM borate,
pH 8.3, 100 mM NaCl and 300 mg/ml blocking reagent),
then washed. The coverslips were then incubated for 10 min
with 2 nM QD in revelation solution, using either a QD 605
(number indicates emission wavelength) streptavidin conjug-
ate for biotin labeling, or a QD 655 goat F(ab0)2 anti-mouse
IgG conjugate for digoxigenin labeling, or a mix of QD 565
streptavidin conjugate and QD 655 goat F(ab0)2 anti-mouse
IgG conjugate (2 nM each) for the dual color labeling scheme.
Coverslips were washed five times at the end of the process.
The QD were purchased from Quantum Dot Corp. (USA). For
each of these steps, the revelation solution (100 ml) or the
washing solution (200 ml) was pipetted down onto the cover-
slip and removed by aspiration after the incubation time.
Fluorescence microscopy and image analysis
The coverslips were scanned using an inverted microscope
(Olympus IX70) equipped with a 60·water-immersion object-
ive (NA = 1.2). The light source was a mercury lamp. After
passing through an excitation filter 475AF40, the light was
directed onto the sample using a dichroic mirror 505DRLP
(Omegafilters). Stained DNA and QD were detected separately
with different band-pass filters: 535DF45 for YOYO-1,
540DF27 for QD 565 streptavidin conjugate, 595DF60 for
QD 605 streptavidin conjugate and 645DF75 for QD 655
anti-mouse conjugate. Simultaneous observation of DNA
and QD was performed with a 510ALP long-pass filter. Images
were captured by a Coolsnap camera (Roper Scientific) and
processed with the Metaview software application. Each pixel
of the CCD camera chip corresponds to a 215 · 215 nm square
on the sample.
An image of stained DNA was taken in order to localize
combed DNA molecules on the surface (exposure time: 1 s).
Due to the intermittent fluorescence of QD (‘blinking’), a
single image of the coverslip was not sufficient to localize
all the QD as some of them could be in a dark state during
the shot. An important feature of QD is that there is no
characteristic blink duration. Therefore, the probability that
the QD will emit light during >1 s in a 60 s timeframe is very
high (17). We recorded a 60-frame movie (exposure time for
each frame: 1 s), which was used to generate two types of
processed images. The first is a QD maximum image where
each pixel intensity is shown at the maximum intensity
displayed in the 60-frame image stack. In the second, the
fluorescence signal was averaged. The first image ensures
equivalent size for all QD and is used for convenient visual-
ization when overlaying the DNA image and the QD image, as
in Figure 2. The second is used for the automated analysis
described below.
Images were further analyzed using a program written in
MATLAB (MathWorks). In order to localize both QD and
DNA, we used a method based on cross-correlation between
the fluorescence image and a specific correlation template. The
template for QD detection was a two-dimensional isotropic
Gaussian function which corresponds to the point spread func-
tion of our optical system. This template is justified in that the
fluorescent source that we aimed to detect was made of one or
a few QD attached to a 0.5 kb DNA fragment. This length
corresponds to a maximum distance of 250 nm between two
adjacent fluorophores, which is smaller than the optical res-
olution (300 nm) of our system. When the QD images were
cross-correlated with the QD template, local maxima above a
user-fixed signal-to-noise detection threshold were localized.
A least-squares Gaussian fit was performed to obtain the loc-
alization of the center of the fluorescent spot (18). The DNA
detection template was elongated parallel to the combing dir-
ection, with a length equivalent to a combed DNA molecule
and a Gaussian cross-section. DNA images were also cross-
correlated with the DNA template. Local maxima above a
user-fixed signal-to-noise detection threshold were localized
and associated to the middle of combed DNA molecules.
Then, for each maximum, a region-growing algorithm was
applied to locate the entire molecule and subsequently its
ends. Since DNA molecules may break during the combing
process, only combed DNA molecules with apparent lengths
ranging from 1.5 to 4.0 mm were taken into account in further
analysis (expected length of a 7.3 kb combed plasmid is
3 mm). The labeling was considered to be successful
when a QD was localized at <1.0 mm of a DNA extremity.
RESULTS
Labeling strategy
Our ultimate goal was to label both ends of combed DNA
molecules in order to locate these molecules by fluorescence
microscopy in the absence of DNA staining agents as well as
PAGE 3 OF 9 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 11 e98
to determine their orientation on the coverslips. To do so, two
different molecular entities detectable by fluorescence micro-
scopy must be attached to both extremities of the DNA
molecule. Specific recognition of DNA extremities can be
achieved by ligation of DNA fragments with different cohes-
ive ends. The fluorescent dyes that are used for detection of
the modified extremities should be tightly linked to the DNA
and produce bright fluorescent signals at two different wave-
lengths. QD are nanometer-sized, bright fluorescent probes
which show exceptional photostability (no bleaching over
extended periods of time) and have large excitation and narrow
emission spectra, thereby allowing multicolor imaging by
using only one excitation wavelength. They are commercially
available in a water-soluble form at various emission wave-
lengths conjugated with biologically active molecules such
as streptavidin, biotin and antibodies. Therefore, we chose
to incorporate biotin or digoxigenin on both ends of the
DNA molecule. We used streptavidin QD for biotin detection
and a two layer scheme for digoxigenin detection involving
one layer of antidigoxigenin antibodies and one layer of QD
coated with a secondary antibody.
Class IIS restriction enzymes, such as BsaI or BsmBI,
cleave outside their recognition site and therefore can generate
various overhangs. Digestion of the pET11-parC plasmid with
BsmBI produced a 6.3 kb fragment with two different cohesive
ends (Figure 1). Short fragments of DNA (0.5 kb) with a
cohesive end compatible with one extremity of this restriction
fragment were obtained by cleavage of a DNA made by PCR
at a BsaI site. This site was introduced close to one extremity
by using appropriate primer sequences. The sequences of the
overhangs were chosen in order to permit only the hybridiza-
tions that lead to the expected construct (Figure 1). Biotin- and
digoxigenin-containing fragments were obtained by including
biotin–dUTP or digoxigenin–dUTP in the PCR. Our protocol
led to incorporation of75 modified deoxynucleotides in each
fragment. Efficient ligation of the gel-purified restriction frag-
ment to one or two 0.5 kb modified DNA fragments, giving
DNA molecules of 6.8 or 7.3 kb, was confirmed by gel
electrophoresis (data not shown). The yield exceeded 95%
for the construct that required two ligations.
Observation of combed DNA molecules by
fluorescence microscopy
Modified DNA molecules were then stained with YOYO-1,
combed on hydrophobic surface and observed by fluorescence
microscopy. Stained DNA molecules are detected by the green
fluorescence of the DNA binding dye, while the extremities
are detected by red or far red fluorescence of QD. Green
images revealed DNA molecules with an apparent length of
3 mm (Figure 2). This is compatible with the length of the
combed DNA molecule (6.8 or 7.3 kb). The mean density
of DNA molecules was 103/mm2. Because QD blink, red
images were acquired every second for one minute and the
series was processed as described in the experimental section.
Then, the red and green images were superimposed (Figure 2).
We first modified only one end of the DNA molecule by
ligating a biotin-containing fragment, using streptavidin QD
for revelation. The red images revealed bright monodisperse
fluorescent dots, some of which colocalize with the extremities
of DNA molecules (Figure 2A). The red dots which did not
colocalize with DNA were attributed to non-specific adsorp-
tion. Reducing this adsorption was one of the key steps in our
experiments. The hydrophobic surface was uniformly covered
with QD conjugates after incubation in the absence of treat-
ment (Figure S1, see Supplementary Material). In order to
reduce these interactions, coverslips were incubated with a
solution of a commercial blocking reagent (Roche) prior
to labeling. This reagent, whose principal ingredient is casein,
was also added to the solution of QD during incubation.
Figure 1. Description of the dual color labeling scheme used in this study. A
DNA restriction fragment (shown in green) is ligated to short DNA fragments
(shown in black) that are modified with biotin (red circles) or digoxigenin (blue
squares), which are revealed using streptavidin QD 565 or one layer of mouse
anti-digoxigenin (light blue) followed by anti-mouse QD 655.
Figure 2. Combed DNA detection with QD. DNA molecules were modified with biotin or digoxigenin at one or both ends, stained with YOYO-1 (green) and
combed. Biotin was detected with streptavidin QD 565 (D) or 605 (A and C) (shown in red) and digoxigenin was detected with mouse anti-digoxigenin and anti-
mouse QD 655 (shown in blue). Four different labeling schemes were performed: biotin at one end (A), digoxigenin at one end (B), biotin at both ends (C), biotin at
one end and digoxigenin at the other end (D). The QD images were processed from a 60 s long image movie (60 images), each pixel intensity is the maximum value of
this pixel in the image stack. DNA image and QD maximum were then overlaid. The horizontal bar represents 10 mm.
e98 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 11 PAGE 4 OF 9
With this treatment, the observed density of streptavidin QD
was3 · 103/mm2. Images were analyzed in order to estimate
the efficiency of the labeling procedure using a program cre-
ated for that purpose (see Material and Methods). About 60%
of the DNA molecules displayed a label at one of their extrem-
ities (Figure 3, sample A). We noted a preferential orientation
of the modified combed DNA. The upper DNA end in Figure 2
is the one that binds to the surface first during the combing
process. Ninety percent of the QD signals were located on this
end of the DNA molecules, suggesting that the biotin-modified
end attaches more frequently to the surface than the non-
modified end. To test whether a large number of biotin was
required to ensure efficient labeling, we performed the same
experiment with a DNA molecule which contains 10 times
fewer biotin-modified nucleotides at the extremity. This
reduced the labeling efficiency from 60 to 30% (Figure 3,
sample A*).
We then performed the same experiment with a
digoxigenin-modified DNA molecule (Figure 2B). The
molecules were revealed using mouse anti-digoxigenin anti-
bodies and then anti-mouse IgG coated QD. A higher non-
specific adsorption was observed with this protocol, and the
mean density of anti-mouse QD was 2 · 104/mm2. This can
be attributed to the supplementary incubation step with mouse
anti-digoxigenin antibodies, which may non-specifically bind
to the surface and therefore lead to additional adsorption of
QD. The labeling efficiency was the same as for the biotin-
modified DNA (Figure 3, sample B). QD were detected at both
ends of the DNA for very few combed molecules (1% of the
biotin-modified DNA and 7% of the digoxigenin-modified
DNA). This may be due to non-specifically adsorbed QD
closer to a DNA end than the chosen localization distance
criterion of 1 mm. These values are in agreement with the
false-positive detection values expected from the measured
QD densities.
We then observed DNA molecules that were modified at
both ends, either with biotin alone (Figure 2C) or with biotin
at one end and digoxigenin at the other (Figure 2D). In the
second case, two different QD conjugates were used at
the same time, thereby allowing a 2-color detection scheme.
The proportion of molecules with signals at both ends was
50% in each case. Forty percent of the molecules were
labeled at only one end (Figure 3, samples C and D), half
of these displayed a QD signal at 565 nm and the other
half at 655 nm. We noticed that DNA molecules modified
with both biotin and digoxigenin anchored to the surface by
the digoxigenin end more than nine times out of ten.
We noted, as expected, that the fluorescence of the DNA
staining agent decreased over time when irradiated at 475 nm.
Figure 4 shows images taken every 10 s during a 1 min movie
of a DNA molecule with two biotin-modified extremities. The
use of a long pass filter allowed us to observe the emission of
both the DNA staining dye and the QD 605 at the same time.
The bleaching of the DNA staining agent as well as the blink-
ing of QD can be clearly observed on these images (see also
the movie provided as Supplementary Material, Figure S2).
QD-mediated DNA detection
We then investigated if the QD images could be used to
localize the DNA molecules using only their labeled fluores-
cent extremities. The fluorescent pairs that were separated by
<10 mm were selected and their separation length and orien-
tation with respect to the combing direction were recorded
and analyzed. For the double-biotin labeling, the distribution
of distances showed a peak between 2.5 and 3.0 mm, and
the distribution of orientations showed a peak close to 0
(Figure 5A and B). If we restrict the set of molecules to
those that have an orientation between 10 and +10, the
peak for the distribution of distances can be more clearly
distinguished (Figure 5D). Similarly, when the distance
between fluorescent pairs is restricted to 1.5–4.0 mm, the ori-
entation distribution peak becomes more apparent (Figure 5C).
The biotin–digoxigenin modified samples were submitted to
the same analysis. Because of a higher non-specific binding
of antimouse-QD to the surface (see above), the histogram
background was higher and no peak could be detected in
Figure 3. Efficacy of QD DNA detection. DNA was labeled as described in
Figure 2, (A*) is a DNA molecule labeled with ten times less biotin than in (A).
DNA and QD images were analyzed using a home-made software (see
Materials and Methods). The proportion of DNA molecules with one label
(gray) or two labels (black) is reported. The error bar is the SD between all
fields of view.
Figure 4. One-minute long observation of labeled DNA. Combed DNA molecules with two biotin-modified extremities were stained with YOYO-1 and visualized
using streptavidin QD 605. A 1 min movie was recorded using a long pass filter. Images are shown every 10 s. YOYO-1 stained DNA molecules (arrows) tend to
disappear and cannot be visualized after a few tens of seconds. Blinking QD are indicated by triangles. The horizontal bar represents 10 mm.
PAGE 5 OF 9 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 11 e98
the absence of correlation (data not shown). Nevertheless, when
the biotin–digoxigenin data were analyzed in the same manner
as the biotin data, the histograms showed peaks corresponding
to approximately the same values (Figure 5E and F).
The criteria established above (i.e. a length between 1.5 and
4.0 mm and an angle between 10 and +10) were applied in
combination in order to select sets of QD pairs to be analyzed
for the presence of DNA. The average distance for these pairs
Figure 5. Preferential layout of QD pairs. DNA molecules were modified with biotin at both ends (A–D) or biotin at one end and digoxigenin at the other end (E and F)
and combed. Biotin was detected with streptavidin QD 565 or 605 and digoxigenin was detected with mouse anti-digoxigenin and anti-mouse QD 655, respectively.
QD images were analyzed using a program written in MATLAB. The angle between a QD pair and the combing direction (A, C and E) and the distance between
both QD of the pair (B, D and F) were measured. Results are reported for QD 605 pairs (A, B, C and D) and for pairs involving one QD 565 and one QD 655 (E and F).
In C and E, only QD pairs for which the distance is between 1.5 and 4.0 mm are represented. In D and F, only QD pairs for which the angle is between10 and +10
are represented.
e98 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 11 PAGE 6 OF 9
was 2.6 – 0.5 mm for the double-biotin detection scheme
and of 2.6 – 0.6 mm for the biotin–digoxigenin scheme.
The average orientation was 3 – 4 for the double-biotin
detection scheme and 1 – 5 for the biotin–digoxigenin
scheme. DNA molecules could be identified by the green
emission of YOYO-1 between the two QD in 43 out of
45 cases for the double-biotin labeling (96%), and in 120
out of 165 cases for the biotin–digoxigenin labeling (73%).
We calculated the probability P that a QD pair that satisfies
the above-mentioned criteria is actually associated with a
DNA molecule. A detected pair can either be two QD at
both ends of a DNA molecule or two QD randomly meeting
these criteria. P is therefore given by
P ¼ Y·DDNA
Dpairs þ Y·DDNA
where Y is the efficiency for labeling a DNA molecule at both
ends, DDNA is the density of DNA molecules and Dpairs is the
density of random QD pairs. When only one type of label is
present, for example streptavidin QD, the density Dpairs of QD
pairs that satisfy specific distance (between r1 and r2) and
orientation (between a1 and a2) criteria by chance is given by
Dpairs ¼ D
2
b
2
· p r22  r21
 
·
a2  a1ð Þ
180
where Db is the total density of streptavidin QD. The formula
changes to
Dpairs ¼ Db ·Dd · p r22  r21
 
·
a2  a1ð Þ
180
when two types of different QD were used, where Dd is the
total density of anti-mouse QD. Dpairs represents here only
pairs composed of one streptavidin QD and one
antimouse QD. Using our values (r1 = 1.5 mm, r2 = 4.0 mm,
a1 = 10, a2 = 10, Db = 3.103/mm2 and Dd = 2.104/mm2),
we found Dpairs values of 21 and 288 pairs/mm
2 for the
double-biotin and the biotin–digoxigenin scheme, respect-
ively. Taking a value of 50% for Y, as documented by
the experiments described above, we can deduce the value
of P, which is 96% for the double-biotin labeling scheme
and 63% for the biotin–digoxigenin labeling scheme. These
values are compatible with the experimental values obtained
from our images.
It should be noted that these values depend on both density
and length of the DNA molecules, and on the nonspecific
adsorption of QD. For example, the value of P for the
double-biotin labeling scheme will decrease from 96 to
69% if the length of the DNA is increased by a factor of 8,
which corresponds to the length of phage lambda DNA
(48.5 kb). The density of DNA we used and the length of
these DNA molecules, in combination with the small number
of non-specifically bound QD, made for a high probability that
QD pairs that satisfy our specific distance and orientation
criteria were in reality associated with a DNA molecule.
This probability is close to 1 for the biotin labeling scheme
and remains over 0.6 for the biotin–digoxigenin labeling
scheme, which provides additional information about the
orientation of the molecule.
DISCUSSION
The aim of this study was to investigate new labeling strategies
for DNA detection by optical microscopy in the absence of
any DNA staining agent, in order to facilitate further dynamic
studies of DNA–protein interactions at the single molecule
level. For this purpose, biotin and/or digoxigenin fragments
were ligated to the ends of linear DNA molecules. The modi-
fied DNA molecules were then combed on a glass surface
and observed by fluorescence microscopy. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first time that the ends of DNA
molecules have been detected by fluorescence microscopy
using fluorescent QD in a 2-color mode. We have demon-
strated that the detection of single DNA molecules is possible
by using only the QD images. QD pairs for which distance and
orientation were characteristic of labeled DNA molecules can
be used as an indicator for the presence of DNA molecules
with a low error rate. Image analysis and QD pair selection can
be automated using software.
The incorporation of multiple biotin or digoxigenin
molecules at each extremity was apparently necessary for
efficient detection. These molecules were introduced in the
form of modified deoxynucleotides incorporated into short
DNA fragments that are produced by PCR and ligated at both
ends of the DNA to be studied. The ligation yield exceeds
95%. Non-fluorescent haptens were used instead of fluorescent
nucleotides, in order to provide a more versatile approach.
Under our experimental conditions, the labeling efficiency
for one end was 60% for both labeling strategies, i.e. using
biotin and streptavidin QD or digoxigenin, mouse antidigoxi-
genin and antimouse QD. This efficiency dropped by 50%
when the DNA fragment contained ten times less biotin. As
QD are likely to always be detected, these yields probably
reflect inefficient binding of biotin and digoxigenin by the
modified QD. The proximity of the surface might disturb
the expected specific interactions, or many biotin or digoxi-
genin molecules might stick to the surface during the combing
process. A preferential attachment of the combed DNA
molecules by their modified extremity supports this hypo-
thesis. Moreover, records of single spot fluorescence temporal
evolution suggest that only one or very few QD are responsible
for the fluorescent signal (see Supplementary Material and
Figure S3). The number of modified nucleotides is therefore
a critical parameter for efficient labeling to take place.
Organic DNA staining agents interfere with DNA–protein
interactions. In addition, these staining agents tend to bleach
which leads to DNA cleavage. Moreover, the presence of
fluorescence along the entire DNA molecule results in low
signal to noise ratio when the emission of other fluorophores is
imaged in the vicinity of DNA. We labeled DNA molecules
with QD, which display specific optical properties that are not
shared by organic fluorophores or fluorescent microspheres
and are particularly valuable for single-molecule visualization.
For example, they have recently been used to follow the dif-
fusion of glycine receptors in the membrane of neurones (19).
They produce localized and long-standing fluorescence signals
with sharp emission spectra. QD that have different emission
wavelengths can be excited by the same wavelength. It is
therefore easy to combine two different wavelengths for
DNA extremities and a third for a protein. Our labeling strat-
egy can be used in the presence of physiologically relevant
PAGE 7 OF 9 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 11 e98
ionic conditions. Two problems are encountered when one
wants to use QD on glass surfaces. The first is that QD
blink. This problem was circumvented by acquiring 60 QD
images at 1 s intervals. The second is non-specific adsorption
onto surfaces. This problem was solved by using an appropri-
ate buffer for the pretreatment of the coverslips as well as
during the incubation step. More non-specific adsorption of
QD was observed with the anti-mouse QD used for digoxi-
genin detection. This resulted in a higher probability of
erroneous QD-mediated DNA detection. At the date of the
experiments, anti-digoxigenin QD conjugate was not yet avail-
able. As anti-digoxigenin conjugated QD are currently being
commercialized, the protocol could now be simplified and
non-specific adsorption would probably be lower.
The development of ultrasensitive instrumentation and new
microscopy techniques opens the way to dynamic studies of
interacting biomacromolecules by fluorescence microscopy,
which will be particularly interesting for DNA studies and
its related machinery. The detection scheme presented here
will likely be helpful to future investigators. For example, it
may be possible to use it in experiments where DNA is elong-
ated by a flow (3), and preliminary experiments suggest that it
can be applied to DNA molecules that are attached to a surface
by only their extremities (11).
The detection of double-stranded DNA by fluorescence
microscopy requires specific labeling strategies. Specific
sequences on stretched single DNA molecules have been
probed by using fluorescently labeled DNA binding proteins
(20,21). We have recently implemented a method of labeling
short internal DNA sequences using a triplex forming oligo-
nucleotide ligated to a fragment containing multiple fluoro-
phores (22). In the present paper, QD are used for the
detection of biotin or digoxigenin moieties that have been lig-
ated to the ends of DNA molecules. QD have so far been used
in only a few studies for detection of nucleic acids. Oligonuc-
leotide probes were conjugated directly to QD or linked to
streptavidin-QD upon biotin functionalization, and these con-
jugates were used for DNA detection in fluorescence in situ
hybridization (23,24) or DNA chips (25,26) experiments. In all
these cases, the target sequences were present in multiple cop-
ies. The detection of short unique sequences of DNA at the
single molecule level still represents an experimental chal-
lenge. In our approach, the ends of a DNA molecule were
detected with a 60% success rate using QD. This efficiency
required the incorporation of a large number of biotin or digoxi-
genin moieties, only a few of which were recognized by QD.
In conclusion, the method we propose for the detection of
DNA molecules paves the way towards new dynamic studies
of single DNA molecules and their interactions with proteins.
QD fluorescent probes appear to be a valuable alternative to
the organic dyes that are commonly used to stain DNA. They
permit not only long-standing observation by fluorescence
microscopy, but also a 2-color determination of the orientation
of single DNA molecules. This study also provides useful
experimental data regarding the possible use of QD for fluor-
escence detection of short DNA sequences.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Material is available at NAR online.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Jean-Franc¸ois Allemand for a gift of the plasmid
pET11-parC. We also thank Maxime Dahan for his interest
in this work, and Heather Sloan for a careful reading of the
manuscript. A.C., B.G.L., I.B. and S.B. were supported by
grants from Ministe`re de la Recherche. This work was sup-
ported by a grant from Ministe`re de la Recherche (ACI
Nanoscience 2004). Funding to pay the Open Access publica-
tion charges for this article was provided by INSERM.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Bustamante,C., Bryant,Z. and Smith,S.B. (2003) Ten years of tension:
single-molecule DNA mechanics. Nature, 421, 423–427.
2. Strick,T., Allemand,J., Croquette,V. and Bensimon,D. (2000) Twisting
and stretching single DNA molecules. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol., 74,
115–140.
3. Ladoux,B., Quivy,J.P., Doyle,P., du Roure,O., Almouzni,G. and
Viovy,J.L. (2000) Fast kinetics of chromatin assembly revealed by
single-molecule videomicroscopy and scanning force microscopy. Proc.
Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 97, 14251–14256.
4. Matsuura,S., Komatsu,J., Hirano,K., Yasuda,H., Takashima,K.,
Katsura,S. and Mizuno,A. (2001) Real-time observation of a single DNA
digestion by lambda exonuclease under a fluorescence microscope field.
Nucleic Acids Res., 29, E79.
5. Scha¨fer,B., Gemeinhardt,H., Uhl,V. and Greulich,K.O. (2000) Single
molecule DNA restriction analysis in the light microscope. Single Mol., 1,
33–40.
6. Spies,M., Bianco,P.R., Dillingham,M.S., Handa,N., Baskin,R.J. and
Kowalczykowski,S.C. (2003) A molecular throttle: the recombination
hotspot chi controls DNA translocation by the RecBCD helicase. Cell,
114, 647–654.
7. Ha,T., Rasnik,I., Cheng,W., Babcock,H.P., Gauss,G.H., Lohman,T.M.
and Chu,S. (2002) Initiation and re-initiation of DNA unwinding by the
Escherichia coli Rep helicase. Nature, 419, 638–641.
8. Hu,X., Aston,C. and Schwartz,D.C. (1999) Optical mapping of DNA
polymerase I action and products. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 254,
466–473.
9. Gue´roui,Z., Place,C., Freyssingeas,E. and Berge,B. (2002) Observation
by fluorescence microscopy of transcription on single combed DNA.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 99, 6005–6010.
10. Michalet,X., Ekong,R., Fougerousse,F., Rousseaux,S., Schurra,C.,
Hornigold,N., van Slegtenhorst,M., Wolfe,J., Povey,S., Beckmann,J.S.
and Bensimon,A. (1997) Dynamic molecular combing: stretching the
whole human genome for high-resolution studies. Science, 277,
1518–1523.
11. Crut,A., Lasne,D., Allemand,J.F., Dahan,M. and Desbiolles,P. (2003)
Transverse fluctuations of single DNA molecules attached at both
extremities to a surface. Phys. Rev. E Stat. Nonlin. Soft Matter Phys., 67,
051910.
12. Meng,X., Cai,W. and Schwartz,D.C. (1996) Inhibition of restriction
endonuclease activity by DNA binding fluorochromes. J. Biomol. Struct.
Dyn., 13, 945–951.
13. Liu,Y.Y., Wang,P.Y., Dou,S.X., Wang,W.C., Xie,P., Yin,H.W.,
Zhang,X.D. and Xi,X.G. (2004) Ionic effect on combing of single
DNA molecules and observation of their force-induced melting by
fluorescence microscopy. J. Chem. Phys., 121, 4302–4309.
14. Kabata,H., Kurosawa,O., Arai,I., Washizu,M., Margarson,S.A.,
Glass,R.E. and Shimamoto,N. (1993) Visualization of single
molecules of RNA polymerase sliding along DNA. Science, 262,
1561–1563.
15. Harada,Y., Funatsu,T., Murakami,K., Nonoyama,Y., Ishihama,A. and
Yanagida,T. (1999) Single-molecule imaging of RNA polymerase–DNA
interactions in real time. Biophys. J., 76, 709–715.
16. Roulon,T., He´le`ne,C. and Escude´,C. (2001) A ligand-modulated padlock
oligonucleotide for supercoiled plasmids. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 40,
1523–1526.
e98 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 11 PAGE 8 OF 9
17. Brokmann,X., Hermier,J.-P., Messin,G., Desbiolles,P., Bouchaud,J.-P.
and Dahan,M. (2003) Statistical aging and nonergodicity in the
fluorescence of single nanocrystals. Phys. Rev. Lett., 90,
120601.
18. Bonneau,S., Cohen,L. and Dahan,M. (2004) Multiple target approach for
single quantum dot tracking. 2004 IEEE International Symposium on
Biomedical Imaging. Arlington, VA, pp. 664–667.
19. Dahan,M., Levi,S., Luccardini,C., Rostaing,P., Riveau,B. and Triller,A.
(2003) Diffusion dynamics of glycine receptors revealed by
single-quantum dot tracking. Science, 302, 442–445.
20. Oana,H., Ueda,M. and Washizu,M. (1999) Visualization of a specific
sequence on a single large DNA molecule using fluorescence microscopy
based on a new DNA-stretching method. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun., 265, 140–143.
21. Taylor,J.R., Fang,M.M. and Nie,S. (2000) Probing specific sequences on
single DNA molecules with bioconjugated fluorescent nanoparticles.
Anal. Chem., 72, 1979–1986.
22. Ge´ron-Landre,B., Roulon,T., Desbiolles,P. and Escude´,C. (2003)
Sequence-specific fluorescent labeling of double-stranded DNA observed
at the single molecule level. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, e125.
23. Pathak,S., Choi,S.K., Arnheim,N. and Thompson,M.E. (2001)
Hydroxylated quantum dots as luminescent probes for in situ
hybridization. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 123, 4103–4104.
24. Xiao,Y. and Barker,P.E. (2004) Semiconductor nanocrystal probes for
human metaphase chromosomes. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, e28.
25. Robelek,R., Niu,L., Schmid,E.L. and Knoll,W. (2004) Multiplexed
hybridization detection of quantum dot-conjugated DNA sequences using
surface plasmon enhanced fluorescence microscopy and spectrometry.
Anal. Chem., 76, 6160–6165.
26. Gerion,D., Chen,F., Kannan,B., Fu,A., Parak,W.J., Chen,D.J.,
Majumdar,A. and Alivisatos,A.P. (2003) Room-temperature
single-nucleotide polymorphism and multiallele DNA detection using
fluorescent nanocrystals and microarrays. Anal. Chem., 75,
4766–4772.
PAGE 9 OF 9 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 11 e98
