nsSNPAnalyzer: identifying disease-associated
nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms
Lei Bao, Mi Zhou and Yan Cui*
Department of Molecular Sciences, Center of Genomics and Bioinformatics, University of Tennessee Health
Science Center, 858 Madison Avenue, Memphis, TN 38163, USA
Received January 21, 2005; Revised February 16, 2005; Accepted March 7, 2005
ABSTRACT
Nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms
(nsSNPs) are prevalent in genomes and are closely
associated with inherited diseases. To facilitate
identifying disease-associated nsSNPs from a large
number of neutral nsSNPs, it is important to develop
computational tools to predict the nsSNP’s pheno-
typic effect (disease-associated versus neutral).
nsSNPAnalyzer, a web-based software developed
for this purpose, extracts structural and evolutionary
information from a query nsSNP and uses a machine
learning method called Random Forest to predict
thensSNP’sphenotypiceffect.nsSNPAnalyzerserver
is available at http://snpanalyzer.utmem.edu/.
INTRODUCTION
Assessing susceptibility to diseases based on an individual’s
genotype has long been a central theme of genetics studies.
Among inherited gene variations in humans, nonsynonymous
single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs) that lead to an
amino acid change in the protein product are most relevant
to human inherited diseases (1). nsSNPs can be classified into
two categories according to their phenotypic effects: those that
cause deleterious effects on protein functions and are hence
disease-associated and those that are functionally neutral.
Given the huge number of nsSNPs already discovered (2,3),
a major challenge is to predict which of them are potentially
disease associated. Computational tools have been developed
to predict the nsSNP’s phenotypic effect, e.g. the SIFT server
(4) and the PolyPhen server (5). Recently, studies have shown
that combining information obtained from multiple sequence
alignment and three-dimensional protein structure can increase
the prediction accuracy (6). nsSNPAnalyzer server integrates
multiple sequences alignment and protein structure analysis
to identify disease-associated nsSNPs. nsSNPAnalyzer takes a
protein sequence and the accompanying nsSNP as inputs and
reports whether the nsSNP is likely to be disease-associated or
functionally neutral. nsSNPAnalyzer also provides additional
useful information about the nsSNP to facilitate the biological
interpretation of results, e.g. structural environment class and
multiple sequence alignment.
PROGRAM DESCRIPTION
Algorithm and implementation
nsSNPAnalyzer is a web server implementing machine learn-
ing methods for nsSNP classification. The program design
and data flow are illustrated in Figure 1. Briefly, on receiving
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 901 448 3240; Fax: +1 901 4487360; Email: ycui2@utmem.edu
ª The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
Figure 1. The program design and data flow of nsSNPAnalyzer.
W480–W482 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gki372
the input sequence, nsSNPAnalyzer searches the ASTRAL
database (7) for homologous protein structures. This step is
skipped if the users provide the protein structure themselves.
nsSNPAnalyzer calculates three types of information from
user’s input: (i) the structural environment of the SNP,
including the solvent accessibility, environmental polarity
and secondary structure (8); (ii) the normalized probability
of the substitution in the multiple sequence alignment (9);
and (iii) the similarity and dissimilarity between the original
amino acid and mutated amino acid. nsSNPAnalyzer then
uses a machine learning method called Random Forest
(10) to classify the nsSNPs. Random Forest is a classifier
consisting of an ensemble of tree-structured classifiers. The
Random Forest classifier was trained to optimally combine
the heterogeneous sources of predictors using a curated
training dataset prepared from the SwissProt database (11).
Several recent studies have demonstrated the better perform-
ance of Random Forest over other machine learning
approaches (12–14). For the nsSNP phenotypic effect pre-
diction, we also found that Random Forest gave the best results
on this training dataset. In a cross-validation test, the false
positive rate is 38% and the false negative rate is 21% (15).
The nsSNPAnalyzer web server is implemented on a Linux
Redhat 8.0 platform with the Common Gateway Interface
scripts written in PHP.
Input
Two inputs are mandatory: protein sequence in FASTA format
and the nsSNP identities to be analyzed. An nsSNP is denoted
as X#Y, where X is the original amino acid in one letter, # is
the position of the substitution (starting from 1), and Y is the
mutated amino acid in one letter. Multiple nsSNPs in a protein
should be separated by new-line characters. Users may provide
the inputs by copy-paste or file uploading. In addition to the
two mandatory inputs, users may also upload an accompany-
ing protein structure file in PDB format if they want their own
structure to be used. Finally, because the calculation usually
takes a while, users may provide their email addresses to avoid
waiting online. The results are sent to the email address when
the calculations are finished. Users can use the sample data to
learn the input format and perform a demo run.
Output
The results of nsSNPAnalyzer are displayed on a web page and
stored on the server for a week. A link to the results page can
also be sent to the user via email. A sample output is shown
in Figure 2. The output includes several calculated features of
the nsSNP: (i) predicted phenotypic class (disease-associated
versus neutral); (ii) a hyperlink to the homologous structure
with a SCOP identifier (7); (iii) the normalized probability of
the substitution calculated by the SIFT program (4); (iv) area
buried score, a measure of the solvent accessibility; (v) frac-
tion polar score, a measure of environmental polarity related to
hydrogen bond formation; (vi) secondary structure (helix,
sheet and coil); and (vii) the structural environment class,
a discrete environment class definition by combining features
(iv)–(vi) (8). The area buried score and fraction polar score are
calculated by the ENVIRONMENT program (8), and the sec-
ondary structure is calculated by the STRIDE program (16).
The user can click the ‘View Alignment’ button to see the local
sequence alignment spanning the substitution sites and get a
direct sight on the mutability of the substitution. The original
amino acid is highlighted in blue, and the mutated amino acid
is highlighted in red.
FUTURE PLANS
Considering the remarkable CPU cost of calculation, we are
planning to provide precalculated results for all human nsSNPs
in the dbSNP (17) with homologous structures available. We
will also test the applicability of extracting structural predict-
ors from predicted structures to eliminate the requirement of
having experimentally determined structures available.
Figure 2. The output of nsSNPAnalyzer. (A) The main output page of nsSNPAnalyzer. The user can click the icon to see the interpretation of each field.
(B) An example of local sequence alignment spanning the nsSNP (D7N). The original amino acid (D) is highlighted in blue, and the mutated amino acid (N) is
highlighted in red.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W481
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Drs James Bowie, Roland Luethy and David
Eisenberg for providing the computer program for calculating
the structural environments. We thank Drs Pauline Ng and
Steven Henikoff for providing access to the SIFT program.
We thank Drs Leo Breiman, Andy Liaw and Matthew
Wiener for providing access to the Random Forest package.
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful sugges-
tions. This work was partly supported by a Phrma Foundation
grant to Y.C. Funding to pay the Open Access publication
charges for this article was provided by the faculty startup
grant from UTHSC.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Stenson,P.D., Ball,E.V., Mort,M., Phillips,A.D., Shiel,J.A, Thomas,N.S.,
Abeysinghe,S., Krawczak,M. and Cooper,D.N. (2003) Human Gene
Mutation Database (HGMD): 2003 update. Hum. Mutat.,
21, 577–581.
2. Fredman,D., Siegfried,M., Yuan,Y.P., Bork,P., Lehvaslaiho,H. and
Brookes,A.J. (2002) HGVbase: a human sequence variation database
emphasizing data quality and a broad spectrum of data sources.
Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 387–391.
3. Irizarry,K., Kustanovich,V., Li,C., Brown,N., Nelson,S., Wong,W. and
Lee,C.J. (2000) Comprehensive EST analysis of single nucleotide
polymorphism across coding regions of the human genome.
Nature Genet., 26, 233–236.
4. Ng,P.C. and Henikoff,S. (2003) SIFT: predicting amino acid
changes that affect protein function. Nucleic Acids Res., 31,
3812–3814.
5. Ramensky,V., Bork,P. and Sunyaev,S. (2002) Human non-synonymous
SNPs: server and survey. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 3894–3900.
6. Saunders,C.T. and Baker,D. (2002) Evaluation of structural and
evolutionary contributions to deleterious mutation prediction.
J. Mol. Biol., 322, 891–901.
7. Chandonia,J.M., Hon,G., Walker,N.S., Lo Conte,L., Koehl,P., Levitt,M.
and Brenner,S.E. (2004) The ASTRAL compendium in 2004.
Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D189–D192.
8. Bowie,J.U., Luthy,R. and Eisenberg,D. (1991) A method to identify
protein sequences that fold into a known three-dimensional structure.
Science, 253, 164–170.
9. Ng,P.C. and Henikoff,S. (2001) Predicting deleterious amino acid
substitutions. Genome Res., 11, 863–874.
10. Breiman,L. (2001) Random Forest. Technical Report, Stat.
Dept. UCB.
11. Yip,Y.L., Scheib,H., Diemand,A.V., Gattiker,A., Famiglietti,L.M.,
Gasteiger,E. and Bairoch,A. (2003) The Swiss-Prot variant page
and the ModSNP database: a resource for sequence and structure
information on human protein variants. Hum. Mutat., 23,
464–470.
12. Svetnik,V., Liaw,A., Tong,C., Culberson,J.C., Sheridan,R.P. and
Feuston,B.P. (2003) Random Forest: a classification and regression tool
for compound classification and QSAR modeling. J. Chem. Inf.
Comput. Sci., 43, 1947–1958.
13. Wu,B., Abbott,T., Fishman,D., McMurray,W., Mor,G., Stone,K.,
Ward,D., Williams,K. and Zhao,H. (2003) Comparison of statistical
methods for classification of ovarian cancer using mass spectrometry
data. Bioinformatics, 19, 1636–1643.
14. Gunther,E.C., Stone,D.J., Gerwien,R.W., Bento,P. and Heyes,M.P.
(2003) Prediction of clinical drug efficacy by classification of
drug-induced genomic expression profiles in vitro. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA, 100, 9608–9613.
15. Bao,L. and Cui,Y. (2005) Prediction of the phenotypic effects of
nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms using structural and
evolutionary information. Bioinformatics, doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/
bti365.
16. Frishman,D. and Argos,P. (1995) Knowledge-based protein secondary
structure assignment. Proteins, 23, 566–579.
17. Sherry,S.T., Ward,M.H., Kholodov,M., Baker,J., Phan,L.,
Smigielski,E.M. and Sirotkin,K. (2001) dbSNP: the NCBI database of
genetic variation. Nucleic Acids Res., 29, 308–311.
W482 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
