Phytome: a platform for plant comparative genomics
Stefanie Hartmann, Dihui Lu1, Jason Phillips and Todd J. Vision*
Department of Biology and 1School of Information and Library Sciences, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA
Received August 15, 2005; Revised and Accepted October 4, 2005
ABSTRACT
Phytome isanonlinecomparativegenomics resource
that can be applied to functional plant genomics,
molecular breeding and evolutionary studies. It
contains predicted protein sequences, protein family
assignments, multiple sequence alignments, phylo-
genies and functional annotations for proteins from
a large, phylogenetically diverse set of plant taxa.
Phytome serves as a glue between disparate plant
gene databases both by identifying the evolutionary
relationships among orthologous and paralogous
protein sequences from different species and by
enablingcross-referencesbetweendifferent versions
of the same gene curated independently by different
database groups. The web interface enables sophist-
icated queries on lineage-specific patterns of gene/
protein family proliferation and loss. This rich data-
set is serving as a platform for the unification of
sequence-anchored comparative maps across taxo-
nomic families of plants. The Phytome web interface
can be accessed at the following URL: http://www.
phytome.org. Batch homology searches and bulk
downloads are available upon free registration.
INTRODUCTION
The comparative analysis of genome data can provide unique
and valuable insights into organismal function and evolution.
While a treasure trove of data is publicly available, there are
substantial barriers to the exploitation of these data in a typical
small-scale research project. Data often come from many dif-
ferent sources, each with different conventions for data man-
agement. This problem is particularly pronounced in plants
owing to the highly decentralized infrastructure for plant
genomics. In addition, comparative genomic analyses fre-
quently require complex and computationally intensive soft-
ware not accessible to the typical lab, and occasional users are
unaware of the state of the art. To address these issues, we have
developed Phytome, an online comparative genomics resource
for functional plant genomics, molecular breeding and
evolutionary studies. Phytome centralizes the relevant data
and makes the results of its computationally intensive analysis
pipeline available through a versatile and powerful web-based
graphical user interface (GUI), thereby enabling individual
researchers to utilize the tools of plant comparative genomics.
In its current form, Phytome is well suited to studies of
functional diversification of protein-coding gene families
and taxonomic lineages. In addition, Phytome serves as
glue between otherwise disjointed plant unigene databases
and between taxon-specific model organism databases.
Phytome contains publicly available protein sequence
information from a phylogenetically diverse set of plant
species (Figure 1). Thirty-nine taxa are included in version 1
(released September 2004) and over one hundred taxa are,
at the time of writing, planned for inclusion in version 2 (to
be released Fall 2005). The majority of protein sequences are
computationally predicted from expressed sequence tag (EST)
data, but Phytome also includes protein predictions from
genomic DNA and full-length cDNA sequences when avail-
able. The sequence data are updated on an annual basis and
new features are added with each release. The most significant
new functionality anticipated in forthcoming releases is
the inclusion of comparative mapping data along with novel
analysis and visualization tools for comparative maps.
DATABASE CONTENT AND ANALYSIS PIPELINE
In brief, the multistage analysis pipeline (Figure 2) begins with
whole or partial predicted protein-coding genes (Unigenes).
From these, predicted translations (Unipeptides) are obtained.
Unipeptides are grouped into Unipeptide Families, and
multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) and phylogenies are
inferred for each family. Large families are then further broken
down into phylogenetically-defined Unipeptide Subfamilies.
A variety of functional annotation tools are applied to
characterize and classify representative sequences from
each Unipeptide Subfamily. Here, we describe each step of
the pipeline in turn. We address differences between version 1
and 2 of Phytome where relevant but primarily focus on the
analysis pipeline for version 2 (under development) and
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 919 843 4507; Fax: +1 919 962 1625; Email: tjv@bio.unc.edu
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
D724–D730 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gkj045
provide statistics for version 1. More information about imple-
mentation of the analysis pipeline is available at the website,
and a detailed evaluation of the results will be published
elsewhere.
Unigenes
For both efficiency and accuracy in the pipeline, Phytome
stores one or more non-redundant sets of predicted genes
(a Unigene set), for each species. We distinguish between a
primary Unigene set, composed of the Unigenes used for
subsequent sequence analyses, and secondary Unigene sets,
for which only assembly information is stored so that corres-
ponding Unigenes from different sources can be cross-
referenced. Pre-assembled Unigene sets for many of the
species are obtained from NCBI Unigene (1), Plant Genome
Network (PGN) (2), PlantGDB (3), Sputnik (4) and TIGR
Gene Indices (5). We prefer to use as a primary source a
Unigene set built using base call quality data [e.g. Phred
scores, refs. (6,7)], though this is not possible for many of
the species. When such an assembly is available from the
original data provider, an effort is made to obtain that assem-
bly rather than one built without quality scores. For species
without an existing Unigene set in the public domain, one is
custom-built using the software TGICL and CAP3 (8,9). When
an authoritative genome annotation is available for a species
(e.g. Arabidopsis, rice), the primary Unigene set is obtained
from the corresponding genome annotation group.
Unipeptides
In most cases (Arabidopsis and rice excepted), Unipeptides
must then be inferred from the Unigene sequences. A multi-
stage homology search is done against several protein
sequence databases using BLAST (10,11). First, Uniprot/
Swissprot plus TrEMBL plant proteins are searched. If a
nearly perfect match is found to a protein from the same
species, this protein (or a consensus of all such proteins) is
Figure 1. Phylogeny of plantmodel organisms. Lineages represented in Phytome are shown. Representative species are denoted by common name or genus. The tree
is largely based on recommendations by the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (APG II). Major groups are indicated by numbered circles at the nodes of their last
common ancestor: 1, Viridiplantae; 2, angiosperms; 3, eudicots; 4, monocots; 5, rosids; 6, asterids.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D725
used as the Unipeptide for that Unigene. Failing that, the top
three homologs are input to a homology-guided translation
step using ESTWise (12) using the following three datasets
in descending order of priority: (i) all Uniprot/Swissport plus
TrEMBL plant records, (ii) non-plant records in Uniprot/
Swissprot, or (iii) non-plant records in Uniprot/TrEMBL.
Some Unigenes do not produce a corresponding Unipeptide
in Phytome for any number of (non-mutually exclusive) reas-
ons: they may lack a coding sequence (by consisting entirely
of the 50 or 30-untranslated region, or of an RNA gene), they
possess a coding sequence that is too short, homologs can not
be found, or the homology-based translation fails. In version 1
of Phytome, there were 735 024 Unigenes but only 640 467
Unipeptides, an attrition of 13%. Basic information, such as
component sequences, can still be retrieved even for a Unigene
lacking a corresponding Unipeptide.
Unipeptide Families
In version 1 of Phytome, an all-by-all BLASTP of Unipeptides
from all species was used as input to Tribe-MCL (13), which
outputs non-overlapping clusters of sequences that can be
considered approximate Unipeptide Families. Tribe-MCL
heuristically takes into account both the strength of the pair-
wise matches and the interconnectivity among the members of
a cluster. The ‘inflation value’, which is a tunable parameter
affecting the stringency of the clustering, was initially set
to three. Clusters with >400 members were iteratively broken
into smaller clusters using inflation values of four or five. In
version 1, clustering was initiated with 640 467 Unipeptides.
Following clustering, there were 26 393 Unipeptide Families
of size two or greater. In addition to these, there were 94 537
Unipeptides with no BLAST match and 212 562 Unipeptides
that were not included in any cluster despite having BLAST
matches of E < 1015. Thus, 48% of the Unipeptides were
grouped into a family containing at least one other Unipeptide.
For subsequent versions of Phytome, the process of family
assignment builds upon existing families as much as possible.
Phytome version 2 Unipeptides that have not changed in
sequence retain their earlier family membership. New and
updated Unipeptides are first searched against profile hidden
Markov models (HMMs) generated using HMMer (14) for the
large Unipeptide Families from version 1. Those that clearly
fall into existing families need not be clustered. Those that
do not match an existing profile HMM are searched against
version 1 families that were too small to have HMMs, and
against each other, using BLAST. They are assigned to one of
the small families if they are closer in sequence to one member
than current family members are to each other. If not, they are
clustered into new Unipeptide Families as in version 1.
Alignments
AMSA is produced for every Unipeptide Family. Owing to the
well-known difficulties of automated de novo MSA on large
protein families, especially when there are many incomplete
sequences, different software programs and parameters need
to be applied depending on the context. The vast majority of
de novo MSAs for Phytome version 1 have been produced
using MAFFT, which is both extremely rapid and has been
Figure 2. Phytome analysis pipelineA simplified schematic representation of the Phytome version 2 analysis pipeline. Black arrows represent the flow of data. Light
gray arrows indicate output stored in the database. Integration with data from physical and genetic maps (dashed box and arrow) is planned for future releases.
D726 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
shown to produce alignments comparable with the most
successful general-purpose programs available (15,16). For
each family, MAFFT was run once with two iterations and
once with three; the better alignment, as determined by the
average sum of pairs (SP) score with the PAM250 substitution
matrix (12), was retained. Alignments of families with 20–700
members generated by MAFFT were subsequently refined
using RASCAL (17), but since we encountered cases in
which applying RASCAL yielded a lower quality MSA than
was input, the refined alignment was used only when it had a
higher SP score. For a small number of families, the MAFFT
alignment was found to be inadequate, and T-COFFEE
or DIALIGN (18–20) were used to generate alignments for
these. To ensure positional homology of columns used for
reconstructing phylogenies (see below), we use a custom pro-
gram named REAP (S. Hartmann, J. Phillips, T.J. Vision,
unpublished data) to ‘prune’ the full MSA by removing (i)
columns containing many gaps and/or highly diverse amino
acids and (ii) sequences that either have little overlap with
other sequences or appear to be systematically misaligned. The
output of REAP is referred to in Phytome as the ‘reduced
alignment’.
As discussed above, profile HMMs were trained for Uni-
peptide Families of Phytome version 1 and used to identify
new family members, using full alignments. Profile HMMs
were also used to guide full alignments of version 2 Unipeptide
Families using HMMer, rather than recalculating each MSA
from scratch. Families for which no prior profile HMM is
available are aligned as in version 1. Profiles are calculated
for new families and for old ones that change substantially in
membership between versions.
Phylogenies
From reduced alignments of Unipeptide Families with at
least four sequences, phylogenies are calculated using the
Neighbor-Joining algorithm (21). Pairwise distances (using
the JTT matrix) are calculated using PHYLIP Protdist and
input into PHYLIP Neighbor to obtain an unrooted phylogen-
etic tree (J. Felsenstein, University of Washington, Seattle,
WA, USA). To facilitate downstream applications such as
inferring speciation and duplication events, all trees are
midpoint-rooted using PHYLIP Retree; a molecular clock
test is then performed to determine the reliability of this
root. The reduced alignment and neighbor-joining tree for
each Unipeptide Family are read into TreePuzzle (22), and
a likelihood ratio clock test is performed (also using the JTT
model). In version 1 of Phytome, phylogenetic trees were
calculated for 11 390 Unipeptide Families. A molecular
clock was rejected for 8111 (71%) of the trees.
Unipeptide Subfamilies
Subfamilies are identified to facilitate analysis within large
families. They are solely defined by the phylogenetic structure
of the family; no functional information is taken into account.
To obtain Unipeptide Subfamilies, each midpoint-rooted tree
is traversed by a breadth-first search from the leaves to the
root. During this traversal, monophyletic clades containing
up to 50 leaves are selected and defined as Unipeptide
Subfamilies. Sequences excluded by REAP from the MSA,
and therefore the phylogenetic tree, are placed into a special
Unipeptide Subfamily (numbered 0).
Functional annotations
A number of automated functional predictions are used to
characterize and classify the Unipeptides within Phytome.
Chloroplast and mitochondrial encoded Unipeptides are iden-
tified within several of the Phytome species using BLAST
searches for near perfect matches against predicted proteins
from the completed organelle genomes of those same taxa.
InterproScan (23,24) is used to predict domains and functional
motifs for the longest Unipeptides within each Subfamily. This
performs searches for conserved signatures within the follow-
ing protein domain and motif databases: Interpro (25,26), PIR
Superfamily (27–29), PRINTS (30), PROSITE/Prefile (31),
PFAM (32), PRODOM (33,34), SMART (35), Superfamily
(36) and TIGRFAMs (37). Low-complexity regions as determ-
ined by SEG (38) are also noted. GO (39) terms are assigned to
Unipeptides on the basis of the InterPro2GO mapping, which
is generated during the curation of InterPro entries (26). Signal
peptides and transmembrane domains are predicted using Sig-
nalP (40,41) and TMHMM (42), respectively. Since protein
function may often be conserved within a Unipeptide Subfam-
ily, and since these predictions tend to be computationally
expensive, only one representative of each Subfamily is ana-
lyzed by InterproScan, SignalP and TMHMM.
Implementation
The results of the analysis pipeline are stored in relational
tables using a custom schema. Phytome runs on a MySQL
backend, and the web GUI consists of dynamic HTML docu-
ments generated by PHP. The custom middle layer makes
heavy use of Bioperl (43).
HOW TO USE THE DATABASE
Phytome’s web-based GUI allows individual users intuitive
access to the contents of the database, along with a variety
of visualization tools. Registered users can download table
dumps, which are intended to encourage connectivity with
Phytome from external databases and websites. Registration
is free and can be accessed from Phytome’s Advanced
Features page.
Unipeptides
Unipeptides can be retrieved in a number of different ways.
Each has a unique Unipeptide ID, which consists of a four
letter species code followed by an integer. A unipeptide can
also be retrieved by querying one of its component sequences
(including a Genbank EST, Uniprot ID, a unigene ID from
another database, or a gene model identifier such as an Ara-
bidopsis At or rice Os number). Synonyms for Unipeptides are
stored as searchable gene/marker aliases. The database of
synonyms is not comprehensive, but seeks to include syn-
onyms particularly when they are used for markers on genetic
or physical maps. It is also possible to retrieve all Unipeptides
to which a particular Interpro or GO ID or term has been
assigned, although such assignments are only available for
one exemplar in each Unipeptide Subfamily. All searches
may be restricted by species.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D727
A unique feature of Phytome is the ability to cross-reference
unigenes from external databases whose assemblies include
one or more shared component sequences. This information is
displayed in two fields on the Unipeptide page: ‘Primary
source’ and ‘Secondary sources’. The primary source is
the DNA sequence that was used to obtain the Unipeptide
sequence and used for all sequence analyses. The secondary
sources share one or more component sequences (usually
ESTs) with the primary source. This cross-reference is pos-
sible because Phytome stores the Genbank accession numbers
of the component sequences for Unigenes, at least for those
Unigene assemblies for which these data are available.
One can enter a query DNA or protein sequence to perform
a BLAST search for homologous Unipeptides within a single
species or all species combined. The customized BLAST out-
put organizes the hits in a novel way, by Unipeptide Family.
Batch BLAST is also available to registered users.
Unipeptide Families
Unipeptide Families can be directly retrieved similarly to
Unipeptides, by entering a text string or using BLAST.
Each family has a unique numerical ID. With a few excep-
tions, the smaller the family number, the more Unipeptides in
that family. In addition, families can be retrieved by searching
for Interpro and GO IDs and terms that have been assigned to
Unipeptides within a given family. The list of Unipeptides
within a family can be viewed sorted either by Unipeptide
Subfamily or by species. A graphical depiction of the Interpro
(and GO) assignments for all Subfamilies within the larger
Unipeptide Family can be obtained. Related Unipeptide
Families are also listed. The user then selects all or a subset
of Unipeptides from a family to include in a multiple align-
ment and/or phylogeny.
A novel way to browse Unipeptide Families is to search for
those that do or do not contain members from particular
species or clade using a graphical Species Selector tool.
With this tool, one can require a species to be either present
or absent; since species with small numbers of Unipeptides
will necessarily lack members in most families, requiring a
species to be present can sometimes be too restrictive for a
particular search.
Alignments and phylogenies
Once the user selects which Unipeptides within a family to
include in the alignment, a page displaying the reduced align-
ment is shown and a set of customized unigene assembly,
sequence, alignment and phylogeny files are made available
for viewing and download. The alignment and phylogeny of
the selected Unipeptides can be viewed and manipulated inter-
actively using the JalView (44) and ATV (45) Java applets,
respectively.
Examples
Two brief examples of published studies will help to illustrate
how seemingly complex comparative genomics questions can
be answered quite easily using Phytome. Allen (46) investig-
ated the role of gene loss and gene acquisition in angiosperms.
To find genes that had been lost in the lineage leading to
Arabidopsis, the author ran BLAST against custom-built
unigene assemblies. He compiled a list of 1002 tomato
genes that lacked an Arabidopsis homolog. He then selected
the 154 genes from that list that had a match in either soybean
or Medicago. Phytome’s Species Selector can be used to
query for Unipeptide Families that show particular patterns
of lineage-specific presence and absence. As expected, a quick
Phytome search designed to reproduce Allen’s results retrieves
the genes discussed in the original study (e.g. polyphenol
oxidases, ornithine decarboxylases and cyanobacterial pro-
teins), in addition to many more, conveniently grouped by
Unipeptide Family.
Phytome is also especially well suited for the study of
orthology and paralogy within large gene families. In a recent
study of receptor-like kinases in Arabidopsis and rice (47),
the authors identified and retrieved kinase sequences and used
these to generate an MSA. The phylogenetic tree computed
from the alignment was used to identify (i) ancestral family
members present in the common ancestor and (ii) subfamilies
that show differential expansion between the species.
With Phytome, Unipeptide Families can be retrieved using
keywords based on InterPro and GO terms (e.g. ‘kinase’).
The user can then display a phylogeny for all the Unipeptides
within a family from selected species, facilitating analysis
of diversification within any of the thousands of Unipeptide
Families in the database.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Phytome is currently being expanded to allow comparisons
among maps from distantly related plant species. This will be
done by first storing the correspondence between Unipeptides
already in Phytome and sequence-based markers on genetic
maps, physical maps and assembled genome sequences from
those species for which such information is available [see also
ref. (48)]. By joint analysis of the phylogenetic relationships
among mapped Unipeptides and the genetic/physical locations
of Unipeptide Family members in each species, segments
of chromosomal homology among multiple species will be
inferred and recorded in the database. This will allow next-
generation tools that can, for instance, infer the gene content
of a chromosomal segment from a sparsely-mapped plant
genome, provided sequenced markers have been mapped to
that region in sufficient density to identify syntenic segments
in genomes with denser marker coverage. The inclusion of
increasingly sensitive methods for detecting synteny in highly
diverged chromosomal segments (49,50), comparative meth-
ods for predicting gene content and organization in sparsely
sampled genomes and visualization tools for the results of
these analyses will put automated predictions of gene content
in candidate QTL regions at experimentalists’ fingertips.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank V. Brendel, L. Mueller, S. Rudd and all the
other data providers upon whom Phytome depends. This work
is supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation
(DBI-0227314). Funding to pay the Open Access publication
charges for this article was provided by the NSF and the
University of North Carolina.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
D728 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
REFERENCES
1. Wheeler,D.L., Barrett,T., Benson,D.A., Bryant,S.H., Canese,K.,
Church,D.M., DiCuccio,M., Edgar,R., Federhen,S., Helmberg,W. et al.
(2005) Database resources of the National Center for Biotechnology
Information. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D39–D45.
2. Albert,V.A., Soltis,D.E., Carlson,J.E., Farmerie,W.G., Wall,P.K.,
Ilut,D.C., Solow,T.M., Mueller,L.A., Landherr,L.L., Hu,Y. et al. (2005)
Floral gene resources from basal angiosperms for comparative genomics
research. BMC Plant Biol., 5, 5.
3. Dong,Q., Schlueter,S.D. and Brendel,V. (2004) PlantGDB, plant genome
database and analysis tools. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D354–D359.
4. Rudd,S. (2005) openSputnik—adatabase toESTablish comparative plant
genomics using unsaturated sequence collections.Nucleic Acids Res., 33,
D622–D627.
5. Lee,Y., Tsai,J., Sunkara,S., Karamycheva,S., Pertea,G., Sultana,R.,
Antonescu,V.,Chan,A.,Cheung,F. andQuackenbush,J. (2005)TheTIGR
gene indices: clustering and assembling EST and known genes and
integration with eukaryotic genomes. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D71–D74.
6. Ewing,B. andGreen,P. (1998)Base-callingof automated sequencer traces
using phred. II. Error probabilities. Genome. Res., 8, 186–194.
7. Ewing,B., Hillier,L., Wendl,M.C. and Green,P. (1998) Base-calling of
automated sequencer traces using phred. I. Accuracy assessment.
Genome. Res., 8, 175–185.
8. Huang,X. and Madan,A. (1999) CAP3: a DNA sequence assembly
program. Genome. Res., 9, 868–877.
9. Pertea,G., Huang,X., Liang,F., Antonescu,V., Sultana,R.,
Karamycheva,S., Lee,Y., White,J., Cheung,F., Parvizi,B. et al. (2003)
TIGR gene indices clustering tools (TGICL): a software system for fast
clustering of large EST datasets. Bioinformatics, 19, 651–652.
10. Altschul,S.F., Gish,W., Miller,W., Myers,E.W. and Lipman,D.J. (1990)
Basic local alignment search tool. J. Mol. Biol., 215, 403–410.
11. Altschul,S.F., Madden,T.L., Schaffer,A.A., Zhang,J., Zhang,Z.,
Miller,W. and Lipman,D.J. (1997) Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a
new generation of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res.,
25, 3389–3402.
12. Birney,E., Clamp,M. and Durbin,R. (2004) GeneWise and Genomewise.
Genome. Res., 14, 988–995.
13. Enright,A.J., Van Dongen,S. and Ouzounis,C.A. (2002) An efficient
algorithm for large-scale detection of protein families.NucleicAcidsRes.,
30, 1575–1584.
14. Eddy,S.R. (1998) Profile hidden Markov models. Bioinformatics, 14,
755–763.
15. Katoh,K., Kuma,K., Toh,H. and Miyata,T. (2005) MAFFT version 5:
improvement in accuracy of multiple sequence alignment. Nucleic Acids
Res., 33, 511–518.
16. Katoh,K., Misawa,K., Kuma,K. and Miyata,T. (2002) MAFFT: a novel
method for rapid multiple sequence alignment based on fast Fourier
transform. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 3059–3066.
17. Thompson,J.D., Thierry,J.C. and Poch,O. (2003) RASCAL: rapid
scanning and correctionofmultiple sequence alignments.Bioinformatics,
19, 1155–1161.
18. Morgenstern,B., Frech,K., Dress,A. and Werner,T. (1998) DIALIGN:
finding local similarities bymultiple sequence alignment.Bioinformatics,
14, 290–294.
19. Morgenstern,B. (1999) DIALIGN 2: improvement of the segment-to-
segment approach to multiple sequence alignment. Bioinformatics, 315,
211–218.
20. Notredame,C., Higgins,D.G. and Heringa,J. (2000) T-Coffee: A novel
method for fast and accurate multiple sequence alignment. J. Mol. Biol.,
1302, 205–217.
21. Saitou,N. andNei,M. (1987)The neighbor-joiningmethod: a newmethod
for reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Mol. Biol. Evol., 4, 406–425.
22. Schmidt,H.A., Strimmer,K., Vingron,M. and von Haeseler,A. (2002)
TREE-PUZZLE: maximum likelihood phylogenetic analysis using
quartets and parallel computing. Bioinformatics, 18, 502–504.
23. Quevillon,E., Silventoinen,V., Pillai,S., Harte,N., Mulder,N.,
Apweiler,R. and Lopez,R. (2005) InterProScan: protein domains
identifier. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, W116–W120.
24. Zdobnov,E.M. and Apweiler,R. (2001) InterProScan—an integration
platform for the signature-recognition methods in InterPro.
Bioinformatics, 17, 847–848.
25. Mulder,N.J., Apweiler,R., Attwood,T.K., Bairoch,A., Barrell,D.,
Bateman,A., Binns,D., Biswas,M., Bradley,P., Bork,P. et al. (2003)
The InterProDatabase, 2003 brings increased coverage and new features.
Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 315–318.
26. Mulder,N.J., Apweiler,R., Attwood,T.K., Bairoch,A., Bateman,A.,
Binns,D., Bradley,P., Bork,P., Bucher,P., Cerutti,L. et al. (2005)
InterPro, progress and status in 2005. Nucleic Acids Res., 33,
D201–D205.
27. Wu,C.H., Huang,H., Nikolskaya,A., Hu,Z. and Barker,W.C. (2004) The
iProClass integrated database for protein functional analysis. Comput.
Biol. Chem., 28, 87–96.
28. Wu,C.H., Nikolskaya,A., Huang,H., Yeh,L.S., Natale,D.A.,
Vinayaka,C.R., Hu,Z.Z., Mazumder,R., Kumar,S., Kourtesis,P. et al.
(2004) PIRSF: family classification system at the Protein Information
Resource. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D112–D114.
29. Wu,C.H., Yeh,L.S., Huang,H., Arminski,L., Castro-Alvear,J., Chen,Y.,
Hu,Z., Kourtesis,P., Ledley,R.S., Suzek,B.E. et al. (2003) The Protein
Information Resource. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 345–347.
30. Attwood,T.K., Bradley,P., Flower,D.R., Gaulton,A., Maudling,N.,
Mitchell,A.L., Moulton,G., Nordle,A., Paine,K., Taylor,P. et al. (2003)
PRINTS and its automatic supplement, prePRINTS. Nucleic Acids Res.,
31, 400–402.
31. Hulo,N., Sigrist,C.J.,LeSaux,V.,Langendijk-Genevaux,P.S.,Bordoli,L.,
Gattiker,A., De Castro,E., Bucher,P. and Bairoch,A. (2004) Recent
improvements to the PROSITE database. Nucleic Acids Res., 32,
D134–D137.
32. Bateman,A., Birney,E., Cerruti,L., Durbin,R., Etwiller,L., Eddy,S.R.,
Griffiths-Jones,S., Howe,K.L., Marshall,M. and Sonnhammer,E.L.L.
(2002) The Pfam protein famililes database. Nucleic Acids Res., 30,
276–280.
33. Bru,C., Courcelle,E., Carrere,S., Beausse,Y., Dalmar,S. and Kahn,D.
(2005) The ProDom database of protein domain families: more emphasis
on 3D. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D212–D215.
34. Servant,F., Bru,C., Carrere,S., Courcelle,E., Gouzy,J., Peyruc,D. and
Kahn,D. (2002) ProDom: automated clustering of homologous domains.
Brief Bioinform., 3, 246–251.
35. Letunic,I., Copley,R.R., Schmidt,S., Ciccarelli,F.D., Doerks,T.,
Schultz,J., Ponting,C.P. and Bork,P. (2004) SMART 4.0:
towards genomic data integration. Nucleic Acids Res., 32,
D142–D144.
36. Gough,J., Karplus,K., Hughey,R. and Chothia,C. (2001) Assignment
of homology to genome sequences using a library of hidden Markov
models that represent all proteins of known structure. J. Mol. Biol., 313,
903–919.
37. Haft,D.H., Selengut,J.D. and White,O. (2003) The TIGRFAMs database
of protein families. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 371–373.
38. Wootton,J.C. (1994) Non-globular domains in protein sequences:
automated segmentation using complexitymeasures.Comput. Chem., 18,
269–285.
39. Ashburner,M.,Ball,C.A.,Blake,J.A.,Botstein,D.,Butler,H.,Cherry,J.M.,
Davis,A.P., Dolinski,K., Dwight,S.S., Eppig,J.T. et al. (2000) Gene
ontology: tool for the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology
Consortium. Nature Genet., 25, 25–29.
40. Bendtsen,J.D., Nielsen,H., von Heijne,G. and Brunak,S. (2004)
Improved prediction of signal peptides: SignalP 3.0. J. Mol. Biol, 340,
783–795.
41. Nielsen,H., Engelbrecht,J., Brunak,S. and von Heijne,G. (1997) A neural
network method for identification of prokaryotic and eukaryotic signal
peptides and prediction of their cleavage sites. Int. J. Neural Syst., 8,
581–599.
42. Sonnhammer,E.L., vonHeijne,G. andKrogh,A. (1998) A hiddenMarkov
model for predicting transmembrane helices in protein sequences. Proc.
Int. Conf. Intell. Syst. Mol. Biol., 6, 175–182.
43. Stajich,J.E., Block,D., Boulez,K., Brenner,S.E., Chervitz,S.A.,
Dagdigian,C., Fuellen,G., Gilbert,J.G., Korf,I., Lapp,H. et al. (2002) The
Bioperl toolkit: Perl modules for the life sciences. Genome. Res., 12,
1611–1618.
44. Clamp,M., Cuff,J., Searle,S.M. and Barton,G.J. (2004) The Jalview Java
alignment editor. Bioinformatics, 20, 426–427.
45. Zmasek,C.M. and Eddy,S.R. (2001) ATV: display and manipulation of
annotated phylogenetic trees. Bioinformatics, 17, 383–384.
46. Allen,K.D. (2002) Assaying gene content in Arabidopsis. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA, 99, 9568–9572.
47. Shiu,S.H., Karlowski,W.M., Pan,R., Tzeng,Y.H., Mayer,K.F. and
Li,W.H. (2004)Comparative analysis of the receptor-like kinase family in
Arabidopsis and rice. Plant Cell, 16, 1220–1234.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D729
48. Muller,C., Denis,M., Gentzbittel,L. and Faraut,T. (2004) The Iccare web
server: an attempt to merge sequence and mapping information for plant
and animal species. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, W429–W434.
49. Huan,J., Prins,J., Wang,W. and Vision,T. (2003) Reconstruction of
ancestral gene order after segmental duplication and gene loss.
In Proceedings of the Conference on IEEE Computer Society
Bioinformatics (CSB). IEEE Computer Society, Stanford, CA, USA,
pp. 484–485.
50. Simillion,C., Vandepoele,K., Saeys,Y. and Van de Peer,Y. (2004)
Building genomic profiles for uncovering segmental homology
in the twilight zone. Genome Res., 14, 1095–1106.
D730 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
