C E N T R F O R I N T E G R A T I V E
B I O I N F O R M A T I C S V U
E
This can also be seen as a form of ‘relative entropy’ of group A  
relative to the sum of the probabilities of both groups (pA + pB). 
This function becomes zero for maximally different sites and one 
for sites with identical distributions. The final SH  score used in 
the method was the average of SHAB and SHBA.
Method
The input of SH is a multiple sequence alignment of the protein 
family and a subdivision into two groups. Advanced features 
optionally allow more control over the analysis and output (see 
also Figure 2). The Sequence Harmony between two groups (A 
and B) at position i is defined as follows:
Sequence Harmony: 
Detecting Functional Specificity from Alignments
Figure 3 | Low-harmony sites for non-B57 vs. B57 
in the HIV capsid protein (1AFV, 2BU0). 
The backdrop shows the GAG region 
alignment where the capsid is located.
K. Anton Feenstra, Walter Pirovano and Jaap Heringa
Centre for Integrative Bioinformatics VU (IBIVU), Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
∑
+
=
x xixi
xi
xii B
,
A
,
A
,A
,
AB
pp
plogp SH
References
[1] Pirovano, W, KA Feenstra, & J Heringa “Sequence Comparison by Sequence 
Harmony Identifies Subtype Specific Sites Functional Sites” Nucl. Acid. Res., 
34: 6540 2006.
[2] Feenstra, KA, W Pirovano, K Krab & J Heringa “Sequence Harmony: Detecting 
Functional Specificity from Alignments”, Nucl. Acid. Res., 35: W495 2007. 
[3] HIV sequence data was kindly provided by M Navis & N Kootstra, Clinical 
Viro-Immunology, Sanquin Research Amsterdam.
`
Figure 1 | Low-harmony sites (red 
balls) for AOX1 vs. AOX2 
in an AOX homology mo-
del. The putative active 
site iron (orange ball) and 
binding residues (sticks) 
are shown as well.
Alternative Oxidase
The mitochondrial plant alternative oxidase (AOX) is encoded in 
two discrete gene subfamilies. AOX1 is found in monocot and 
dicot plants and is induced by stress stimuli. AOX2 is usually 
constitutive and has at present not been 55 found in monocot 
plants. Of the nine non-harmonious (SH=0) residues (Table 1), 5 
are located at the substrate binding site as indicated in Figure 1.
Table 1 | Output table for the Alternative Oxidase.
HIV Sequence Divergence 
and Disease Progression
Divergence between HIV virus populations in infected patients
is important for predicting AIDS progression. Figure 3 shows 
selected sites in the crystal structure of the HIV capsid protein. 
The 26 sites selected by SH  contain all 7  known B57 restricted 
CTL escape mutants. Comparison with non-B57 patients in early- 
and late-stage of disease progression, and those that show long-
term non-progression, revealed 18 sites of which 12 are known 
mutation sites that correlate with HIV replication rates.
Sequence Harmony
We present the Sequence Harmony (SH) method and web server 
 introduced previously [1,2]. SH  allows  the quick selection of 
subtype-specific sites from a multiple alignment given a subfam-
ily grouping, by scoring compositional differences, without im-
posing conservation. In addition, it maps the predicted sites dir-
ectly onto a protein structure for display and manipulation. 
The web server can be accessed from: 
www.ibi.vu.nl/programs/SeqHarmWWW/.
Figure 2 | Input web-form 
of the SH Web 
Server, showing 
input and set-
tings for analy-
sis of the HIV 
alignment.
