GBA server: EST-based digital gene expression
profiling
Xin Wu1, Michael G. Walker2,3, Jingchu Luo1 and Liping Wei1,2,*
1Center for Bioinformatics, National Laboratory of Protein Engineering and Plant Genetic Engineering, College
of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China, 2Biomedical Informatics, Department of
Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA and 3Walker Bioscience,
Sunnyvale, CA, USA
Received February 14, 2005; Revised and Accepted April 15, 2005
ABSTRACT
Expressed Sequence Tag-based gene expression
profiling can be used to discover functionally asso-
ciated genes on a large scale. Currently available
web servers and tools focus on finding differentially
expressed genes in different samples or tissues
rather than finding co-expressed genes. To fill this
gap,wehave developed aweb server that implements
the GBA (Guilt-by-Association) co-expression algo-
rithm, which has been successfully used in finding
disease-related genes. We have also annotated
UniGene clusters with links to several important
databases such as GO, KEGG, OMIM, Gene, IPI and
HomoloGene. The GBA server can be accessed and
downloaded at http://gba.cbi.pku.edu.cn.
INTRODUCTION
The sequencing and analysis of Expressed Sequence Tags
(ESTs) is one of the three most important techniques used to
study gene expression, the other two being DNA microarray
and SAGE. Vast amounts of EST data are now available, and
the volume is growing rapidly. Currently there are over 25
million EST sequences in NCBI’s dbEST database (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/dbEST/), among which six million
were added in 2004 alone. Because the same gene may be
represented by many different EST sequences, the UniGene
database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/UniGene) (1) was
developed to partition nucleotide sequences into a
non-redundant set of gene-oriented clusters.
Although it can be difficult to use data from more than one
microarray experiment because the platforms are often differ-
ent, it is straightforward to use EST data across different lib-
raries, tissues and disease stages. Analysis of these EST data,
often with the help of the UniGene database, holds tremendous
value for the study of gene expression. For instance, Baranova
et al. (2) developed software named HsAnalyst that identified
novel tumor markers and potential targets for anti-tumor
therapy using data in dbEST and UniGene. Stanton et al. (3)
built differential gene expression profiles from dbEST and
UniGene to identify tissue-enriched genes in mouse pancreas,
mammary gland and heart. Ewing et al. (4) built digital gene
expression profiles of the rice genome using dbEST and
analyzed these profiles using Pearson’s correlation coefficient;
they found two co-expressed clusters of contigs encoding
proteins with seed-related functions. Walker (5) developed
the Guilt-by-Association (GBA) algorithm, which uses the
Fisher exact test to find genes that have similar expression
patterns to that of a query gene across EST libraries; using
known disease-related genes as a query (bait), they successfully
identified new genes that are associated with schizophrenia,
Parkinson’s disease and prostate cancer (5,6). Thompson
et al. (7) applied the GBA algorithm to identify groups of
genes involved in common cellular processes, which they
named ‘functional modules’, in pregnancy, breast cancer and
ovarian cancer, and validated the results using real-time PCR.
Despite the proven importance of EST-based expression
profiling, there is a shortage of web servers that conduct
such analysis. The deficiency is especially clear when contras-
ted with the large number of available web servers for micro-
array analysis. Furthermore, the EST servers that do exist,
including Digital Differential Display (DDD, http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/UniGene/info_ddd.html), cDNA Digital Gene
Expression Displayer (DGED, http://cgap.nci.nih.gov/Tissues/
GXS), xProfiler (http://cgap.nci.nih.gov/Tissues/xProfiler)
and GEPIS (8), all aim to find differentially expressed genes
in different pools of tissues or samples. For instance Scheurle
et al. (9) used DDD to find up-regulated and down-regulated
genes in solid tumors. Currently there is no web server that can
find co-expressed genes based on ESTs in cDNA libraries and
UniGene. In particular, the GBA algorithm is not publicly
available as a web server or standalone software.
Given the value of finding co-expressed genes, we have
developed a new web server, named GBA, that has two types
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +86 10 6276 4970; Fax: +86 10 6275 2438; Email: weilp@mail.cbi.pku.edu.cn
 The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W673–W676
doi:10.1093/nar/gki480
of functions. First, given a gene sequence, it uses the GBA
algorithm to find other genes (clustered by UniGene) that have
statistically similar expression pattern across all EST libraries.
Thus a user can input a novel sequence and find the most
closely co-expressed genes that can offer valuable information
on the input’s function. Or the user can input a gene known to
be involved in a disease and find new genes co-expressed with
it that may also be involved in the same disease. Second, we
have linked UniGene clusters to a variety of other databases,
including Gene (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.
fcgi?db=gene), IPI (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/IPI/IPIhelp.html)
(10), HomoloGene (http://www.ncbi.nih.gov/HomoloGene),
OMIM (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=
OMIM) (11), GOA (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/index.html)
(12) and KEGG (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) (13). The ser-
ver allows a user to input a UniGene ID and retrieve extensive
information about the gene such as functional categories and
known pathways. Alternatively, it also allows a user to input
an ID from GO, KEGG, etc. and retrieve all UniGene clusters
involved in the particular GO function or KEGG pathway.
DESCRIPTION OF FUNCTIONS
The GBA server supports four functions: GBA Engine and
Gene Matcher, which implement the GBA algorithm, and
UniGene Annotation and Annotation Linker, which link
UniGene clusters to several important molecular databases.
GBA Engine
We have downloaded and parsed all cDNA libraries from
EMBL (ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/embl/release/) (14)
and CGAP (http://cgap.nci.nih.gov/Info/CGAPDownload/) (15)
and stored the data in a relational database. Because libraries
with too few entries are under-sequenced and do not
adequately reflect the true expression levels of genes, GBA
Engine allows the user to specify the minimum number of
cDNA sequences in a library in order for it to be included
in the analysis. Table 1 shows how using a different minimum
number of cDNA sequences affects the number of libraries
included in the analysis. Based on previous experience, we
recommend using a cutoff of 500 or 1000.
A gene is considered present (expressed) in a library if at
least one cDNA sequence corresponding to the gene is found
in the library. The presence/absence of a gene in all libraries
forms a vector that represents its expression profile. For a pair
of genes, A and B, GBA Engine converts their expression
profiles into a 2 · 2 contingency table, showing the numbers
of libraries where both A and B are present, where A is present
but B is absent, where B is present but A is absent, and where
both A and B are absent. GBA Engine then applies the Fisher
exact test to test the null hypothesis that there is no association
between A and B and determines a P-value for statistical
significance. Because multiple statistical tests are performed,
GBA Engine can optionally apply a Bonferroni correction to
the P-value to reduce the false positive rate. Given a gene
(represented by its UniGene ID), GBA Engine returns a list of
other UniGene clusters that have similar expression pattern
across cDNA libraries, ranked by their P-value.
Gene Matcher
If a user has an anonymous gene sequence, the first require-
ment is to find its corresponding UniGene cluster before
running GBA Engine or UniGene Annotation. Gene Matcher
provides an interface that runs BLAST (16) to query the gene
sequence against all UniGene sequences to identify the right
UniGene cluster.
UniGene Annotation and Annotation Linker
To help users better understand the functions of UniGene
clusters, we have integrated UniGene clusters with several
molecular databases including Gene, IPI, HomoloGene,
OMIM, GO and KEGG, which we downloaded, parsed and
stored in a relational database. Given a UniGene ID, UniGene
Annotation returns detailed information on the gene locus,
orthologs, disease association, GO categories and path-
ways. Alternatively, given an ID from the other databases,
Annotation Linker returns all UniGene clusters that are asso-
ciated with the locus, ortholog, GO category and pathway,
respectively.
IMPLEMENTATION
The GBA server is a three-tier application developed in Java.
In the Database Tier, we developed the GBA tool Java package
to parse the molecular databases integrated in the GBA server
and used the POSTGRES database system to store the data.
In the Logic Tier, we developed Java programs for data pro-
cessing and statistical tests. In the Web Tier, we used Apache
Tomcat (http://jakarta.apache.org/tomcat/index.html) for the
web server, Struts (http://struts.apache.org/) as the MVC
(Model–View–Control) framework and Java Mail (http://
java.sun.com/products/javamail/community/links/index.html)
to handle emailing of the results.
We update our database whenever the NCBI UniGene data-
base is updated. We track the external databases such as GO
and OMIM regularly and update the links in our database when
these databases are updated. Complete updates of our database
are scheduled monthly. In addition, users can download and
install the GBA server locally and update it according to their
own needs. (See GBA Administrator Guide on the website
for help.)
EXAMPLE APPLICATION
To demonstrate the use of the GBA server, we used it to
identify genes that may be associated with Parkinson’s dis-
ease, one of the most common neurodegenerative disorder
Table 1. Number of human and mouse libraries in the CGAP database using
different minimum numbers of cDNA sequences
No. of cDNAs
in library
No. of human
libraries
No. of mouse
libraries
>5000 276 253
>2000 488 401
>1000 713 516
>500 1117 584
>100 3774 651
Total 8570 965
W674 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
diseases, given genes already known to be associated with
Parkinson’s disease, such as PTEN induced putative kinase 1
(PINK1). It has been suggested that a mutant form of PINK1
damages neurons by stress-induced apoptosis and mitochon-
drial dysfunction (17). Using PINK1 (UniGene ID Hs.389171)
as bait, we searched the cDNA libraries with >500 sequences
for the top 50 genes that have similar expression patterns,
using GBA Engine with a Bonferroni correction (Figure
1a). Part of the result is shown in Figure 1b. In particular,
we found that hit #3 (UniGene ID Hs.370408), in turn, has a
large number of the same co-expressed genes (measured
by GBA) as several genes known to be associated with
Parkinson’s disease, such as alpha-synuclein (SNCA) (data
not shown) (18). We looked for more information on this
gene using UniGene Annotation (Figure 2). The linked entry
in the Gene (LocusLink) database shows that the gene is
Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT ), which encodes a pro-
tein that ‘catalyzes the transfer of a methyl group from
S-adenosylmethionine to catecholamines, including the neuro-
transmitters dopamine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine’ (19).
The linked entry in the OMIM database shows that ‘COMT is
important in the metabolism of catechol drugs used in the treat-
ment of hypertension, asthma, and Parkinson disease.’ Figure 2
shows that COMT is involved in KEGG pathway hsa00350
(Tyrosine Metabolism). Figure 3 shows the input and output
using the KEGG Gateway of Annotation Linker to find all Uni-
Gene clusters involved in the pathway. This example demon-
strates the power of using GBA Engine to find additional genes
that are involved in a disease process and can serve as potential
drug targets. It also demonstrates the value of using UniGene
Annotation and Annotation Linker for further in-depth analysis.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1. Input and output of GBA Engine using PINK1 as an example.
(a) Example input of GBA Engine. (b) Example output of GBA Engine showing
genes having similar expression patterns to PINK1.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2. Input and output of UniGene Annotation using Hs.370408 as an
example. (a) Example input of UniGene Annotation. (b) Example output of
UniGene Annotation showing detailed information on the gene.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W675
DISCUSSION
The GBA server is the first to make the GBA algorithm
publicly available. It also integrates UniGene clusters with
a variety of molecular databases for the first time and provides
a public, web-based user interface. With the rapid accumula-
tion of available EST data, and because data in new cDNA
libraries from new experiments can be easily used together
with existing ones, the effectiveness of the GBA server will
continue to increase. Currently the GBA server supports three
species that have the most available EST data: human, mouse,
and rat. We will add more species in the future that have
sufficient EST data available.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Funding for this work, including payment for the Open Access
publication charges for this article, was provided by the
China National High-tech 863 Program (2004AA231020,
2004BA711A21).
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Wheeler,D.L., Church,D.M., Federhen,S., Lash,A.E., Madden,T.L.,
Pontius,J.U., Schuler,G.D., Schriml,L.M., Sequeira,E., Tatusova,T.A.
and Wagner,L. (2003) Database resources of the National Center for
Biotechnology. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 28–33.
2. Baranova,A.V., Lobashev,A.V., Ivanov,D.V., Krukovskaya,L.L.,
Yankovsky,N.K. and Kozlov,A.P. (2001) In silico screening for
tumour-specific expressed sequences in human genome.
FEBS Lett., 508, 143–148.
3. Stanton,J.A., Macgregor,A.B. and Green,D.P. (2003) Identifying
tissue-enriched gene expression in mouse tissue using the NIH UniGene
database. Appl. Bioinformatics, 2 (Suppl. 3), S65–S73.
4. Ewing,R.M., Ben,K.A., Poirot,O., Lopez,F., Audic,S. and Claverie,J.M.
(1999) Large-scale statistical analyses of rice ESTs reveal correlated
patterns of gene expression. Genome Res., 9, 950–959.
5. Walker,M.G. (1999) Pharmaceutical target discovery using
Guilt-by-Association: schizophrenia and Parkinson’s disease genes.
Proc. Int. Conf. Intell. Syst. Mol. Biol., 1999, 282–286.
6. Walker,M.G., Volkmuth,W., Sprinzak,E., Hodgson,D. and Klingler,T.
(1999) Prediction of gene function by genome-scale expression analysis:
prostate cancer-associated genes. Genome Res., 9, 1198–1203.
7. Thompson,H.G., Harris,J.W., Wold,B.J., Quake,S.R. and Brody,J.P.
(2002) Identification and confirmation of a module of coexpressed
genes. Genome Res., 12, 1517–1522.
8. Zhang,Y., Eberhard,D.A., Frantz,G.D., Dowd,P., Wu,T.D., Zhou,Y.,
Watanabe,C., Luoh,S.M., Polakis,P., Hillan,K.J., Wood,W.I. and
Zhang,Z. (2004) GEPIS—quantitative gene expression profiling in
normal and cancer tissue. Bioinformatics, 20, 2390–2398.
9. Scheurle,D., DeYong,M.P., Binninger,D.M., Page,H., Jahanzeb,M. and
Narayanan,R. (2000) Cancer gene discovery using digital differential
display. Cancer Res., 60, 4037–4043.
10. Kersey,P.J., Duarte,J., Williams,A., Karavidopoulou,Y.,
Birney,E. and Apweiler,R. (2004) The International Protein Index:
an integrated database for proteomics experiments. Proteomics, 4,
1985–1988.
11. McKusick-Nathans Institute for Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins
University (Baltimore, MD) and National Center for Biotechnology
Information, National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, MD.
(2000) Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man, OMIM (TM), http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=OMIM.
12. Camon,E., Magrane,M., Barrell,D., Lee,V., Dimmer,E., Maslen,J.,
Binns,D., Harte,N., Lopez,R. and Apweiler,R. (2004) The Gene Ontology
Annotation (GOA) Database: sharing knowledge in Uniprot with
Gene Ontology. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D262–D266.
13. Ogata,H., Goto,S., Sato,K., Fujibuchi,W., Bono,H. and Kanehisa,M.
(1999) KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes.
Nucleic Acids Res., 27, 29–34.
14. Kanz,C., Aldebert,P., Althorpe,N., Baker,W., Baldwin,A., Bates,K.,
Browne,P., van den Broek,A., Castro,M. and Cochrane,G. (2005)
The EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database. Nucleic Acids Res., 33,
D29–D33.
15. Lal,A., Lash,A.E., Altschul,S.F., Velculescu,V., Zhang,L.,
McLendon,R.E., Marra,M.A., Prange,C., Morin,P.J. and Polyak,K.
(1999) A public database for gene expression in human cancers.
Cancer Res., 59, 5403–5407.
16. Altschul,S.F., Gish,W., Miller,W., Myers,E.W. and Lipman,D.J. (1990)
Basic local alignment search tool. J. Mol. Biol.,
215, 403–410.
17. Hatano,Y., Li,Y., Sato,K., Asakawa,S., Yamamura,Y., Tomiyama,H.,
Yoshino,H., Asahina,M., Kobayashi,S., Hassin-Baer,S. et al. (2004)
Novel PINK1 mutations in early-onset parkinsonism. Ann. Neurol.,
56, 424–427.
18. Huang,Y., Cheung,L., Rowe,D. and Halliday,G. (2004) Genetic
contributions to Parkinson’s disease. Brain Res. Rev., 46,
44–70.
19. Tai,C.H. and Wu,R.M. (2002) Catechol-O-methyltransferase and
Parkinson’s disease. Acta Med. Okayama., 56, 1–6.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3. Input and output of Annotation Linker using pathway hsa00350
as an example. (a) Example input of the KEGG Gateway of Annotation Linker.
(b) Example output of the KEGG Gateway of Annotation Linker showing all
UniGene clusters involved in the pathway.
W676 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
