WebGestalt: an integrated system for exploring
gene sets in various biological contexts
Bing Zhang, Stefan Kirov and Jay Snoddy*
Graduate School in Genome Science and Technology, University of Tennessee-Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA
Received February 14, 2005; Revised March 30, 2005; Accepted April 15, 2005
ABSTRACT
High-throughput technologies have led to the rapid
generation of large-scale datasets about genes and
gene products. These technologies have also shifted
our research focus from ‘single genes’ to ‘gene sets’.
We have developed a web-based integrated data
mining system, WebGestalt (http://genereg.ornl.gov/
webgestalt/), to help biologists in exploring large sets
of genes. WebGestalt is composed of four modules:
gene set management, information retrieval, organ-
ization/visualization, and statistics. Themanagement
module uploads, saves, retrieves and deletes gene
sets, as well as performs Boolean operations to
generate the unions, intersections or differences
between different gene sets. The information retrieval
module currently retrieves information for up to 20
attributes for all genes in a gene set. The organiza-
tion/visualization module organizes and visualizes
gene sets in various biological contexts, including
Gene Ontology, tissue expression pattern, chromo-
some distribution, metabolic and signaling pathways,
proteindomain informationandpublications.Thestat-
istics module recommends and performs statistical
tests to suggest biological areas that are important
to a gene set and warrant further investigation. In
order to demonstrate the use of WebGestalt, we have
generated48genesetswithgenesover-represented in
various human tissue types. Exploration of all the 48
genesetsusingWebGestalt isavailableforthepublicat
http://genereg.ornl.gov/webgestalt/wg_enrich.php.
INTRODUCTION
The development of high-throughput methodologies, as
epitomized by microarray technologies, has led to the rapid
generation of large-scale datasets about RNA transcripts or
proteins. While in the past biologists studied single genes
at a time, now we can use high-throughput technologies to
analyze tens of thousands of genes simultaneously. The nature
of high throughput technologies requires that bioinformatics
tools focus on ‘gene sets’ instead of ‘single genes’. For
example, microarray and proteome technologies are producing
sets of genes and proteins that are differentially expressed
under certain conditions, or sets of genes and proteins that
are co-expressed under varying conditions. Other studies such
as quantitative trait analysis, large-scale mutagenesis studies,
and other large-scale genetic studies are also producing sets of
interesting genes. Translating the identified gene sets into a
better understanding of the underlying biological processes
constitutes a huge challenge for today’s biologists. Even
retrieving the associated functional information for large gene
sets can be time-consuming. Further manipulating, visualiz-
ing, and statistically analyzing the interrelated data can
involve complex processes for an average biologist. Without
the assistance of appropriate bioinformatics tools, exploring
the gene sets to discover important patterns is not a trivial task
for biologists.
Traditional resources that are available for retrieving func-
tional information, such as the LocusLink from NCBI (National
Center for Biotechnology Information, http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/LocusLink/), are typically displayed in a one-gene-
at-a-time format (1). A newer generation of resources has
been created to facilitate batch information retrieval for sets
of genes (2–4). One such example is ENSMART (http://www.
ensembl.org/Multi/martview), in which the users can perform a
genome information search and retrieval for sets of genes in
human and several other eukaryotic species (3). ENSMART
covers a broad spectrum of functional information pertaining to
gene- and protein-specific attributes as well as disease, expres-
sion, sequence variation and cross-species attributes. Despite
being an excellent batch information retrieval tool, ENSMART
does not help biologists in efficiently exploring the abundant
information associated with a gene set.
One way to help biologists in exploring large gene sets is
to organize the genes based on common functional features,
such as Gene Ontology (GO) (5) categories or biochemical
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 865 574 6541; Fax: +1 865 576 5332; Email: snoddyj@ornl.gov
 The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W741–W748
doi:10.1093/nar/gki475
pathways. Several bioinformatics tools have been developed
for organizing sets of genes based on GO (6–10). Most of these
tools have also implemented statistical tests to identify
enriched GO categories and to suggest the most important
biological areas associated with a given gene set. Although
the use of ontological methods to structure biological know-
ledge is an active area of research and development, the body
of biological knowledge associated with any gene set extends
far beyond GO. In addition to organizing gene sets within the
context of GO, MAPPFinder (11), DAVID (12) and GFINDer
(13) provide the option of organizing and visualizing gene sets
within the context of KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes
and Genomes, http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg) biochemical
pathways (14). DAVID and GFINDer can also organize
gene sets based on protein domain information. Other features,
such as chromosome location, tissue expression pattern and
association in publication, could also be used to organize a
gene set. However, these features are not implemented in the
current gene set analysis tools.
Although methods of gene organization help biologists
explore large gene sets, they frequently generate complex
results with hundreds of categories. Information visualization
enables people to deal with the overwhelming amount of
information associated with a gene set by taking advantage
of our innate visual perception capabilities. Visual methods
are useful in displaying data in ways that capitalize upon the
particular strengths of human pattern processing abilities (15).
Information visualization techniques have been successfully
used in many areas of bioinformatics, including molecular
structures, expression profile, genome and sequence anno-
tation, sequence analysis, molecular pathway, ontology, tax-
onomy and phylogeny (16). Application of information
visualization techniques in gene set analysis will not only
help the visualization of large amount of information, but
also facilitate data mining by aiding recognition of patterns
and trends.
Besides information retrieval, organization, statistical
analysis and visualization, management of large gene sets
presents additional challenges for biologists. Bioinformatics
tools are needed to create subsets of genes from a gene set
based on different criteria, such as GO categories, biochemical
pathways or chromosome location ranges. Tools are also
needed to perform Boolean operations and generate the uni-
ons, intersections and differences between gene sets. Boolean
operations could help to reveal the interrelationship among
different gene sets.
In response to these challenges, we have developed
WebGestalt (WEB-based GEne SeT AnaLysis Toolkit), an
integrated data mining system for the management, infor-
mation retrieval, organization, visualization and statistical
analysis of large sets of genes.
METHODS
Database: GeneKeyDB
WebGestalt is based on an ORACLE relational database,
GeneKeyDB. This database has used a strong gene and protein
centric viewpoint. Gene and gene product information is
primarily taken from NCBI LocusLink, Ensembl, Swiss-
Prot, HomoloGene, Unigene, CGAP, UCSC, GO Consortium,
KEGG, BioCarta and Affymetrix. As a consequence of the
transition from LocusLink to Entrez Gene from NCBI, we are
currently migrating from the LocusLink data to the Entrez
Gene data. Updating of GeneKeyDB is automated by pre-
prepared scripts. The Schema and dictionary of GeneKeyDB
are available from http://genereg.ornl.gov/gkdb. More details
of GeneKeyDB are available from (17).
WebGestalt modules
Figure 1 depicts the schematic overview of WebGestalt.
WebGestalt is composed of four modules: gene set manage-
ment, information retrieval, organization/visualization and stat-
istics. The gene set management module receives gene sets
submitted by the users. Received gene sets can be saved,
retrieved and deleted. Boolean operations are also provided
by this module to generate the unions, intersections or differ-
ences between gene sets. The information retrieval module
currently retrieves information for up to 20 attributes through
our local database GeneKeyDB for the received gene sets. The
organization/visualization module helps the users to explore
efficiently the retrieved information in various biological con-
texts, using eight sub-modules: GO Tree, KEGG Table and
Maps, BioCarta Table and Maps, Protein Domain Table, Tissue
Expression Bar Chart, Chromosome Distribution Chart,
PubMed Table and GRIF Table. Subsets of genes based on
the organization can be generated and saved as new gene sets.
The statistics module currently provides two statistical tests
(the hypergeometric test and the Fisher’s exact test) to identify
interesting patterns in the gene sets.
Gene set management module. The gene set management
module accepts gene sets submitted by files, by GO categories
or by chromosome location ranges. The input file should be a
plain text file, including the appropriate IDs (required) and
corresponding microarray ratios or other values (optional),
separated by tabs in the format of one ID per row. Gene
identifiers that can be recognized are Entrez Gene IDs,
Swiss-Prot IDs, Ensembl IDs, Unigene IDs, gene symbols
and Affymetrix probe set IDs. WebGestalt works currently
with human and mouse. More organisms will be added in the
future. A unique analysis name is given for each gene set by
the user and can be used to retrieve or delete the gene set in the
future. Sub-sets of genes can be generated from an existing
gene set through the organization/visualization module and
saved as new gene sets through the management module.
The management module also performs Boolean operations
to generate the union, intersection and difference between two
existing gene sets. Recursively applying these Boolean opera-
tions makes it possible to combine information from more than
two sets of genes. Orthologs can be retrieved for a gene set
using the management module. The orthologs are defined
by HomoloGene from NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
entrez/query.fcgi?db=homologene). Inclusion of orthologous
information could assist in comparative genomics studies.
Information retrieval module. The information retrieval mod-
ule provides rapid access to the existing information for all
genes in a gene set. The attributes that can be retrieved include
nomenclature, identifiers to different databases, map and func-
tional information. Table 1 lists all of the 20 attributes, their
sources and associated websites. Retrieved information for all
W742 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
genes in a gene set can be downloaded as a tab-delimited file
or opened directly in the web browser using Microsoft Excel.
Organization/visualization module. While the information
retrieval module provides quick and easy information retrieval
for large sets of genes and generates files that can be easily
parsed and further utilized by other computational tools, it
does not help biologists in exploring information associated
with the gene sets. The organization/visualization module in
WebGestalt is intended to assist biologists in exploring large
gene sets by organizing and visualizing the genes in various
biological contexts.
(i) GO Tree. The GO Tree is based on our published tool
GO Tree Machine, which was described in detail in (9).
The GO Tree organizes a gene set based on the GO DAG
(Directed Acyclic Graph), and has implemented several
visualizations, including an expandable tree, a bar chart
at selected annotation level and an enriched DAG. The
expandable tree is suitable for exploring interactively
the structure of GO. After exploring the expandable tree,
the user may pick appropriate annotation levels to generate
corresponding bar charts that are appropriate for publi-
cations and presentations. The enriched DAG is used for
visualizing GO categories with enriched gene numbers as
identified by the statistics module.
(ii) KEGG and BioCarta Tables and Maps. One of the most
important tasks in the high-throughput experiments is to
identify the pathways that are involved in the biological
studies. Similarly to DAVID, MAPPFinder and GFINDer,
WebGestalt can organize genes based on the KEGG bio-
chemical pathways in a KEGG Table. The KEGG Table
shows KEGG pathways associated with the gene set, the
number of genes in each pathway and the Entrez Gene
IDs for the genes. The KEGG table also providesP-values,
indicating the significance of enrichment for each KEGG
pathway. Each pathway name in the KEGG Table is hyper-
linked to the KEGG Map, in which genes in the gene set
are highlighted in red. WebGestalt can also organize genes
based on another popular pathway database, BioCarta
Figure 1. Schematic overview of WebGestalt. WebGestalt is composed of four main modules: gene set management, information retrieval, organization/
visualization and statistics. The gene set management module uploads, saves, retrieves and deletes gene sets, as well as performs Boolean operations to generate
the unions, intersections and differences between gene sets. The uploading tool accepts datasets defined by experiment data, GO categories or chromosome location
ranges. WebGestalt is flexible in the input identifier (Entrez Gene ID, Swiss-Prot ID, Ensembl ID, Unigene ID, gene symbol and Affymetrix Probe Set ID). The saving
tool saves sub-sets of genes generated by the organization/visualization module. The information retrieval module currently retrieves information for up to
20 attributes for all genes in a gene set, including nomenclatures, various gene identifiers, map and functional information. Retrieved information can be exported
to Microsoft Excel files. The organization/visualization module organizes and visualizes a gene set in figures or tables using eight sub-modules: GO Tree, Tissue
Expression Bar Chart, Chromosome Distribution Chart, KEGG Table and Maps, BioCarta Table and Maps, Protein Domain Table, PubMed Table and GRIF Table.
The statistics module provides two statistical tests, the hypergeometric test and Fisher’s exact test and suggests important biological areas in a gene set.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W743
(http://www.biocarta.com), into a BioCarta Table. The
BioCarta Table has the same structure as the KEGG
Table. Each pathway name in the BioCarta Table is hyper-
linked to the BioCarta Map.
(iii) Protein Domain Table. The Protein Domain Table orga-
nizes the genes based on the PFAM protein domains. The
table shows the name of the PFAM domains associated
with the gene set, the number of genes having each domain
and the Entrez Gene IDs for the genes. The table also
provides P-values, indicating the significance of enrich-
ment for each domain. Each domain name is hyperlinked to
the Conserved Domain Database of the NCBI, where the
information of domain functions, structure and sequence is
available. Each Entrez Gene ID is hyperlinked to the
Conserved Domain Summary of the NCBI, where a gra-
phical view of domains on the protein is available.
(iv) Tissue Expression Bar Chart. The Tissue Expression Bar
Chart is designed to organize a gene set based on large-
scale, publicly available gene expression data derived from
a wild variety of tissue and organ types. The current version
of WebGestalt uses the gene expression data from the
CGAP-expressed sequence tag (EST) project (http://
cgap.nci.nih.gov/Tissues) (18). It has been well accepted
that the content of the EST pool for a given tissue type
reflects the composition of original mRNA samples used
for creation of the complementary DNA library (19). In the
Tissue Expression Bar Chart, each tissue is represented by
a bar. The height of the bars represents the number of genes
that are in the active gene set, and also expressed in the
tissue based on the CGAP data. For individual genes, Web-
Gestalt evaluates the over/under-representation of the gene
in individual tissue types using the statistics module.
(v) Chromosome Distribution Chart. Chromosome distri-
bution of the genes in a gene set is visualized using
the Chromosome Distribution Chart. The chromosome
location information comes from the UCSC genome
annotation databases (ftp://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/
goldenPath/currentGenomes/). In this chart, each chromo-
some is represented by a vertical bar. Each gene is repre-
sented by a ‘red cross’ symbol and located on the
chromosome based on its location. Clustered genes from
a gene set can be easily visualized in the chart.
(vi) PubMed Table and GRIF Table. WebGestalt can organize
genes according to their co-occurrence in publications,
based on the gene-publication association information
retrieved from in the LocusLink database. LocusLink pro-
vides two types of gene-publication indices. One is com-
puted from the PubMed, the other is GRIF (1). WebGestalt
organizes genes based on both indices and generates a
PubMed Table or a GRIF Table. The PubMed Table
shows PubMed IDs for the publications associated with
the gene set, the number of genes in each publication and
the Entrez Gene IDs for the genes. Each PubMed ID is
hyperlinked to the corresponding PubMed record, where
the abstract for the paper is available. The GRIF Table is
similar to the PubMed Table, except for one additional
column showing the GRIF comments.
Statistics module. While methods of gene organization provide
an efficient way for biologists to explore large gene sets, these
approaches, such as the GO Tree, frequently generate very
complex results with hundreds of categories still requiring
summarization. Statistical analysis is needed to guide biolo-
gists in finding the statistically significant categories that are
associated with a gene set. In order to identify functional
categories with significantly enriched gene numbers in a gene
set we are interested in, we need to compare the gene set of
interest to a reference gene set for the proportion of genes in
Table 1. Gene attributes that can be retrieved by WebGestalt
Attribute Source Website
Nomenclature information
Gene symbol LocusLink http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/
Symbol alias LocusLink http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/
Gene name LocusLink http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/
Name alias LocusLink http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/
IDs reference into different databases
Entrez Gene ID EntrezGene http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=gene
Refseq_NM Refseq http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/RefSeq/
Refseq_NP Refseq http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/RefSeq/
Unigene ID Unigene http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=unigene
Ensembl ID Ensembl http://www.ensembl.org
Swiss-Prot ID Swiss-Prot http://us.expasy.org/sprot/
Map information
Cytogenetic LocusLink http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/
Physical UCSC ftp://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/currentGenomes/
Functional information
Domain name CDD http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=cdd
OMIM ID OMIM http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=OMIM
PubMed ID PubMed http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=PubMed
GRIF record LocusLink http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/
GO term GO http://www.geneontology.org
KEGG KEGG http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg
BioCarta BioCarta http://www.biocarta.com/
Phenotype LocusLink http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/
Ensembl ID, Ensembl gene stable ID; Cytogenetic, Cytogenetic map location; Physical, Physical map location; KEGG, KEGG pathway name; BioCarta, BioCarta
pathway name.
W744 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
the category. Suppose that we have n genes in the interesting
gene set (A) and m genes in the reference gene set (B). Suppose
further that there are k genes in A and j genes in B that are
in a given category (C) (e.g. a GO category, a KEGG pathway,
a BioCarta pathway etc.). Based on the reference gene set,
the expected value of k would be ke = (n/m)* j. If k exceeds the
above expected value, category C is said to be enriched, with
a ratio of enrichment (r) given by r = k/ke. If B represents the
population from which the genes in A are drawn, WebGestalt
uses the hypergeometric test to evaluate the significance of
enrichment for category C in gene set A,
P ¼
Xn
i¼k
mj
ni
 
j
i
 
m
n
  :
If A and B are two independent gene sets, WebGestalt uses
Fisher’s exact test instead,
P ¼
Xn
i¼k
n
i
 
m
jþ ki
 
mþ n
jþ k
  :
The users can select different significance levels for the
statistical analysis. The users can also specify the minimum
number of genes in a significant category. For example,
categories with only one gene might be statistically enriched,
but they might not be in the user’s interest.
The hypergeometric test is also used for the evaluation of
the over/under-representation of individual genes in a selected
tissue type. Suppose that we have d EST sequences for a
selected gene in all tissues and b EST sequences for all
genes in all tissues. Suppose further that there are c EST
sequences for the selected gene in a selected tissue and a
EST sequences for all genes in the tissue. If c > (d/b)* a,
we consider that the gene is over-represented in the tissue,
and the P-value indicating the significance of over-
representation is calculated by this formula:
P ¼
Xd
i¼c
ba
di
 
a
i
 
b
d
  :
If c < (d/b)*a, we consider that the gene is under-represented
in the tissue, and the P-value indicating the significance of
under-representation is calculated using this formula:
P ¼
Xc
i¼0
ba
di
 
a
i
 
b
d
  :
User interface
All of the above tools in WebGestalt can be accessed through a
simple and intuitive user interface (Supplementary Figure S1).
The interface can be divided into five areas. Area A provides
gene set management tools for uploading, retrieving, deleting,
performing Boolean operations and retrieving orthologs. Area
B displays the name and description of the currently active
gene set. Area C provides the gene set information retrieval
tool, where the user can choose to retrieve information for up
to 20 attributes. Area D provides the gene set organization and
visualization tools that help users to explore large gene sets.
Area E displays a table for the genes in the currently active
gene set, including the ID used in the input file, the value
provided in the input file, Entrez Gene ID, gene symbol and
gene name. Each Entrez Gene ID is hyperlinked to a gene
information record with detailed information retrieved from
our local database GeneKeyDB. The values >0 are colored
red, while those <0 are colored blue. Mouse-over descriptions
are available for the buttons.
Implementation
WebGestalt is implemented in PHP. Gene set management,
information retrieval and organization are mainly accomp-
lished by querying the GeneKeyDB database. The expandable
GO Tree is generated using the PHP Layers Menu System
(http://phplayersmenu.sourceforge.net/). The bar chart for the
GO organization, the tissue expression bar chart and the chro-
mosome distribution chart are all generated by ChartDirector
(http://www.advsofteng.com/index.html). The DAG for
enriched GO categories is created using Graphviz (http://
www.research.att.com/sw/tools/graphviz/). Genes on the
KEGG map are highlighted using the KEGG Applications
Programming Interface (API) (http://www.genome.ad.jp/
kegg/soap/). WebGestalt is accessible through IE5.0 or higher,
Netscape 7.0 or higher, Safari and Firefox from multiple
platforms. WebGestalt can be accessed from the website
http://genereg.ornl.gov/webgestalt/. A detailed manual can
be downloaded from http://genereg.ornl.gov/webgestalt/
WebGestalt_Manual.pdf.
RESULTS
In order to demonstrate the use of WebGestalt, we have
generated 48 gene sets with genes over-represented in various
human tissue types. These gene sets were generated based on
the gene expression data from the publicly available human
EST database (CGAP, http://cgap.nci.nih.gov/), the same data
we used for creating the Tissue Expression Bar Chart. The
tissue type is defined by CGAP. We did not separate different
histological types. As described in the methods, we performed
hypergeometric tests to identify tissue-enriched genes for each
tissue type based on the EST representation profile. As we were
doing multiple tests simultaneously, we considered a gene was
over-represented in a select tissue if the P-value was<0.01 after
the Bonferroni adjustment. To simplify, we will call these genes
‘tissue-enriched genes’. No tissue-enriched gene was found in
adrenal medulla. It was probably due to the small number of
available ESTs in this tissue type. An average of 190 tissue-
enriched genes was identified for each of the other 48 tissue
types, ranging from 6 in synovium to 817 in brain. All these 48
gene sets were uploaded to WebGestalt for exploration. Some
sample results from the GO Tree analysis, KEGG pathway
mapping and chromosome distribution analysis will be presen-
ted in this paper. Complete exploration of all the 48 gene sets
using all available tools in WebGestalt is available for the public
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W745
through this URL: http://genereg.ornl.gov/webgestalt/wg_
enrich.php.
An example will be given for the GO Tree analysis using the
set of 23 genes that are significantly over-represented in
adrenal cortex. WebGestalt was able to found GO annotations
for 21 out of the 23 genes. Nineteen GO categories were found
to have enriched gene numbers using all genes in the human
genome as a reference. Ten categories were under ‘biological
process’, six were under ‘molecular function’ and three were
under ‘cellular component’. Figure 2 is an enriched DAG for
the 10 categories under ‘biological process’. An enriched DAG
shows GO categories with enriched gene numbers (in red) and
their non-enriched parents. Most of the enriched GO categories
identified for this gene set were closely related to the function of
adrenal cortex. The most significant category was ‘C21-steroid
hormone biosyntheses’, which gives a P-value of 4.22 · 109.
Similarly, GO Tree analysis was able to identify the most
important functional areas for other tissue types. For example,
the most significant category under ‘biological process’ for
adipose is ‘lipid metabolism’ (P = 3.40 · 106), for cerebrum
is ‘transmission of nerve impulse’ (P = 3.33 · 1019), for ear
is ‘perception of sound’ (P = 1.70 · 109), for heart is ‘muscle
contraction’ (P = 2.00 · 1022), for lymph node is ‘defense
response’(P = 1.40 · 1026), for retina is ‘sensory perception
of light’ (P = 3.57 · 1044) and for testis is ‘sexual reproduc-
tion’ (P = 1.35 · 1021).
For the same gene set, the KEGG Table in WebGestalt
reveals 18 KEGG pathways that involve genes over-
represented in adrenal cortex. The ‘C21-Steroid Hormone
Metabolism’ pathway was found to have enriched gene
numbers (P = 3.09 · 108) using all genes in the human
genome as a reference. This result is consistent with the
GO Tree analysis. Three genes, CYP17A1, CYP21A2 and
HSD3B2, were mapped to and highlighted on the ‘C21-
Steroid Hormone Metabolism’ pathway using the KEGG
Map in WebGestalt.
The Chromosome Distribution Chart was used to show the
distribution of the set of 208 pancreas genes on the human
chromosome. Several clusters of pancreas-enriched genes can
be seen from the chart. For example, 18 out of the 208 genes
are found to be located within 2.54M on chromosome 19,
which is a >20 times of enrichment comparing with the back-
ground distribution (75 out of the 17 435 physically located
genes were found in this region). Clustering of tissue-enriched
genes on the chromosome was also found in other tissue types.
Although the Chromosome Distribution Chart may help us
to identify these important patterns, statistical analysis is
needed to evaluate the significance. We are working on the
Figure 2.Enriched DAG under ‘biological process’ for a set of 23 genes that are significantly over-represented in adrenal cortex, using all genes in the human genome
as a reference. The enriched GO categories are brought together and visualized as a DAG. Categories in red are enriched ones while those in black are non-enriched
parents. Listed in the boxes are the name of the GO category, the number of genes in the category and the P-value indicating the significance of enrichment.
W746 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
statistically evaluation of local gene enrichment for a given
gene set.
DISCUSSION
WebGestalt is designed for genomic, gene expression, proteo-
mic and large-scale genetic studies from which high-throughput
datasets are generated. Complementing and extending the
functionality of similar data mining tools, WebGestalt provides
a unique online resource for the management, information
retrieval, organization, visualization and statistical analysis of
sets of genes. The major advantages of WebGestalt compared
with similar existing tools include: (i) the ability to retrieve
more information for all genes in a gene set; (ii) more ways
to organize a gene set; (iii) appropriate visualization for each
organization; (iv) assistance in choosing appropriate statistical
tests; (v) a simple and intuitive user interface; and (vi) Boolean
operations on selected gene sets.
Functional features, such as GO (6–13), KEGG pathway
(11–13) and PFAM domains (12,13), have been used to organ-
ize and help exploring gene sets. WebGestalt has added sev-
eral new features for gene set organization, including tissue
expression pattern, chromosome location and co-occurrence in
publications. Their potential uses will be discussed below.
The Tissue Expression Bar Chart is especially useful in
candidate gene identification for genetic experiments. For
example, the critical interval identified from the QTL (Quant-
itative Trait Loci) analysis will be between 0.5 and 10 cM, with
the number of genes anywhere between 5 and 300 (20). It has
been shown that it is possible to identify plausible candidate
genes for human multiple congenital anomaly syndromes by
systematically using data on murine gene expression patterns
(21). The tissue expression pattern of the genes in an interval
can be easily analyzed and visualized using the Tissue Expres-
sion Bar Chart in WebGestalt. The sub-set of genes expressed in
certain tissue types can be saved as new gene sets and analyzed
by other modules in WebGestalt, such as the GO Tree to further
prioritize the genes for mutation analyses. The current Tissue
Expression Bar Chart is based on the gene expression data from
the CGAP EST project (18). Microarray data on the tissue-
specific pattern of mRNA expression are recently available
for a panel of 79 human and 61 mouse tissues (22). Massively
Parallel Signature Sequencing data on different mouse
tissue types are also available from the Mouse Transcriptome
Project (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/guide/mouse/
MouseTranscriptome.html). We are considering adding these
and other large datasets to WebGestalt.
The Chromosome Distribution Chart can help to
identify clustered genes from a gene set. Tight clustering of
co-expressed genes on the chromosomes is common in proka-
ryotes (23). In eukaryotes, it is typically assumed that genes
are randomly distributed. Nonetheless, recent studies in yeast
(24), worm (25), fly (19,26), mouse (27) and human (28,29)
suggest that gene location might not be random. For example,
among the 1661 testes-specific genes identified in Drosophila,
one-third are clustered on chromosomes (19). Testis-specific
clustering of genes on chromosomes has also been found in
mouse (27). Although tissue-specific clustering of genes on
chromosomes has not been found in human, Lercher et al. (29)
have shown that housekeeping genes are strongly clustered
in human. Since the Chromosome Distribution Chart
organizes genes in a gene set based on their chromosome
location, clustered genes can easily be visualized. Statistical
methods are being developed and will be added in the statistics
module for the identification of local gene enrichment on the
chromosome.
Bioinformatics tools based on literature profiling have been
developed by a few groups to assist biologists in the inter-
pretation of sets of interesting genes (30–32). Jenssen et al.
(30) have constructed a gene network from the co-occurrence
of gene symbols or short gene names in the title or the abstract
of a common article record. They also demonstrated that lit-
erature co-occurrence associated biologically related genes,
which suggests the value of organizing genes based on the
co-occurrence in publications. In WebGestalt, instead of con-
structing a gene-publication index de novo, we used the indi-
ces available from the LocusLink database and organized the
genes in a gene set using the PubMed Table and the GRIF
Table. The PubMed table provides better coverage but with
less specificity, while the GRIF table provides less coverage
but better functional specificity.
Another feature of WebGestalt is the Boolean operations on
existing gene sets. It will help to answer simple questions such
as: ‘show me all genes identified through experiment A or
experiment B’ (union), ‘show me the genes that are consist-
ently up-regulated in both of two microarray experiments’
(intersection) or ‘show me the genes that are expressed in
brain but not skin’ (difference). Recursively applying the
Boolean operation makes it possible to combine information
from any number of gene sets. Putting the organization module
and the management module together, WebGestalt is able to
answer complex questions such as ‘give me all genes in my
gene set that are expressed in the brain or cerebellum, located
on chromosome 5 and involved in signal transduction’.
WebGestalt incorporates information from different public
resources, provides tools for the management, information
retrieval, organization, visualization and statistical analysis
of gene sets. The simple and intuitive, web-based interface
provides experimental biologists easy access to the tool kit.
Moreover, the modules in WebGestalt can be easily used by
third-party applications. For example, WebGestalt has been
implemented in WebQTL (http://www.webqtl.org), which is a
unique service that allows biologists to rapidly identify and
map genes and QTL (33). The WebGestalt modules are used to
analyze sets of genes that are highly correlated with various
phenotypes in WebQTL. We are working on an API to allow
easy access of the WebGestalt modules from any third-party
applications.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Material is available at NAR Online.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank Suzanne Baktash and Oakley Crawford for
technical help in preparing the manuscript. This work was sup-
ported by the INIA project (NIH/NIAAA, U01-AA013532), the
BISTI project (NIH/NIDA, P01-DA015027) and the ORNL
LDRD project (DOE, AC05-00OR22725). Funding to pay the
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W747
Open Access publication charges for this article was provided
by the INIA project (NIH/NIAAA, U01-AA013532).
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Pruitt,K.D. and Maglott,D.R. (2001) RefSeq and LocusLink: NCBI
gene-centered resources. Nucleic Acids Res., 29, 137–140.
2. Tsai,J., Sultana,R., Lee,Y., Pertea,G., Karamycheva,S., Antonescu,V.,
Cho,J., Parvizi,B., Cheung,F. and Quackenbush,J. (2001)
RESOURCERER: a database for annotating and linking microarray
resources within and across species. Genome Biol., 2, 1–4.
3. Kasprzyk,A., Keefe,D., Smedley,D., London,D., Spooner,W.,
Melsopp,C., Hammond,M., Rocca-Serra,P., Cox,T. and Birney,E. (2004)
EnsMart: a generic system for fast and flexible access to biological data.
Genome Res., 14, 160–169.
4. Diehn,M., Sherlock,G., Binkley,G., Jin,H., Matese,J.C., Hernandez-
Boussard,T., Rees,C.A., Cherry,J.M., Botstein,D., Brown,P.O. et al.
(2003) SOURCE: a unified genomic resource of functional annotations,
ontologies, and gene expression data. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 219–223.
5. Ashburner,M., Ball,C.A.,Blake,J.A., Botstein,D., Butler,H., Cherry,J.M.,
Davis,A.P., Dolinski,K., Dwight,S.S., Eppig,J.T. et al. (2000) Gene
ontology: tool for the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology
consortium. Nature Genet., 25, 25–29.
6. Herrero,J., Al-Shahrour,F., Diaz-Uriarte,R., Mateos,A., Vaquerizas,J.M.,
Santoyo,J. and Dopazo,J. (2003) GEPAS: a web-based resource for
microarray gene expression data analysis. Nucleic Acids Res., 31,
3461–3467.
7. Draghici,S., Khatri,P., Martins,R.P., Ostermeier,G.C. and Krawetz,S.A.
(2003) Global functional profiling of gene expression. Genomics, 81,
98–104.
8. Zeeberg,B.R., Feng,W., Wang,G., Wang,M.D., Fojo,A.T., Sunshine,M.,
Narasimhan,S., Kane,D.W., Reinhold,W.C., Lababidi,S. et al. (2003)
GoMiner: a resource for biological interpretation of genomic and
proteomic data. Genome Biol., 4, R28.
9. Zhang,B., Schmoyer,D., Kirov,S. and Snoddy,J. (2004) GOTree Machine
(GOTM): a web-based platform for interpreting sets of interesting genes
using Gene Ontology hierarchies. BMC Bioinformatics, 5, 16.
10. Zhong,S., Li,C. and Wong,W.H. (2003) ChipInfo: software for extracting
gene annotation and gene ontology information for microarray analysis.
Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 3483–3486.
11. Doniger,S.W., Salomonis,N., Dahlquist,K.D., Vranizan,K., Lawlor,S.C.
and Conklin,B.R. (2003) MAPPFinder: using Gene Ontology and
GenMAPP to create a global gene-expression profile from microarray
data. Genome Biol., 4, R7.
12. Dennis,G.,Jr, Sherman,B.T., Hosack,D.A., Yang,J., Gao,W., Lane,H.C.
and Lempicki,R.A. (2003) DAVID: Database for Annotation,
Visualization, and Integrated discovery. Genome Biol., 4, R60.
13. Masseroli,M., Martucci,D. and Pinciroli,F. (2004) GFINDer: Genome
Function INtegrated Discoverer through dynamic annotation, statistical
analysis, and mining. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, W293–W300.
14. Kanehisa,M., Goto,S., Kawashima,S., Okuno,Y. and Hattori,M. (2004)
The KEGG resource for deciphering the genome. Nucleic Acids Res.,
32, D277–D280.
15. Hand,D., Mannila,H. and Smyth,P. (2001) Principles of Data Mining.
The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
16. Tao,Y., Liu,Y., Friedman,C. and Lussier,Y.A. (2004) Information
visualization techniques in bioinformatics during the postgenomic era.
Biosilico, 2, 237–245.
17. Kirov,S.A., Peng,X., Baker,E., Schmoyer,D., Zhang,B. and Snoddy,J.
(2005) GeneKeyDB: a lightweight, gene-centric, relational database to
support data mining environments. BMC Bioinformatics, 6, 72.
18. Strausberg,R.L. (2001) The Cancer Genome Anatomy Project: new
resources for reading the molecular signatures of cancer. J. Pathol., 195,
31–40.
19. Boutanaev,A.M., Kalmykova,A.I., Shevelyov,Y.Y. and Nurminsky,D.I.
(2002) Large clusters of co-expressed genes in the Drosophila genome.
Nature, 420, 666–669.
20. van Driel,M.A., Cuelenaere,K., Kemmeren,P.P., Leunissen,J.A. and
Brunner,H.G. (2003) A new web-based data mining tool for the
identification of candidate genes for human genetic disorders.
Eur. J. Hum. Genet., 11, 57–63.
21. van Steensel,M.A., Celli,J., van Bokhoven,J.H. and Brunner,H.G. (1999)
Probing the gene expression database for candidate genes.
Eur. J. Hum. Genet., 7, 910–919.
22. Su,A.I., Wiltshire,T., Batalov,S., Lapp,H., Ching,K.A., Block,D.,
Zhang,J., Soden,R., Hayakawa,M., Kreiman,G. et al. (2004) A gene atlas
of the mouse and human protein-encoding transcriptomes. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA, 101, 6062–6067.
23. Dandekar,T., Snel,B., Huynen,M. and Bork,P. (1998) Conservation of
gene order: a fingerprint of proteins that physically interact.
Trends Biochem. Sci., 23, 324–328.
24. Cohen,B.A., Mitra,R.D., Hughes,J.D. and Church,G.M. (2000)
A computational analysis of whole-genome expression data reveals
chromosomal domains of gene expression. Nature Genet., 26, 183–186.
25. Roy,P.J., Stuart,J.M., Lund,J. and Kim,S.K. (2002) Chromosomal
clustering of muscle-expressed genes in Caenorhabditis elegans.
Nature, 418, 975–979.
26. Spellman,P.T. and Rubin,G.M. (2002) Evidence for large domains of
similarly expressed genes in the Drosophila genome. J. Biol., 1, 5.
27. Li,Q., Lee,B.T. and Zhang,L. (2005) Genome-scale analysis of positional
clustering of mouse testis-specific genes. BMC Genomics, 6, 7.
28. Caron,H., van Schaik,B., van der Mee,M., Baas,F., Riggins,G., van
Sluis,P., Hermus,M.C., van Asperen,R., Boon,K., Voute,P.A. et al. (2001)
The human transcriptome map: clustering of highly expressed genes in
chromosomal domains. Science, 291, 1289–1292.
29. Lercher,M.J., Urrutia,A.O. and Hurst,L.D. (2002) Clustering of
housekeeping genes provides a unified model of gene order in the human
genome. Nature Genet., 31, 180–183.
30. Jenssen,T.K., Laegreid,A., Komorowski,J. and Hovig,E. (2001)
A literature network of human genes for high-throughput analysis of gene
expression. Nature Genet., 28, 21–28.
31. Masys,D.R., Welsh,J.B., Lynn Fink,J., Gribskov,M., Klacansky,I. and
Corbeil,J. (2001) Use of keyword hierarchies to interpret gene expression
patterns. Bioinformatics, 17, 319–326.
32. Chaussabel,D. and Sher,A. (2002) Mining microarray expression data by
literature profiling. Genome Biol., 3, RESEARCH0055.
33. Chesler,E.J., Lu,L., Wang,J., Williams,R.W. and Manly,K.F. (2004)
WebQTL: rapid exploratory analysis of gene expression and genetic
networks for brain and behavior. Nature Neurosci., 7, 485–486.
W748 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
