GoPubMed: exploring PubMed with the
Gene Ontology
Andreas Doms and Michael Schroeder*
Biotechnological Center, Department of Computer Science, TU Dresden, Germany
Received February 9, 2005; Revised March 3, 2005; Accepted April 13, 2005
ABSTRACT
The biomedical literature grows at a tremendous
rate and PubMed comprises already over 15 000 000
abstracts. Finding relevant literature is an important
and difficult problem. We introduce GoPubMed,
a web server which allows users to explore PubMed
search results with the Gene Ontology (GO), a hier-
archically structured vocabulary for molecular bio-
logy. GoPubMed provides the following benefits:
first, it gives an overview of the literature abstracts
by categorizing abstracts according to the GO and
thus allowing users to quickly navigate through
the abstracts by category. Second, it automatically
shows general ontology terms related to the original
query, which often do not even appear directly in
the abstract. Third, it enables users to verify its clas-
sification because GO terms are highlighted in the
abstracts and as each term is labelled with an accur-
acy percentage. Fourth, exploring PubMed abstracts
with GoPubMed is useful as it shows definitions of
GO terms without the need for further look up.
GoPubMed is online at www.gopubmed.org.
Querying is currently limited to 100 papers per query.
BACKGROUND
Limits of classical literature search
The biomedical literature grows at a tremendous pace.
PubMed, the main biomedical literature database references
over 15 000 000 abstracts. Owing to this size, simple web-style
text search of the literature is often not yielding the best
results and a lot of important information remains buried in
the masses of text.
Consider the following example: a researcher wants to
know the enzymes that are inhibited by levamisole. A keyword
search for ‘levamisole inhibitor’ produces well over 100 hits
in the PubMed. To find out about specific functions, the
researcher has to go through all these papers. He/she is
interested in the relevant enzymatic functions. From the
first titles it is immediately evident that levamisole inhibits
alkaline phosphatase. A less well-known fact is, however, still
buried in the abstracts. The abstract ’The effect of levamisole
on energy metabolism in Ehrlich ascites tumour cells in vitro’
with PMID 2947578 is ranked very low (position 89 on
February 7, 2005) by PubMed. (Please note that all the
examples in this paper depend on PubMed’s ranking of search
results. Since the literature is growing, PubMed may return
different articles for the same query at different time points.
This means that GoPubMed may display different papers for
the examples in this paper. All queries in this paper were
checked on February 8, 2005.) The abstract states that leva-
misole also inhibits phosphofructokinases. Most readers will
miss this statement.
Even if the user would try to reduce the number of papers
by filtering out the ones mentioning ‘levamisole inibitor’ (e.g.
query PubMed for ‘levamisole inhibitor’ NOT ‘phosphatase’),
he/she would miss the less obvious hits like ermphosphofruc-
tokinase, if both terms occur in the same abstract. Thus, even
advanced PubMed queries with Boolean logic cannot always
properly structure the search results.
The Gene Ontology
We propose to improve literature search by using ontologies,
which are controlled, hierarchical vocabularies. The ontologies
are used to categorize and explore abstracts. Currently, one of
the most prominent ontology is the Gene Ontology (GO) (1),
which has been designed for the annotation of gene products.
It comprises over 19 000 terms organized in three sub-
ontologies for cellular location, molecular function and
biological process.
Gene Ontology was initially created to reflect Drosophila in
the Flybase database, but has expanded to encompass many
other genomes as well as sequence and structure databases.
The hierarchical nature of GO allows one to quickly navigate
from a rather abstract to very specific terms. As an example,
there are maximally 16 terms from the root of the ontology to
the deepest and most refined leave concept in GO.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +49 351 463 40062; Fax: +49 351 463 40061; Email: ms@biotec.tu-dresden.de
ª The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W783–W786
doi:10.1093/nar/gki470
Extracting terms from abstracts
The main problem that needs to be solved before we can use
ontologies for literature exploration is term extraction. Finding
ontology terms exactly in the literature is rarely possible, as
authors do not write their abstracts with the GO in mind. For
example, the excerpt ‘tyrosine phosphorylation of a recently
identified STAT’ should match with the GO term ‘tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT protein’.
Therefore, a term extraction algorithm has to be able to drop
words from both the abstracts and the GO terms. It should have
the ability to rank the importance of a word. For example, the
word ‘activity’ occurs in many GO terms and is therefore not
so important, e.g. ‘phosphorylation’.
For GoPubMed we have developed a term extraction
algorithm that is based on (2). It uses local sequence alignment
of words of the abstract and the words of GO terms. We are
using a special tokenizer and stemmer for the GO terms. The
stemmed words of each term are then aligned against the
abstract text taking the information content of each word in
the GO term into account.
GoPubMed: ONTOLOGY-BASED
LITERATURE SEARCH
With term extraction and ontologies in place there is an
alternative to classical literature search. GoPubMed submits
keywords to PubMed, extracts GO terms from the retrieved
abstracts, and presents the induced ontology for browsing. The
induced ontology is the minimal subset of GO, which com-
prises all the GO terms found in the documents. The users
actually query PubMed. For an explanation of the user inter-
face consider Figure 1.
Example: which enzymes are inhibited by levamisole?
To illustrate the power of this approach let us consider the
levamisole example again. Consider Figures 1 and 2, which
show screen-shots of the GoPubMed web server. The user
wants to learn which enzymes are inhibited by levamisole.
He/she submits ’levamisole inhibitor’ with GoPubMed.
GoPubMed classifies the papers with GO and the user can
explore the ontological classification of the papers:
(i) Of the 100 papers some 50 papers mention terms, which
are ‘cellular components’, some 90 papers mention
‘biological processes’ and some 90 ‘molecular functions’.
(ii) Selecting molecular function and then catalytic activity,
the user finds cyclases, transferases, isomerases, hydro-
lases, lyases, small protein conjugating enzyme activity
and oxidoreductases.
(iii) Consider Figure 1. Hydrolases are mentioned in 81 papers.
Refining this term, the user learns that there are 73 occur-
rences of ‘phosphoric ester hydrolase activity’, 72 occur-
rences of ‘phosphoric mono-ester hydrolase activity’ and
Figure 1. User interface of GoPubMed. The screen-shot of GoPubMed displays the results for the query ‘levamisole inhibitor’ limited to 100 papers. On the left, part
of the GO relevant to the query is shown and on the right the abstracts for a selected GO term. The search terms are highlighted online in orange and the GO terms in
green. Right of each abstract is a list with all the GO terms for that abstract ordered by an accuracy percentage. For example, the term ’P-glycoprotein’, which is a
synonym for the GO term ‘xenobiotec transporting ATPase’, is found with 100% accuracy, while ‘lung development’ matches only with 72%, as only the word ‘lung’
occurs in the abstract. Synonyms, such as the term ‘P-glycoprotein’ above, are displayed in dark grey and the synonymous term is given in a tool-tip (please note that
Mozilla-based browsers do not currently break lines in tool-tips). Moving the mouse over the term displays the definition of the term in a tool-tip. The ontology on the
left shows the paths from the root of the ontology—‘cellular component’, ‘biological process’ and ‘molecular function’—to the currently selected GO term. The
number in brackets behind each GO term in the ontology is the number of papers the GO term or any of its children occur in. In the figure, the path from ‘molecular
function’ to ‘alkaline phosphatase’ is shown and the number 71 behind the term ‘alkaline phosphatase’ indicates that there are 71 papers mentioning alkaline
phosphatase. Clicking on the term displays the relevant abstracts, which confirm that levamisole inhibits alkaline phosphatase. Overall, the number of papers
containing a term and its children is a very good indicator to let users select the most frequent terms and, thus, best representatives. Instead of using the ontology
to browse through abstracts, users can also display all the abstracts in the same order as in PubMed with the additional benefit of displaying the GO terms and
search keywords. Users can also search within the ontology using the input field at the bottom of the ontology. GoPubMed searches are currently limited to 100 papers
per query. Answering a query takes 20 s.
W784 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
finally 71 occurrences of ‘alkaline phosphatase’. The titles
of these abstracts such as, for example, ‘Effects of alkaline
phosphatase and its inhibitor Levamisole . . .’ immediately
sustain that levamisole inhibits alkaline phosphatase.
(iv) Consider Figure 2. Exploring the transferases, which occur
in 14 papers, the user finds one article listed under ‘phos-
phofructokinase activity’. The abstract of this article states
that ‘levamisole directly inhibits tumor phosphofructoki-
nase’ (PMID 2947578).
(v) To summarize, GoPubMed allows users to quickly answer,
which enzymes are inhibited by levamisole. The most
obvious enzyme, alkaline phosphatase, is also the most
frequently occurring in GoPubMed. The lesser known
phosphofructokinases clearly show up in GoPubMed,
while being deeply hidden in a classical PubMed search
result list.
Example: author profiles
GoPubMed is generally useful to gain an overview of a set of
articles and to define a profile for these articles. This feature
can be used to quickly get an insight into the topics a researcher
is working on. Specifying, for example, the name and the
affiliation of a researcher as query to GoPubMed one will
be able explore the researcher’s interest and focus of research.
In particular, the induced GO can serve as a profile represent-
ing that researcher. As an example, consider Kai Simons in
Dresden. The PubMed query ‘simons dresden’ returns some
20 articles. The induced ontology for these papers indicates
that he is working on cell organization and biogenesis (within
the process ontology) and in particular on lipid raft formation,
a term that is found in 13 papers.
Example: actin
Which term is most obviously related to actin? Many research-
ers will promptly reply myosin. In GoPubMed such obvious
relationships can be identified by exploring the most fre-
quently occurring GO terms. In the case of actin, GoPubMed
suggests that some 80 papers mention ‘cellular components’
or any sub-terms, nearly 80 papers ‘cell’ or sub-terms, some
70 ‘intracellular’, 67 ‘cytoplasm’, 57 ‘cytoskeleton’, 50 ‘actin
cytoskeleton’ and 9 ‘myosin’. Thus, in only five clicks the user
can relate actin and myosin and even underpin this relationship
through the statements of associated abstracts, such as PMID
15679101: ‘Syntrophin was also able to inhibit actin-activated
myosin ATPase activity’.
Example: Rab5
After querying with Rab5 the ontology shows among the
biological processes the path physiological processes
! cellular physiological processes ! cell growth and/or
maintenance ! transport ! vesicle-mediated transport !
vesicle endocytosis. Selecting the papers mentioning vesicle
endocytosis, there are statements such as:
(i) PMID 15328530: The small GTPase Rab5 is a key regu-
lator of clathrin-mediated endocytosis.
(ii) PMID 15199393: Downregulation of several small
GTPases, such as rab5, rac1, and rhoA, which regulate
endocytosis, was found in CP-r cells.
Inspecting the ontology for cellular components there is a
path: cell! intracellular! cytoplasm! endosome! early
endosome. Associated articles contain, for example, the follow-
ing statements:
(i) PMID 12876219: Rab5 small GTPase is a famous regulator
of endocytic vesicular transport from plasma membrane to
early endosomes.
(ii) PMID 14636058: Rabaptin-5 interacts with Rab5 and is an
essential component of the fusion machinery for targeting
endocytic vesicles to early endosomes.
Example: lipid rafts
Querying for ‘lipid rafts cell adhesion’, the ontology displays
among others the terms molecular function ! binding !
protein binding ! cytoskeletal protein binding with children
‘spectrin binding’ and ‘actin binding’. The link between
spectrin/actin and the rafts is supported, for example, by
(i) PMID 11160430: However, lipid raft dispersion also
caused the depolymerization of the F-actin cytoskeleton,
which can also tether the receptor at specific sites.
(ii) PMID 12743109: In NCAM120-transfected cells, bI
spectrin is detectable predominantly in lipid rafts.
Figure 2. GoPubMed displaying the results for ‘levamisole inhibitor’ that contain the GO term phosphofructokinase.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W785
Example: molecular functions associated with
osteoclast differentiation
Querying with osteoclast differentiation bone resorption the
ontology shows the path molecular function ! signal trans-
ducer activity ! receptor activity ! receptor binding !
G-Protein coupled receptor binding ! chemokine receptor
binding with a descendent chemokine activity. The paper
with PMID 15265944 supports this statement. In this study,
we examined the effect of MIP-1g , a C–C chemokine family
member, on receptor activator of NF-kB ligand (RANKL)-
stimulated osteoclast differentiation, survival and activation.
Example: MMP2 and VEGF
Which morphogenetic processes can be associated with the
matrix metalloprotease, MMP2 and the vascular endothelial
growth factor, VEGF? The query ’MMP2 VEGF’ results in an
ontology with the path biological process ! development !
morphogenesis ! organogenesis ! blood vessel develop-
ment ! angiogenesis. For the latter, the paper PMID
15389539 provides the following evidence ‘which plays an
important role in activation of MMP-2 and VEGF to induce
angiogenic process and promotion of inflammation-associated
adenoma formation in mice’.
Comparison and conclusion
GoPubMed is related to three other tools, namely Textpresso
(3), XplorMed (4) and Vivisimo (vivisimo.com).
Textpresso (3) is an information retrieval system based on a
set of some 30 high-level categories, which can be seen as
a very shallow ontology. Parts of the category members are
based on the GO. Using these categories, Textpresso can
answer queries like ‘Which abstracts mention an allele and
a biological process in the title?’ There are four main differ-
ences between Textpresso and GoPubMed: First, Textpresso
uses only 30 categories for classification, while GoPubMed
uses the full GO, not limiting itself to the top concepts. Second,
Textpresso returns a list of relevant abstract, while GoPubMed
uses the deep ontology as vehicle to navigate through a large
result set in a non-sequential order. Third, Textpresso is
designed for full papers on Caenorhabditis elegans, while
GoPubMed works on all the PubMed abstracts. Fourth,
Textpresso tries to find the category terms directly in the text
only allowing for some variations in lower/uppercase letters
and plural forms. GoPubMed uses an algorithm, which allows
for gaps within matches and considers the information
content of words, which leads to a more refined term extrac-
tion. This is necessary, as most GO terms cannot be found
directly in free text.
XplorMed (4) maps PubMed results to the eight main
MeSH categories and then extracts topic keywords and
their co-occurrences. For the query ‘levamisole inhibitor’,
XplorMed returns 22 relevant co-occurring words such as
activity, protein, cell, which are, however, very general and
do not shed any light on the enzymes inhibited, for example.
Vivisimo is closely related to GoPubMed as it also uses an
ontology to explore search results. However, instead of the
GO, Vivisimo automatically derives an ontology from the
search results. While this ensures that the ontology closely
matches the articles, the ontology itself cannot be as well
structured as a hand-curated one like GO.
There are numerous other tools, which use the GO to explore
data other than literature abstracts. Many of them cater for the
annotation of gene expression data and are based on GOA, the
Gene Ontology Annotation, which annotates sequences with
GO terms. For a comprehensive list of these tools please refer
to the GO website www.geneontology.org.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We kindly thank the reviewers for their comments, which
helped to improve the paper. We gratefully acknowledge
support of the EU project REWERSE (IST-2004-506779).
Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this
article was provided by REWERSE.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Gene Ontology Consortium (2004) The Gene Ontology (GO) database and
informatics resource. Nucleic Acids Res., 1, D258–D261.
2. Delfs,R., Doms,A., Kozlenkov,A. and Schroeder,M. (2004) GoPubMed:
ontology-based literature search applied to GeneOntology and PubMed.
In Proceedings of German Bioinformatics Conference. LNBI Springer,
Bielefeld, Germany, pp. 169–178.
3. Mu¨ller,H.-M., Kenny,E.E. and Sternberg,P.W. (2003) Textpresso:
an ontology-based information retrieval and extraction system for
biological literature. PLoS Biol., 2, 2003.
4. Perez-Iratxeta,C., Perez,A.J., Bork,P. and Andrade,M.A. (2003) Update
on XplorMed: a web server for exploring scientific literature. Nucleic
Acids Res., 31, 3866–3868.
W786 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
