EzCatDB: the Enzyme Catalytic-mechanism Database
Nozomi Nagano*
Computational Biology Research Center (CBRC), National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
(AIST), 2-41-6 Aomi, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-0064, Japan and PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency, 4-1-8
Honcho Kawaguchi-shi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan
Received August 15, 2004; Revised and Accepted October 8, 2004
ABSTRACT
The EzCatDB (Enzyme Catalytic-mechanism
Database) specifically includescatalyticmechanisms
of enzymes in terms of sequences and tertiary
structures of enzymes, and proposed catalytic
mechanisms, along with ligand structures. The
EzCatDB groups enzyme data in the Protein Data
Bank (PDB) and the SWISS-PROTdatabasewith iden-
ticaldomaincompositions,EnzymeCommission (EC)
numbersandcatalyticmechanisms.TheEzCatDBcan
be queried by the type of catalytic residue, name and
type of ligand molecule that interacts with an enzyme
as a cofactor, substrate or product. It can provide
literature information, other database codes and
EC numbers. The EzCatDB provides ligand annota-
tion for enzymes in the PDB aswell as literature infor-
mation on structure and catalytic mechanisms.
Furthermore, the EzCatDB also provides a hierarchic
classification of catalytic mechanisms. This classifi-
cation incorporates catalyticmechanisms and active-
site structures of enzymes as well as basic reactions
and reactive parts of ligand molecules. The EzCatDB
is available at http://mbs.cbrc.jp/EzCatDB/.
INTRODUCTION
The organization of enzyme data is chaotic at various research
stages. Complete structures have been determined for some
enzymes. Nevertheless, for many enzymes, structural infor-
mation is either completely unavailable or available only for
non-catalytic domains. Even for those tertiary structures of
catalytic domains that are available, it is extremely difficult
to annotate catalytic sites and to propose a catalytic mechan-
ism without site-directed mutagenesis results or structures of
liganded forms of enzymes. In particular, the latter would lend
the user some insight into enzyme catalysis. In contrast,
catalytic mechanisms could be proposed for those enzymes
whose catalytic sites are annotated, and whose complex struc-
tures with ligand molecules have been determined. For these
reasons, enzyme structure data should be sorted in terms of the
research stage in which they are.
Meanwhile, the classification of enzymes has been defined
by the Enzyme Commission (EC) (1), based mainly on the
whole chemical structures of the substrates and products, and
on the cofactors involved. However, the EC classification
neglects protein sequence and structure information, which
are extremely important in catalytic mechanisms. Non-
homologous enzymes can catalyze similar reactions, while
homologous enzymes sometimes adopt different strategies
in terms of catalytic mechanisms (2,3). The EC classification
does not reflect such detailed mechanisms in terms of protein
structures. Moreover, some enzymes catalyze complex reac-
tions comprising several basic reactions, such as oxidation/
reduction, hydrolysis, transfer/elimination/addition of some
groups and isomerization, which are very difficult to express
using only one EC number.
To date, numerous enzyme structures have been determined
using X-ray crystallography and NMR. They have been depos-
ited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) (4). Furthermore, various
enzyme databases have been developed based on EC numbers
and enzyme sequence/structure information: BRENDA (5,6),
ExPASy (7), KEGG (8) and the Catalytic Site Atlas (CSA) (9).
Although the BRENDA, ExPASy and KEGG databases anno-
tate various enzyme data, including ligand molecules (cofac-
tors, substrates, products, inhibitors and activators), reaction
formulae and metabolic pathways, their detailed catalytic
mechanisms are neither annotated nor classified in terms of
sequence or structure information. The CSA database focuses
on the catalytic residues of enzymes that are involved in cat-
alysis. It also provides related literature. Nevertheless, the
catalytic mechanisms are whole systems of active site residues
and ligand molecules, including cofactors, substrates and pro-
ducts, which act interactively on the enzyme molecules. In
some enzymes, cofactors or some moieties of substrates are
involved directly in catalytic groups, instead of protein resi-
dues.
The EzCatDB is a novel enzyme catalytic-mechanism data-
base. It includes a search system that can retrieve some
*Tel: +81 3 3599 8043; Fax: +81 3 3599 8081; Email: n.nagano@aist.go.jp
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use permissions, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org.
ª 2005, the authors
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 33, Database issue ª Oxford University Press 2005; all rights reserved
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D407–D412
doi:10.1093/nar/gki080
enzyme groups specifically by their respective types of cata-
lytic residues, names or ligand molecule types that interact
with enzymes as cofactors, substrates or products. It also
allows querying of literature information, other database
entry codes and a specific research stage. Furthermore, the
EzCatDB specifically addresses the catalytic mechanisms of
enzymes. It is intended to classify them based on structural
information of enzymes and ligand molecules, and proposed
mechanisms. The EzCatDB is available at http://mbs.cbrc.jp/
EzCatDB/.
MAIN FEATURES OF EzCatDB
The contents of respective entries in the EzCatDB are
summarized in Table 1. Depending on the research stage
and other situations, additional information can be included.
Main features of the EzCatDB are described in subsequent
sections.
Search page
A search for enzyme data can be specified in various ways.
Each EzCatDB entry has been assigned EC numbers and
CATH numbers that represent hierarchic classification of
domain structures (10). Enzyme data can be retrieved using
those numbers. Although each number comprises four levels,
some levels can be abbreviated for the search. With a specific
entry code for the PDB (4), SWISS-PROT/ExPASy (7,11) and
KEGG database (8), the enzyme data related to the database
entries can be retrieved. Moreover, types of active-site resi-
dues can be specified along with ligand names or types that are
related to enzymes as cofactors, substrates or products. An
author name and key words in related literature can also be
specified in addition to the code for literature in the PubMed
database (12).Moreover, enzymedata can be retrievedwith spe-
cific stages of data: ‘Catalytic domain’ determined/annotated;
‘Active-site residues’ annotated; complex structures with
ligand molecules determined; literature reporting catalytic
mechanisms; catalytic mechanism classified in the EzCatDB;
and three-dimensional (3D) models of catalytic mechanism
constructed. In addition, any of those search items can be
combined to create a more specific search.
Table of annotated ligand for the PDB data
The ligand information will be useful when considering
catalytic mechanisms of the enzymes. Therefore, annotation
of ligand molecules bound to the enzyme structures was
performed manually for each PDB entry, then tabulated for
corresponding cofactors, substrates and products. The table
includes intermediate and transition-state data. Analogous
ligand molecules were analyzed in addition to ‘native’ ligand
molecules, then annotated as ‘analogues’ of cofactors, sub-
strates, products or intermediates. Thereby, those entries with
ligand molecules can be selected easily among many PDB
entries. An example of the table of annotated ligands is
shown in Figure 1. Annotated ligand data are linked to the
compound data in KEGG COMPOUND (8) and PDBsum
Ligand data (13), whereas the PDB entries are linked to the
PDBsum (13). Moreover, in the search page noted above,
those enzyme data with any PDB data, whose ligand mole-
cules could be annotated as cofactors, substrates, products,
intermediates or analogues of native ligand molecules, can
be retrieved. Meanwhile, entries without any PDB data, for
which the complex structures with ligand molecules have
been determined, can also be retrieved. This capability will
be useful for structural biologists as they search for target
enzymes.
Collection of literature information on catalytic
mechanisms
Information with reference to previous studies, especially
those studies related to protein structures and catalytic
mechanisms, have been collected for each enzyme in this
Table 1. Contents for each entry in EzCatDB
Information item Descriptiona Entries that contain information (number of entriesb)
DB code Entry ID in this EzCatDB database All entries (302)
RLCP catalysis type Classification of catalytic mechanism Entries with catalytic mechanism classified (163)
CATH Domain composition described
with CATH number (10)
All entries
Catalytic domain Catalytic domain annotated for CATH domains Entries with catalytic domain assigned (283)
EC Enzyme commission number (1) and
links to KEGG enzyme data (8)
All entries
3D-view of catalysis 3D-model of catalytic mechanisms Entries with constructed 3D-model of catalytic mechanism (7)
Related DB codes Links to other entries in the same family Entries with links to related data within EzCatDB (homologous data)
Enzyme name Nomenclature in the SWISS-PROT (11) and KEGG (8) All entries
KEGG pathways Related metabolic pathways with links to KEGG data (8) Entries with links to related data in other database (184)
SWISS-PROT
information
Basic information on activity, cofactor
and links to SWISS-PROT (11)
Entries with links to related data in other database
Table of ligand annotation Annotation of ligand molecules in the PDB structures All entries
Active-site residues Catalytic residues, cofactor-binding
residues and modified residues
Entries with active site residues annotated (276)
Catalytic mechanism References on catalytic mechanism are annotated Entries with literature on catalytic mechanisms (274)
References List of related references with links to PubMed (12) All entries
Comments Additional information for catalytic
mechanisms based on literature
Entries with additional information (216)
aReference numbers are given in parentheses.
bNumber of entries may change through updates.
D408 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
database. A link to the abstract page allows users to access
that literature, which is maintained in the PubMed database
(12). The literature on catalytic mechanisms was annotated
manually.
Hierarchic classification of catalytic mechanisms, RLCP
A novel classification of enzyme catalytic mechanisms, which
clusters catalytic mechanisms at four levels, has also been
developed:
(i) Basic Reaction (R),
(ii) Ligand group involved in catalysis (L),
(iii) Type of Catalytic mechanism (C),
(iv) Residues/cofactors located on Proteins (P).
‘Basic Reaction’ represents reaction types such as hydrolysis,
phosphorolysis and transfer, which are mostly related to the
primary number of each EC number. Reactive groups of
substrates are classified at the second level (L). Whereas
EC numbers have been based on whole chemical formulae
of substrates and products, only the reactive parts of ligand
molecules are considered at the ‘L’ level. At the third level (C),
the catalytic mechanisms are classified systematically based
on the types of catalysts, such as nucleophile, acid, base,
stabilizer and modulator; existence of cofactors; SN2/SN1 (or
associative/dissociative) reactions; and also on the way in
which these catalytic groups function interactively. Table 2
summarizes these determinants of catalytic-mechanism
classification. The types of catalysts are classified based on
the reported definition by Bartlett et al. (14), which have been
modified slightly.
Types of catalytic residues and cofactors with the ligating
residues are classified at the fourth level (P). Even though
enzymes have got the same reaction mechanisms, they can
have different catalytic residues. Information on catalytic
mechanism and active sites has been manually collected
from the related literature, the PDB and the SWISS-PROT/
ExPASy data (1,7,11). Whereas the conventional EC numbers
are a kind of nomenclature of enzymes, the RLCP classifies the
catalytic reactions. Therefore, some enzymes could have sev-
eral RLCP classes, rather than only one class, if they catalyze
more than one reaction. Furthermore, whereas whole chemical
structures of substrates and products were examined for EC
classification, the RLCP specifically addresses the reactive
part of the ligand molecules. For that reason, the first two
levels of the RLCP classification, the ‘R’ and ‘L’ levels,
can be correlated with the EC numbers.
Table 2. Summary of major determinants of catalytic-mechanism classifica-
tion for hydrolysis reactions
Determinants Possible types for determinants
1st Nucleophile Watera/substrateb/catalytic residue
Catalytic groups Only cofactor/enzyme residues and
substrates/both cofactor and
enzyme residues and substrates
SN2/SN1 reactions SN2 (associative) reaction/SN1
(dissociative) reaction/unclear
Base Catalytic residue/substrate-assisted/non-existent
Acid Catalytic residue/substrate-assisted/non-existent
Target of 1st base Waterc/nucleophile, other than waterd/
other site/non-existent
Stabilizer Catalytic residue/substrate-assisted/non-existent
Modulator Catalytic residue/substrate-assisted/non-existent
aFor transfer reactions, this type will be replaced by ‘acceptor group of sub-
strate’. For phosphorolysis reaction, this will be ‘phosphate’.
bFor transfer reactions, this type will be replaced by ‘group of substrate, other
than acceptor group’.
cFor transfer reactions, this type will be replaced by ‘transferred group of sub-
strate’. For phosphorolysis reaction, this will be ‘phosphate’.
dFor transfer reactions, this type will be replaced by ‘nucleophile (catalytic
residue or acceptor group of substrate)’.
Figure 1.Table of annotated ligand for the PDB entries. This table is for cytidylate kinases (EC 2.7.4.14). The PDB entries are listed at left, whereas the ligand names
are listed across the top row. Types of ligands are also classified. Whereas the PDB entries are linked to the PDBsum (13), the annotated ligand data are linked to
KEGG COMPOUND data (8) and PDBsum ligand data (13).
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D409
Hydrolysis and transfer reactions have been the primary
focus of the RLCP classification effort, as hydrolases and trans-
ferases present the majority of enzymes.Moreover, elucidation
of basic reactions engenders better understanding of compli-
cated reactions that comprise several reactions. For example,
many ligases catalyze two successive transfer reactions: phos-
phoryl transfer and acyl group transfer. Indeed, active sites and
catalytic mechanisms of ligases are quite similar to those of
kinases (phosphoryl transferases). Other reaction mechanisms
such as elimination (EC numbers; 4.-.-.-) and isomerization
(EC numbers; 5.-.-.-) will be available soon.
An example of the RLCP view is shown in Figure 2. This
RLCP site is linked to the EzCatDB entries, catalytic mechan-
isms of which have been classified, but this page can also be
viewed independently from the EzCatDB, at http://mbs.cbrc.
jp/EzCatDB/RLCP/.
Three-dimensional view of catalytic mechanisms
Proposed catalytic mechanisms of the enzymes tend to be
indicated in schematic diagrams in papers, rather than in 3D
graphical diagrams.Toelucidate detailed functionsof enzymes,
3D models of the catalytic mechanisms should be constructed
and presented. For some enzyme data, their catalytic mechan-
isms were modeled from the PDB structure data, based on the
proposed mechanism reported in the literature. Those model
structures were constructed using the Insight II/Discover appli-
cation (Accelrys Inc.). Such mechanism models can be viewed
with a 3Dgraphics application, 3D-EzCat, whichwas developed
for this database, on a Java applet platform with Java3D. The
application allows users to load and view a catalytic mechanism
as a series of snapshots, with 3D arrows indicated between cat-
alytic atoms, and with half-bonds and one-and-a-half-bonds as
well as double-bonds between the reactive atoms to show the
processes of transition-states or intermediates. Figure 3 shows
an example of the 3D-view of catalytic mechanism. Such 3D-
catalytic-mechanisms will be helpful to elucidate catalysis and
to design novel drugs that can inhibit or activate the enzymes.
Although the Insight II/Discover application is usually used
for homology modeling, it can also be used for 3D-catalytic-
mechanism modeling. This application has several kinds of
force-field, such as AMBER (15) and extensible systematic
force field (ESFF) (16). The ESFF was used for the 3D-
catalytic-mechanism modeling because it covers many kinds
of atoms, including even magnesium ions and other metals,
during optimization of structures. Some metals are essential
for reactions such as phosphoryl transfer, so that the ESFF
is the most useful force-field. The 3D-coordinates from the
PDB structures with substrate molecules, or their analogous
molecules, usually started as initial structures. Using the
Figure 2. RLCP page for serine hydrolases. Catalytic mechanisms are clustered at four levels in the RLCP classification. Related enzyme entries are listed at the
bottom of this page.
D410 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
‘Biopolymer’ module of InsightII, some groups and atoms can
be modified. Hydrogen atoms can be added to the PDB struc-
tures easily. Considering the charge and protonation states of
active-site residues (based on literature information), the resi-
due types (protonated or non-protonated residue) can also be
replaced. During optimization, the distances, angles and dihe-
dral angles between reacting atoms and groups can be speci-
fied to make them closer to each other, using the ‘Restraint’
option of the software. Use of the ‘Restraint’ option is espe-
cially important to model transition-state structures, which
have energetically unlikely conformations.
DATA IN EzCatDB
Enzyme data with tertiary structures deposited in the PDB, to
which EC numbers and CATH domain classification (version
2.4) had been assigned, have been analyzed and annotated in
the EzCatDB (4,10). The EzCatDB groups enzyme data in the
PDB and the SWISS-PROT database with identical domain
compositions, EC numbers and catalytic mechanisms (4,7,11).
When the EC numbers in the PDB entries are inconsistent with
those in SWISS-PROT data, those numbers annotated in
SWISS-PROT/ExPASy data are assigned to the EzCatDB
entries (4,7,11). Some enzyme sequences from different
organisms can be homologous. Those PDB data and their
corresponding SWISS-PROT codes from different organisms
can be included in the same EzCatDB entries if they have the
same EC numbers, catalytic mechanisms and domain compo-
sitions, and structures in terms of the CATH classification
(1,4,7,10,11). In the case of a multienzyme having more
than one chain, non-homologous SWISS-PROT data can be
included in the same EzCatDB entries if they are found to
function together as enzyme complexes (7,11). Moreover, in
the case of some enzymes that have more than one EC number,
the corresponding EzCatDB entries could have more than one
Figure 3.A snapshot of 3D-viewof catalyticmechanism (3D-EzCat applet): in this snapshot, the yellow arc arrow indicates that the oxygen atomof ‘CAQ’molecule
makes a nucleophilic attack on the methyl group of ‘SAM’ molecule.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D411
EC number (1). In contrast, some enzymes catalyze compli-
cated reactions that are composed of several ‘Basic Reactions’.
For example, many ligases (EC 6.-.-.-) catalyze two successive
transfer reactions. In such cases, EzCatDB entries could have
more than one RLCP class. In this manner, clustering allows
some EzCatDB entries to contain more than one SWISS-
PROT code, EC number or RLCP class.
Currently, 300 enzyme entries, mainly for hydrolases (EC
numbers; 3.-.-.-) and transferases (EC numbers; 2.-.-.-) related
to 1500 PDB data, are deposited in the EzCatDB. Regarding
3D-views of catalytic mechanisms, such models have been
prepared for seven entries. The EzCatDB is updated on a
weekly basis at the rate of roughly 10 entries a week.
FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
Only hydrolysis and transfer reactions have been classified in
the RLCP. However, the reactions that are catalyzed by ligases
(EC numbers; 6.-.-.-) and some isomerases (EC numbers;
5.-.-.-) that catalyze intramolecular transfer reactions can be
included in the category. Other reactions that are catalyzed by
oxidoreductases, lyases and isomerases must be classified into
several types of ‘Basic Reaction’ in the RLCP. Through the
classification of catalytic mechanisms and ligand annotation,
the relationships between the active-site structures and func-
tions of enzymes can be elucidated in detail.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank Yuko Hasegawa, Keitarou Nonaka,
Kenji Morita, Munehiro Sugiyama and Junko Some, who
assisted in the annotation of enzyme data and collection of
the literature. I also would like to thank Dr Yutaka Akiyama
and Dr Tamotsu Noguchi for supporting this project, and
Dr Paul Horton for correcting the manuscript. This project
was supported by a grant from PRESTO, organized by the
Japan Science and Technology Corporation (JST).
REFERENCES
1. Webb,E.C. (1992) Enzyme Nomenclature 1992. Recommendations of
the Nomenclature Committee of the International Union of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology. Academic Press, New York, NY.
2. Todd,A.E., Orengo,C.A. andThornton,J.M. (2001)Evolution of function
in protein superfamilies, from a structural perspective. J. Mol. Biol.,
307, 1113–1143.
3. Todd,A.E., Orengo,C.A. and Thornton,J.M. (2002) Plasticity of enzyme
active sites. Trends Biochem. Sci., 27, 419–426.
4. Berman,H.M., Westbrook,J., Feng,Z., Gilliland,G., Bhat,T.N.,
Weissig,H., Shindyalov,I.N. and Bourne,P.E. (2000) The Protein Data
Bank. Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 235–242.
5. Schomburg,I., Chang,A. and Schomburg,D. (2002) BRENDA, enzyme
data and metabolic information. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 47–49.
6. Schomburg,I., Chang,A., Hofmann,O., Ebeling,C., Ehrentreich,F. and
Schomburg,D. (2002) BRENDA: a resource for enzyme data and
metabolic information. Trends Biochem. Sci., 27, 54–56.
7. Gasteiger,E., Gattiker,A., Hoogland,C., Ivanyi,I., Appel,R.D. and
Bairoch,A. (2003) ExPASy: the proteomics server for in-depth protein
knowledge and analysis. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 3784–3788.
8. Kanehisa,M., Goto,S., Kawashima,S., Okuno,Y. and Hattori,M. (2004)
The KEGG resources for deciphering the genome. Nucleic Acids Res.,
32, D277–D280.
9. Porter,C.T., Bartlett,G.J. and Thornton,J.M. (2004) The Catalytic Site
Atlas: a resource of catalytic sites and residues identified in enzymes
using structural data. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D129–D133.
10. Orengo,C.A., Michie,A.D., Jones,S., Jones,D.T., Swindells,M.B. and
Thornton,J.M. (1997) CATH—a hierarchic classification of protein
domain structures. Structure, 5, 1093–1108.
11. Bairoch,A., Boeckmann,B., Ferro,S. and Gasteiger,E. (2004) SWISS-
PROT: juggling between evolution and stability. Brief Bioinformatics,
5, 39–55.
12. McEntyre,J. and Lipman,D. (2001) PubMed: bridging the information
gap. CMAJ, 164, 1317–1319.
13. Laskowski,R.A. (2001) PDBsum: summaries and analyses of PDB
structures. Nucleic Acids Res., 29, 221–222.
14. Bartlett,G.J., Porter,C.T., Borkakoti,N. and Thornton,J.M. (2002)
Analysis of catalytic residues in enzyme active sites. J. Mol. Biol.,
324, 105–121.
15. Weiner,S.J., Kollman,P.A., Case,D.A., Singh,U.C., Ghio,C.,
Alagona,G., Profeta,S.,Jr and Weiner,P. (1984) A new force field for
molecular mechanical simulation of nucleic acids and proteins.
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 106, 765–784.
16. Shi,S., Yan,L., Yang,Y., Fisher-Shaulsky,J. and Thacher,T. (2003) An
extensible and systematic force field, ESFF, for molecular modeling of
organic, inorganic, and organometallic systems. J. Comput. Chem.,
24, 1059–1076.
D412 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
