ESEﬁnder: a web resource to identify
exonic splicing enhancers
Luca Cartegni, Jinhua Wang, Zhengwei Zhu, Michael Q. Zhang and Adrian R. Krainer*
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA
Received February 14, 2003; Revised and Accepted April 7, 2003
ABSTRACT
Point mutations frequently cause genetic diseases
by disrupting the correct pattern of pre-mRNA
splicing. The effect of a point mutation within a
coding sequence is traditionally attributed to the
deduced change in the corresponding amino acid.
However, some point mutations can have much
more severe effects on the structure of the encoded
protein, for example when they inactivate an exonic
splicing enhancer (ESE), thereby resulting in exon
skipping. ESEs also appear to be especially impor-
tant in exons that normally undergo alternative
splicing. Different classes of ESE consensus motifs
have been described, but they are not always easily
identiﬁed. ESEﬁnder (http://exon.cshl.edu/ESE/) is a
web-based resource that facilitates rapid analysis of
exon sequences to identify putative ESEs respon-
sive to the human SR proteins SF2/ASF, SC35,
SRp40 and SRp55, and to predict whether exonic
mutations disrupt such elements.
INTRODUCTION
Accurate and efficient removal of introns from pre-mRNAs is
essential to ensure correct gene expression. However, the
information content present in the canonical splice signals
(50 splice site, branch site and 30 splice site) is insufficient to
precisely define exons, as a large excess of sequences that
conform to these weakly defined consensus elements is present
in introns but these sequences are never used (1,2). Additional
regulatory cis-elements exist in the form of splicing enhancers
and silencers (3). These elements become particularly
important in the presence of weak splice sites or when
alternative splicing is involved. It is estimated that over 60% of
human genes undergo alternative splicing (4). Not only is this
one of the main mechanisms by which the relatively small
number of human genes accounts for the complexity of the
proteome, but the generation of different isoforms can be
differentially regulated depending on developmental stage, cell
type and in response to a wide array of physiological and
pathological signals (4,5).
Up to 50% of all point mutations responsible for genetic
diseases cause aberrant splicing (3). Such mutations can
disrupt splicing by directly inactivating or creating a splice site,
by activating a cryptic splice site or by interfering with splicing
regulatory elements. Point mutations in the coding regions of
genes were traditionally assumed to exert their effects by
altering single amino acids in the encoded proteins. However,
some of these exonic mutations also affect pre-mRNA splicing.
Nonsense, missense and even translationally silent mutations
can disrupt exonic splicing enhancers (ESEs) and cause the
splicing machinery to skip the mutant exon, with dramatic
effects on the structure of the gene product. Since in most cases
the effects of mutations are predicted solely based on genomic
sequence information, the prevalence of mutations whose
primary consequence is aberrant splicing has been substan-
tially underestimated (3).
ESEs are common in both alternative and constitutive exons,
where they act as binding sites for Ser/Arg-rich proteins (SR
proteins), a family of conserved splicing factors that participate
in multiple steps of the splicing pathway (6). SR proteins bind
to ESEs through their RNA-binding domain, and promote
exon definition by recruiting spliceosomal components via
protein–protein interactions mediated by their RS domain and/
or by antagonizing the action of nearby splicing silencers.
Different SR proteins have different substrate specificities, and
multiple classes of ESE consensus motifs have been described
(3,6,7).
We previously used functional SELEX [Systematic
Evolution of Ligands by Exponential enrichment (8)], to
identify ESE motifs specific for a subset of SR proteins (9,10).
In this approach, a natural enhancer in an IgM minigene was
replaced by random 20 nt sequences from an oligonucleotide
library. The resulting pool of minigenes was then used to
generate pre-mRNA transcripts, which were spliced as a pool
in vitro under conditions in which splicing was completely
dependent on both an ESE and a recombinant SR protein able
to productively recognize this ESE. Spliced mRNAs were gel-
purified, amplified and used to rebuild minigene templates,
allowing the procedure to be iterated. Specific ESE motifs were
thus gradually enriched and eventually cloned, sequenced and
individually tested. Using the sequences that resulted from the
functional selection procedure, we derived nucleotide-fre-
quency matrices (available on the web site), which define
consensus motifs for these SR proteins. The motifs are short
(6–8 nt), degenerate and can partially overlap (3) (Fig. 1). Here
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: þ1 516 3678417; Fax: þ1 516 3678453; Email: krainer@cshl.edu
3568–3571 Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 13
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkg616
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 31, No. 13 # Oxford University Press 2003; all rights reserved
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 22, 2013
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
we describe the implementation of the motif-scoring matrices
in a web-based program called ESEfinder (release 2.0: http://
exon.cshl.edu/ESE/) which allows scanning of nucleotide
sequences to predict putative ESEs responsive to the human
SR proteins SF2/ASF, SC35, SRp40 or SRp55. ESEfinder has
been freely available for non commercial uses since May 2002,
and it has already been used successfully to predict ESEs and/
or their disruption in a variety of genes, including ACF (11),
BRCA1 (12), BRCA2 (13), FBN1 (14), IGF1 (15), PDHA1
(16), SMN1 (17), SMN2 (17), TNFRSF5 (18), CFTR (19,20)
and others.
DESCRIPTION
ESEfinder performs searches for putative ESEs in query
sequences by using weight matrices corresponding to the
motifs for four different human SR proteins. The matrices are
based on frequency values derived from the alignment of
winner sequences obtained by functional SELEX experiments,
adjusted on the basis of the background nucleotide frequency
of the initial SELEX library, which was made by chemical
synthesis (9,10). We have now developed a user-friendly
WWW interface and a representation of the program output is
shown in Figure 2.
The query sequences can be directly pasted into the input
box or can be uploaded from a text file. Multiple sequences can
be analyzed simultaneously, provided that a FASTA-format
descriptive line (beginning with ‘>’) precedes them (Fig. 2A).
Even though ESEfinder is an RNA analysis tool, only standard
DNA notation is accepted (A, C, G and T, not U). The program
will ignore any character other than A, C, G and T, including
spaces and paragraph breaks. Both upper and lower cases are
accepted but the output lines will be in upper case.
The user selects which matrices will be used, up to all four
matrices simultaneously. For each matrix, the output is
provided as a series of scores calculated in 1 nt increments.
In the initial output window (Fig. 2B), only the ‘hits’ or ‘high-
score motifs’ are displayed, giving the position of the first
nucleotide, the sequence of the motif match, and the calculated
score. A score is considered a high score when it is greater than
the threshold value defined in the input page. Any score can be
chosen as the cutoff value by selecting the ‘custom’ button and
typing the desired value in the box. We suggest that for most
routine analyses, users select the ‘default’ threshold values,
above which we consider a score for a given sequence to be
potentially significant. Our default threshold values are defined
as the median of the highest scores for each sequence in a set
of 30 randomly chosen 20 nt sequences (from the starting pool
used for functional SELEX experiments). Such values are
currently set as follows: SF2/ASF, 1.956; SC35, 2.383; SRp40,
2.670; SRp55, 2.676. Any refinements or updates will be
incorporated as they become available. From the output
window, the complete set of scores for the input sequence
can be selected (Fig. 2C).
To facilitate the interpretation of the results and to
standardize their representation, we implemented a graphic
output of the query that is accessible from the output page (Fig.
2D). The query (exonic) sequence is reproduced along the
x-axis. The presence of a high-score motif (above the selected
threshold) is indicated by the color-coded bars. The height of
the bars represents the motif scores, whereas their width
indicates the length and position (6–8 nt).
DISCUSSION
ESEfinder allows for the identification of putative ESEs and
one of its most useful applications is the correct interpretation
of the effects of disease-associated point mutations or
polymorphisms. We have previously shown that ESEs
predicted by this matrix-based approach tend to cluster in
regions where natural enhancers have been experimentally
mapped and are more frequent in exons than in introns (9,10).
In a database of 50 human point mutations known to cause in
vivo exon skipping, the majority reduced or eliminated at least
one predicted ESE (12). Considering that we can currently
search for putative ESEs using matrices for just four SR
proteins, it is likely that a large fraction of skipping-associated
mutations do indeed cause ESE disruption, and that a higher
predictive value will be obtained when matrices for other
relevant splicing factors become available. A computational
approach (RESCUE-ESE) was recently described (7), in which
putative ESE motifs are identified by comparing the frequency
of hexamers in exons surrounded by ‘weak’ versus ‘strong’
splice sites. Several hexamer families enriched in the weak
exons, which likely depend on enhancers for correct expres-
sion, were identified, and some of these overlap with the motifs
defined by ESEfinder.
The ESEfinder matrices have been used to show that
disruption of ESEs recognized by various SR proteins cause
exon skipping in several genes (11–18). In some contexts,
ESEfinder appears to be remarkably accurate. For example,
using a BRCA1-derived three-exon minigene system, which is
Figure 1. Pictograms (1) representing the functional-SELEX consensus ESE
motifs. The height of each letter reflects the frequency of each nucleotide at
a given position, after adjusting for background nucleotide composition. At
each position, the nucleotides are shown from top to bottom in order of
decreasing frequency; orange letters indicate above-background frequencies.
For each motif, the threshold value and the highest possible score are provided.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 13 3569
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 22, 2013
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Figure 2. Example of ESEfinder input and output windows. (A) Input window. Two query sequences, BRCA1 exon 18 and a single point mutation variant (E1694X)
are shown. All four matrices and their default threshold values were selected. Additional information is available from the tab links. (B) Output window. High
scores, tabulated under each SR protein, are listed. Note that an SF2/ASF high score (arrow) has been abrogated by the mutation. (C) Output window with complete
list of scores. (D) Graphic output window. High scores are represented as color-coded bars. The height of each bar indicates the score value, and its width and
placement on the x-axis represent the length of the motif (6–8 nt) and its position along the sequence.
3570 Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 13
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 22, 2013
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
very responsive to point mutations within a critical ESE, we
showed that when multiple SF2/ASF-dependent ESEs were
substituted for each other or mutated, there was a strong
correlation between exon-inclusion efficiency and the matrix
scores (12,17). Furthermore, ESEfinder was used in combina-
tion with mutational analysis, in vitro and in vivo splicing, and
site-specific UV-crosslinking experiments to demonstrate that
the translationally silent, single-nucleotide difference between
SMN1 and SMN2 disrupts an ESE, which in SMN1 is directly
recognized by splicing factor SF2/ASF (17). The disruption of
the SF2/ASF-dependent ESE causes inefficient SMN2 exon 7
inclusion. In the absence of SMN1, SMN2 is unable to produce
enough full-length SMN protein, thus resulting in a spinal
muscular atrophy phenotype. Finally, we exploited the
degeneracy of the consensus motif, and used ESEfinder to
design a second-site suppressor mutation that reconstituted
the high-score motif and fully restored exon 7 inclusion in the
SMN2 context in vivo and in vitro, as predicted (17). More than
a dozen wild-type and mutant SF2/ASF heptamer motifs were
tested in the SMN and BRCA1 systems (12,17). All of the
motifs that maintained a high-score promoted exon inclusion
in a manner roughly proportional to the motif score, even
though, because of the degeneracy of the consensus motif,
some of them did not share a single nucleotide. All of the
motifs with below-threshold scores resulted in reduced levels
of exon inclusion.
It should be emphasized, however, that the presence of a
high-score motif in a sequence does not necessarily identify
that sequence as a functional ESE, and that, in general, there is
not a very strict quantitative correlation between numerical
scores and ESE activity. Until stronger predictive algorithms
are available, direct experimental evidence will remain
necessary before safely concluding that a particular sequence
can act as an ESE in its natural context. Conversely, the lack of
a high-score motif does not imply that no ESEs are present.
Several important variables, such as the local sequence context,
the splice-site strengths, the position of the ESE along the exon
and the presence of silencer elements, are likely to play a
significant role in ESE activity. Furthermore, even mutations
that abrogate genuine ESEs might not always exert a noticeable
effect, because of the presence of redundant ESEs nearby.
Finally, it should be noted that our matrices were defined in a
mammalian system and reflect the sequence specificity of the
human SR proteins. Their relevance to other species depends
on the extent of conservation of each SR protein.
The development and refinement of reliable prediction tools
for auxiliary splicing elements will have important implica-
tions for our ability to accurately identify the exon/intron
structures of genes and predict their expression profile, to
correctly interpret the effects of point mutations and/or
polymorphisms, and to assess phenotypic risk.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank the many users that sent us useful comments and
suggestions which have been incorporated in the current
release. We thank Xavier Roca for comments on the manu-
script and Gengxin Chen for assistance. This work was
supported by NIH grants GM42699 to A.R.K. and CA88351
and HG01696 to M.Q.Z.
REFERENCES
1. Burge,C.B., Tuschl,T. and Sharp,P.A. (1999) Splicing of precursors to
messenger RNAs by the spliceosome. In Gesteland,R.F., Cech,T.R. and
Atkins,J.F. (eds) The RNA World II, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press,
Cold Spring Harbor, NY, pp. 525–560.
2. Sun,H. and Chasin,L.A. (2000) Multiple splicing defects in an intronic
false exon. Mol. Cell. Biol., 20, 6414–6425.
3. Cartegni,L., Chew,S.L. and Krainer,A.R. (2002) Listening to silence and
understanding nonsense: exonic mutations that affect splicing. Nature Rev.
Genet., 3, 285–298.
4. Maniatis,T. and Tasic,B. (2002) Alternative pre-mRNA splicing and
proteome expansion in metazoans. Nature, 418, 236–243.
5. Ladd,A.N. and Cooper,T.A. (2002) Finding signals that regulate alternative
splicing in the post-genomic era. Genome Biol., 3, reviews0008.
6. Graveley,B.R. (2000) Sorting out the complexity of SR protein functions.
RNA, 6, 1197–1211.
7. Fairbrother,W.G., Yeh,R.F., Sharp,P.A. and Burge,C.B. (2002) Predictive
identification of exonic splicing enhancers in human genes. Science, 297,
1007–1013.
8. Tuerk,C. and Gold,L. (1990) Systematic evolution of ligands by
exponential enrichment: RNA ligands to bacteriophage T4 DNA
polymerase. Science, 249, 505–510.
9. Liu,H.X., Zhang,M. and Krainer,A.R. (1998) Identification of functional
exonic splicing enhancer motifs recognized by individual SR proteins.
Genes Dev., 12, 1998–2012.
10. Liu,H.X., Chew,S.L., Cartegni,L., Zhang,M.Q. and Krainer,A.R. (2000)
Exonic splicing enhancer motif recognized by human SC35 under splicing
conditions. Mol. Cell. Biol., 20, 1063–1071.
11. Dance,G.S., Sowden,M.P., Cartegni,L., Cooper,E., Krainer,A.R. and
Smith,H.C. (2002) Two proteins essential for apolipoprotein B mRNA
editing are expressed from a single gene through alternative splicing.
J. Biol. Chem., 277, 12703–12709.
12. Liu,H.X., Cartegni,L., Zhang,M.Q. and Krainer,A.R. (2001) A mechanism
for exon skipping caused by nonsense or missense mutations in BRCA1
and other genes. Nature Genet., 27, 55–58.
13. Fackenthal,J.D., Cartegni,L., Krainer,A.R. and Olopade,O.L. (2002)
BRCA2 T2722R is a deleterious allele that causes exon skipping.
Am. J. Hum. Genet., 71, 625–631.
14. Caputi,M., Kendzior,R.J.,Jr and Beemon,K.L. (2002) A nonsense
mutation in the fibrillin-1 gene of a Marfan syndrome patient induces
NMD and disrupts an exonic splicing enhancer. Genes Dev., 16,
1754–1759.
15. Smith,P.J., Spurrell,E.L., Coakley,J., Hinds,C.J., Ross,R.J.M., Krainer,A.R.
and Chew,S.L. (2002) An exonic splicing enhancer in human IGF-I
pre-mRNA mediates recognition of alternative exon 5 by the
serine-arginine protein splicing factor-2/alternative splicing factor.
Endocrinology, 143, 146–154.
16. Mine,M., Brivet,M., Touati,G., Grabowski,P.J., Abitbol,M. and Marsac,C.
(2003) Splicing error in E1 alpha PDH mRNA caused by novel intronic
mutation responsible for lactic acidosis and mental retardation.
J. Biol. Chem., 278, 11768–11772.
17. Cartegni,L. and Krainer,A.R. (2002) Disruption of an SF2/ASF-dependent
exonic splicing enhancer in SMN2 causes spinal muscular atrophy in
the absence of SMN1. Nature Genet., 30, 377–384.
18. Ferrari,S., Giliani,S., Insalaco,A., Al-Ghonaium,A., Soresina,A.R.,
Loubser,M., Avanzini,M.A., Marconi,M., Badolato,R., Ugazio,A.G.
et al. (2001) Mutations of CD40 gene cause an autosomal recessive
form of immunodeficiency with hyper IgM. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA, 98, 12614–12619.
19. Pagani,F., Buratti,E., Stuani,C. and Baralle,F.E. (2003) Missense, nonsense
and neutral mutations define juxtaposed regulatory elements of splicing in
CFTR Exon 9. J. Biol. Chem., PMID: 12732620.
20. Pagani,F., Stuani,C., Tzetis,M., Kanavakis,E., Efthymiadou,A., Doudou-
nakis,S., Casals,T. and Baralle,F.E. (2003) New type of disease causing
mutations: the example of the composite exonic regulatory elements of
splicing in CFTR exon 12. Hum. Mol. Genet., 12, 1111–1120.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 13 3571
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 22, 2013
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
