Spontaneous sharp bending of DNA: role of
melting bubbles
Chongli Yuan, Elizabeth Rhoades1, Xiong Wen Lou and Lynden A. Archer*
School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering and 1Department of Applied and Engineering Physics,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
Received March 8, 2006; Revised May 5, 2006; Accepted May 9, 2006
ABSTRACT
The role of centrally located and distributed base
pair mismatches (‘melting bubbles’) on localized
bending and stiffness of short dsDNA fragments
is evaluated using time-dependent fluorescence
lifetime measurements. Distributed melting bubbles
are found to induce larger bending angles and
decreased levels of stiffness in DNA than centrally
located ones of comparable overall size. Our results
indicate that spontaneous local opening-up of the
DNA duplex could facilitate sharp bending of short
DNA strands even in the absence of DNA binding
proteins. We also find that the occurrence of two
closely spaced melting bubbles will generally be
favored when a large energetic barrier must be over-
come in forming the desired bent DNA structure.
INTRODUCTION
Gene expression often requires the interplay of two distant
genetic regions and thus sharp bending of DNA is an essential
component of gene functioning. Conventional thinking holds
that bending of short DNA strands below the persistent
length, Np  150 bp, is facilitated by DNA binding proteins,
such as integration host factor (IHF) and a histone-like pro-
tein (HU) (1). DNA cyclization experiments provide a con-
venient method for evaluating this hypothesis (2,3). In a
typical cyclization experiment, DNA fragments are designed
with two complementary sticky ends. A cyclization reaction
is then performed by adding DNA ligase, e.g. T4 DNA ligase,
to the DNA solution. The efficiency of the cyclization reac-
tion (J), i.e. the relative yield of cyclized versus linear
DNA product, is related to the bending rigidity of the DNA
analyte. By analyzing the J factor using Zhang–Crothers (4)
or Shimada–Yamakawa (5) theory, it is in fact possible to
extract the intrinsic rigidity of short DNA fragments.
Fundamental understanding of how a short DNA fragment
forms a complete cycle during the cyclization assay is then
an important first step for developing a more complete
understanding of how DNA is packaged and transcribed in
cells. This information should also make it possible to deter-
mine how DNA achieves the required enhancement in flexib-
ility to form sharp bends at minimum energetic cost.
Recent cyclization experiments by Widom’s group using
short DNA fragments below the persistence length indicate
that even these fragments spontaneously form sharp bends
(6,7). This finding simultaneously challenges conventional
thinking about the role of DNA bending catalysts and ques-
tions the suitability of classical theories based on worm-like
chain (WLC) models for interpreting bending stiffness of
double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) (8,9).
It has long been suspected that local, spontaneous opening-
up of the dsDNA duplex can dramatically enhance DNA flex-
ibility, perhaps explaining its ability to form sharp bends.
Treating DNA as a kinkable elastic chain, simple models
have been proposed to describe this effect (8–10). Single or
multiple bubble(s) on DNA backbone is/are capable of creat-
ing local kinks, and thus effectively reduce(s) its bending
stiffness. Studies using these models conclude that two melt-
ing bubbles are essential (9,10), and indeed likely (10), for
interpreting Widom’s cyclization experimental data (6). A
recent study by Du et al. (11), however, challenges the
enhanced DNA flexibility observed in Widom’s experiment.
These authors attribute the exceptionally high cyclization
efficiency to higher than normal ligase concentration, which
they contend invalidates the kinetic assumptions used to
relate J to the bending stiffness of DNA. This ongoing debate
underscores the need for other types of experiments that com-
plement cyclization measurements to elucidate the mechan-
ism(s) by which DNA is bent in cells.
The spontaneous base pair flip-out rate for DNA has been
determined experimentally to be 103 s1 (12). The rate of
cyclization of 199 bp DNA fragments under normal experi-
mental conditions (11), ranges from 103 to 102 s1 with
increasing ligase concentration. This means that cyclization
of fragments containing flip-out bases will generally make a
small to insignificant contribution to J. On the other hand, the
cyclization rate of the short DNA fragments used by Widom
et al., i.e. <106 bp, is in the range of 105 to 106 s1 and
even lower (11). This means that as DNA fragment length
is gradually reduced below the persistence length, fragments
*To whom correspondence should be addressed at School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Cornell University, 120 Olin Hall, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.
Tel: +1 607 254 8825; Fax: +1 607 255 9166; Email: laa25@cornell.edu
 2006 The Author(s).
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
4554–4560 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 16 Published online 5 September 2006
doi:10.1093/nar/gkl394
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 4, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
containing one or more transiently flipped-out bases become
more probable during the lifetime of the cyclization assay.
Furthermore, if these flip-out bases significantly enhance
the cyclization rate, the population of fragments whose cyc-
lization is assisted by base flip-out can become very large.
For short DNA fragments well below Np, this effect should
become dominant, since the cyclization rate of DNA without
base flip-out approaches zero. Indeed conventional cycliza-
tion measurements have already shown that internal base
pair mismatches in DNA can significantly enhance the cyc-
lization efficiency (13). Precise information about how the
kink(s) form and about how their location(s) impact cycliza-
tion efficiency of DNA therefore seems required to use any
theoretical model to quantitatively explain cyclization data
for short DNA.
As a first step towards understanding the effect of flip-out
bases on bending of short DNA, we investigate bending prop-
erties of idealized analytes containing one or more permanent
base pair mismatch(s) or melting bubbles. Because the life-
time of base unpairing events in these analytes is effectively
infinite, these systems best model short DNA fragments with
‘trapped’ base flip-out by the ligase-mediated cyclization
reaction. Their bending properties therefore provide insight
into a potential alternative reaction pathway for cyclization
reactions involving short dsDNA fragments. The extent to
which the detailed conformation of a melting bubble
resembles that of a transient base pair flip-out is, however,
presently unknown. The well-known ability of a base pair
mismatch to disrupt local base pairing as well as stacking,
nonetheless, makes it a reasonable analog of the base pair
flip-out. Precisely how these bubbles change the conforma-
tion as well as the local stiffness of DNA remains an open
question. To quantify these effects, time-dependent fluores-
cence resonance energy transfer (FRET) experiments will
be used to measure the distance, and its fluctuation amplitude,
between donor and acceptor fluorophores appended to the
two ends of a short DNA fragment. Time dependent FRET
measurements are preferable to single-molecule fluorescence
experiments (14), for at least two reasons. First, they avoid
inevitable complications in the analyte’s conformation
induced by its attachment to a surface. Second, the higher sig-
nal to noise levels possible with FRET permit direct correla-
tion between DNA local flexibility and its conformational
state.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
DNA samples
A series of short dsDNA analytes of fixed size (16 bp), con-
taining single bubble and double-melting bubbles positioned
at predetermined locations along the DNA backbone forms
the focus of our study. Bubbles are introduced by non
Watson–Crick base pairs at specific locations in the DNA
backbone. All oligonucleotides used in the study were custom
synthesized and high-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC) purified by Simga Genosys (Woodlands, TX). A
single target strand with sequence 50-GGACTCCAGGTCA-
CCC-30, is 50-labeled with 6-FAM (donor) and 30-labeled
with TAMRA (acceptor). Complementary sequences (see
Table 1) were designed to hybridize with the target to
produce dsDNA structures containing: (i) no defects (bub-
bles); (ii) 1, 2 and 4 bp bubble(s) at the center; and (iii) two
1 bp bubbles symmetrically located 3, 4 and 5 bp away from
the two ends, or in other words 8, 6 and 4 bp away from each
other. Hybridization was performed under standard condi-
tions (15), and all samples were purified using PAGE as
described previously (15). A buffer solution containing
10 mM Tris–HCl, 500 mM NaCl and 1 mM EDTA (pH 8.0)
is used for fluorescence measurements.
Time-dependent fluorescence measurements
A time-dependent fluorescence measurement technique is
used to characterize the flexibility of the dsDNA fragments
(16). All measurements were carried out at 20C. The
FRET efficiency E was determined by measuring the fluores-
cence life time of the donor molecule in absence (td) and
presence (tda) of acceptor molecule using a home-made
device described in Ref. (15). E can be related to the distance
between the fluorophore pairs, using the well-known formula,
E ¼ 1  tda
td
¼ 1
1þ ðR/R0Þ6
1
R0 is the Fo¨rster radius, which has been previously character-
ized to be 5.0 nm for the 6-FAM/TAMRA pair (17).
The anisotropy of 6-FAM and TAMRA was determined
independently to be 0.08 and 0.20, supporting the usage of
an orientation factor k2 ¼ 2/3 in calculating the Fo¨rster
distance. Alexa 488 was used as calibration dye. Measure-
ments using our apparatus yield a lifetime of 4.1 ± 0.1 ns,
which compares very well with the 4.1 ns value reported
by the dye manufacturer.
All dsDNA samples used for these measurements are care-
fully purified using PAGE before measurements, and their
purity rechecked by PAGE after FRET measurements.
Given the relatively short fragment sizes used and the fact
that these fragments contain one or more mismatched
bases, it is possible that residual amounts of dual labeled
single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) may contribute to the meas-
ured FRET efficiencies. Lifetime measurements provide a
simple, direct means of ruling out this possibility. Specific-
ally, because of the much higher flexibility of ssDNA the
donor lifetime in the presence of acceptor is anticipated to
be substantially smaller than for dye-pair labeled dsDNA.
This effect was confirmed using control experiments with
dual labeled ssDNA. In these experiments we independently
measured the FRET efficiency of ssDNA using steady-state
and time-dependent fluorescence data. The former experi-
ments yielded high efficiencies in the range of 85–100%,
which is consistent with the high flexibility of the ssDNA.
The time dependent measurements, however, reveal no con-
tribution from the donor–acceptor pair. This latter effect is
easily traced to the small fluorescence lifetime, <400 ps, of
the donor–acceptor pair attached to ssDNA. Such a fast
decay time-scale is in fact comparable to the normal laser
pulse rising time (200 ps), and therefore renders it inaccess-
ible with the current equipment. As a result, residual amounts
of dye-pair labeled ssDNA present in the FRET samples will
make no contribution to the energy transfer efficiency
deduced from the measured lifetimes.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 16 4555
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 4, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Centrally located melting bubbles
The energetic cost of introducing a single base pair mismatch
in DNA is 1–2 kcal/mol (18). This value far exceeds the
energetic penalty of interrupting local base pairing, i.e.
0–1 kcal/mol (19). This means that selective introduction
base pair mismatches to dsDNA backbone, to create melting
bubbles, will not only compromise local base paring, but
also will interfere with local base stacking. It is known that
base pairing and base stacking act to stiffen dsDNA (20).
Therefore, in the vicinity of a melting bubble, dsDNA is
expected to exhibit greatest flexibility, suggesting that these
bubbles might act as de facto hinges or kinks in the DNA
backbone. The structural characteristic of the bubble region
are anticipated to resemble those of single stranded, rather
than dsDNA (14).
To quantify the effect of base pair mismatches/bubbles on
dsDNA conformation, the average distance between 6-FAM
and TAMRA appended to the ends of linear DNA fragments
was determined from FRET efficiency data. By systematic-
ally varying the position(s) and number of bases contained
in the bubbles, it is then possible to determine how these vari-
ables affect conformation of the DNA analyte. The simplest
approach for extracting the size of the analyte from FRET
efficiency data is the single component fitting method
described in Ref. (15). End-to-end distances computed in
this way are summarized in Figure 1 for a DNA analyte con-
taining a single, centrally located melting bubble. The experi-
mental values are compared with those obtained from theory
(see Figure 1); theoretical end-to-end distance values in the
figure were calculated by assuming that short DNA fragments
assumes a linear rigid-rod structure and that dsDNA contrib-
utes 0.34 nm per base pair, while the melting bubble contrib-
utes 0.7 nm per base pair (14). These calculations are
corrected for the extra distance [0.25 nm, (21)] due to dye
labeling. The above calculation makes a key assumption
about the ssDNA forming the melting bubble, namely that
the unit length of each base of ssDNA is fixed at 0.7 nm.
The unit length per base of ssDNA has in fact been determ-
ined using various approaches, including measuring the aver-
age distance between adjacent phosphorus atoms determined
from crystal structures of ssDNA–protein complexes, in
which case it has been determined to be (0.63 ± 0.08 nm)
(22); stretching ssDNA (0.75 nm) (23); and the calculation
of inter-phosphate distances based on a virtual bond scheme
(0.59–0.69 nm) (24). Our choice of 0.7 nm per base is there-
fore justified by any of these approaches. Of course, based on
the variation of the reported values other choices are possible
(0.55–0.75 nm), which will change the specific values of
bending angles and flexibility deduced, but should have no
effect on the qualitative trends (see Table 3). The salt concen-
tration used in this study is similar to the salt concentra-
tion used for typical cyclization reactions, the persistence
length of ssDNA under these conditions is estimated to be
2.0 nm (22). This means that the length contribution from
ssDNA in melting bubbles 2 bp and greater can be reasonably
well modeled by summing over the single base contributions.
However, when the two ssDNA strands are close to each
other, inter-strand stacking may have an effect on the cal-
culated lengths; this effect is discussed in the data analysis
section of the paper.
For the fully complementary DNA, the calculated end-to-
end distance is almost identical to the theoretical value, indic-
ating that it assumes an unbent, rigid rod-like structure. This
result is expected because there are no (AT) or (CG) tracts
in the sequence. As the melting bubble size gradually
increases, the experimental values are observed to deviate sys-
tematically from the theoretical predictions. Specifically, for
the 1, 2 and 4 bp melting bubbles/bubbles, the end-to-end dis-
tance decreases by 1, 7 and 19% relative to theoretically
determined values. These deviations correspond to apparent
bending angles of 16 ± 1, 41 ± 1 and 71 ± 1, respectively.
Here, the position of the bend is taken to be in the center of
DNA fragment.
Reduction in end-to-end distance of short dsDNA contain-
ing base pair mismatches does not necessarily imply that the
structures exhibit permanent bends or kinks. Such reductions
might also arise if the bubbles enhance the flexibility of the
DNA backbone, which will also increase the FRET efficiency
E above the values deduced from Equation 1, assuming a per-
fectly rigid-rod structure. To simultaneously consider the
contribution from these two effects, we assume that fluctu-
ations of the donor and acceptor dye separation about the
mean value r are uncorrelated and small in comparison to
Figure 1. End-to-end distance of 16 bp dsDNA containing a fully
complementary sequence and containing centrally located bubbles with
varying size.
Table 1. complementary DNA sequences used in the study
Sequence (50–30) the mismatch
sequence(s) is underlined
Centrally located melted bubble GGGTGACCTGGAGTCC
GGGTGACCAGGAGTCC
GGGTGACAAGGAGTCC
GGGTGAGAAAGAGTCC
Distributed melted bubbles GGGTGTCCTGCAGTCC
GGGTCACCTGGTGTCC
GGGAGACCTGGACTCC
4556 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 16
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 4, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
the length of the fragment. In this case the probability distri-
bution of end-to-end lengths can be represented analytically
(25,26)
PðrÞ ¼ 1
s
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2p
p exp  1
2
rr
s
 2" #
‚ 2
where r and s are the mean end-to-end distance and variance,
respectively. The assumptions leading to Equation 2 are rig-
orously valid when the DNA fragment is long relative to its
persistence length, and/or when dye-DNA bond fluctuations
make a significant contribution to the end-to-end distance dis-
tribution (e.g. if the DNA fragment is short). The last condi-
tion has been corroborated using computer simulations of
FRET from freely rotating dye pairs append to short DNA
fragments (25). For intermediate size DNA, the end-to-end
distance distribution of dsDNA, without considering dye-
DNA bond fluctuations, can be calculated using a WLC
model, which assumes an exponential form P(re) for materi-
als in the size range of interest (27). The overall end-to-end
distance reported by the FRET experiment is then a convolu-
tion over the distribution P(re) due to the bending stiffness of
dsDNA and a Gaussian distribution P(rg) due to dye-DNA
bond fluctuations. When the dye-DNA bond fluctuations are
either larger or comparable to the length fluctuations of the
dsDNA analyte, as in this study, the convoluted distribution
P(r) takes an approximate Gaussian form, and the variance
is well approximated using the summation of the variances
of P(rg) and P(re). This approximation can be shown to
become progressively worse when the variance in P(r)
becomes two times or more greater than that of P(rg); in
which case an analysis of FRET data using the Gaussian
form will lead to systematic underestimation of the contribu-
tion due to P(re).
The variance s deduced from the above analysis therefore
does not solely reflect the bending flexibility of DNA, but
instead includes a significant contribution from DNA-dye
bond fluctuation. Since DNA-dye bond fluctuations are inde-
pendent of oligonucleotide content far from the dye labeling
site, changes in the variance values produced by base pair
mismatches in the DNA fragments are expected to provide
a direct indication of changes in DNA flexibility.
The intensity decay curves obtained for an arbitrary DNA
molecule labeled with a FRET pair is the convolution integral
over this probability distribution (25–26,28–29)
IDAðtÞ ¼ ID
Z 1
0
PðrÞ exp  t
tD
 t
tD
R0
r
 6" #
dr: 3
Here tD is the lifetime of the corresponding donor-only
labeled molecule and is determined independently as
described previously. ID is a free fitting parameter reflecting
the overall fluorescence intensity. Inserting Equation 2 in
3 yields a functional form for IDA(t) that can be compared
with the experimentally determined fluorescence decay data
to extract the two unknown parameters r and s. The donor
decay curve can be directly fitted by Equation 3 to yield r
and s. However, this approach will yield undesirable coup-
ling between the two parameters. An analytical procedure
utilizing the method of moments (28,29) can be used to
remove this coupling.
In this procedure, the fluorescence decay curves of the
donor with and without acceptor molecules are first deconvo-
luted to remove the instrument response function. The result-
ing function is then analyzed using a multi-exponential fitting
routine available in the SPC image software (Becker & Hickl
GmbH). Based on a simple c2 minimization procedure, the
fluorescence decay curve for the donor-only case was
found to be best fit by a single exponential function ID(t),
while the donor–acceptor fluorescence decay is best fit by a
bi-exponential function, IDA(t).
These functions can be used to define a new function
G(t) ¼ IDA(t)/ID(t), which reflects only the pure energy trans-
fer process between donor and acceptor (28,29). The zeroth
and first moments of G(t) can be readily computed, allowing
r and s to be uniquely determined for any analyte. In addition
to decoupling r and s, this procedure also has the advantage
of correcting for the effect of small amounts of residual
donor-only labeled DNA present with the dye-pair labeled
species during FRET measurements.
The fitted end-to-end distance distribution curves for DNA
analytes containing centrally located bubbles of variable size
are shown in Figure 2 and the results are summarized in
Table 2. Bending angles calculated using the same procedure
as described in the previous paragraph are found to be
39 ± 4, 52 ± 2 and 78 ± 1 for melting bubble size of 1,
2 and 4 bp, respectively. These values are comparable to
the value obtained using the one dominant conformation
assumption, but are slightly higher since different analysis
procedures are used. To evaluate the effect of ssDNA unit
length on these values, bending angles are calculated using
two other unit lengths, 0.55 nm and 0.75, and the results
are summarized in Table 3. It is evident from the table that
while different choices of ssDNA unit length do lead to
different bending angles, the maximum relative error made
by fixing the ssDNA unit length at 0.7 nm is in the range
of 20–40%. As expected, however, changes in the unit length
have no effect on the observed trends.
Figure 2. End-to-end distance distribution of dsDNA containing centrally
located bubbles with varying size.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 16 4557
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 4, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Even from visual inspection of the curves in Figure 2, it is
apparent that the variance s is almost identical for all of the
analytes studied. This result is quite unexpected because it
means that for our experimental conditions, and time-scale
resolution (100 ps), increasing the centrally located bubble
size has only a negligible effect on analyte flexibility. This
finding suggests that the primary difference between analytes
containing centrally located melting bubbles is captured in r ,
and therefore arise from permanent local bends/kinks in the
DNA backbone. The closeness of the end-to-end distance of
DNA with various bubble size nonetheless indicates that the
formula used to estimate the melting bubble contribution to
the contour length must be viewed with some care. Specific-
ally, it could be argued that as a result of inter-strand stack-
ing, two spatially close ssDNAs, forming the melting bubble,
might fold in a similar way as a dsDNA, eliminating the need
for a separate analysis of the single-strand contribution. The
end-to-end distance of 22 bp dsDNA obtained in the single
molecule fluorescence experiments by Schallhorn et al. (14)
partially resolve this issue. These authors reported that the
end-to-end distance of dsDNA is increased by 0.2 and
0.5 nm, respectively, when a 3 and 7 bp bubble is introduced;
indicating that the ssDNA sections in the bubbles do enhance
the end-to-end separation of short DNA duplexes.
Distributed melted bubbles
The FRET distance distribution for linear DNA containing
two 1 bp melted bubbles, symmetrically located on its back-
bone was determined using a similar method as described in
the previous paragraph. Figure 3 and Table 4 summarize res-
ults from this analysis. Two 1 bp bubbles distributed on the
DNA backbone introduce two hinge points, which should res-
ult in many new molecular conformations. Since these two
hinge points are placed symmetrically, they are essentially
equivalent to each other. Also taking into account the electro-
static repulsion between DNA segments, which maximizes
the inter-segment distance, trans-like conformation as illus-
trated in Figure 3 should be favored. The local bending angles
calculated under the assumption of the trans-conformation are
47 ± 1, 45 ± 1, 47 ± 1 for base pair mismatches 4, 6 and
8 bp, respectively, away from each other. On the other hand,
the local bending angle of the two hinges calculated based on
the cis-conformation assumes a constant value close to 80
for each of these analytes. Bending angle values for the
two-bubble analytes computed under the trans-dominant
assumption, are evidently much larger than those computed
for DNA containing a centrally located 1 bp bubble, but of
similar magnitude to those obtained for analytes containing
a central 2 bp bubble.
It is also evident from Figure 3 that the variance of the dis-
tance distribution is significantly larger for the two-bubble
than for the one-bubble case. Taken together with the results
from the previous section, this indicates that introducing two
hinge points to the DNA backbone has a much larger effect
on its flexibility, as well as on the amplitude of localized
kinks or bends. The overall effect of introducing two hinge
points is also substantially larger than what is expected if
the hinges are assumed to act independently. Specifically,
under the ‘independent action’ assumption, no change in
local stiffness and smaller bending angles for each hinge
are anticipated. This observation is most likely a manifesta-
tion of cooperative action by the two bubbles. In other
words, when the two defects are spaced closely, i.e. less
than the DNA helix twist length (<11 bp in our experiments),
the two defects can sense each other, effectively softening the
Figure 3. End-to-end distance distribution of dsDNA containing two 1 bp
bubbles symmetrically located on the backbone separated by varying
distance.
Table 2. Calculated contour length (including 0.25 nm extra length owing to
dye labeling), experimentally measured mean end-to-end separation, r , of
FRET dye pair and the associated variance s
Melted bubble size (bp) rcontour(nm) r(nm) s(nm)
0 5.69 5.69 ± 0.02 0.50 ± 0.01
1 6.05 5.72 ± 0.03 0.46 ± 0.02
2 6.41 5.80 ± 0.02 0.49 ± 0.02
4 7.13 5.58 ± 0.02 0.48 ± 0.03
Results are for DNA containing one centrally located melting bubble with
variable size.
Table 3. Calculated bending angles of centrally located melting bubble with
variable size using different unit lengths of ssDNA
Melted bubble size (bp) 0.55 nm 0.75 nm
0 0 0
1 29 ± 5 41 ± 3
2 37 ± 3 52 ± 1
4 64 ± 2 88 ± 4
Table 4. Mean end-to-end distance, r , of FRET dye-pair and the associated
variance s for DNA containing two symmetrically distributed 1 bp melted
bubbles separated by varying distances
Distributed bubble distance (bp) r(nm) s(nm)
0 5.80 ± 0.02 0.49 ± 0.02
4 5.57 ± 0.03 0.51 ± 0.03
6 5.58 ± 0.01 0.57 ± 0.01
8 5.28 ± 0.01 0.62 ± 0.01
4558 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 16
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 4, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
DNA. This means that in selecting multi-defect models for
DNA bending the local stiffness parameters for closely loc-
ated hinges should be selected with care because they will
generally be quite different from stiffness parameters
assigned to a single local defect. A surprising consequence
of this result is that the flexibility of the DNA strand contain-
ing distributed 1 bp bubbles depends on the bubble separation
distance. In particular, we find that the distributed bubbles act
in concert to produce a cooperative enhancement in DNA’s
flexibility. This cooperative effect is typically large when
the bubbles are positioned in equivalent phases of the helix.
CONCLUSIONS
There are at least two implications of our findings for inter-
preting cyclization data. First, our results show that spontan-
eous unpairing of DNA leading to localized or distributed
bubbles, produces large permanent bends/kinks in short
dsDNA analytes. Thus, although localized bubbles are
found to have negligible effect on the overall flexibility of
short DNA, the bends/kinks they produce can significantly
impact cyclization efficiency and hence apparent flexibility
of the analyte deduced from cyclization data. Second, our res-
ults suggest that multiple distributed bubbles provide a more
efficient route to bend DNA than single multi-bp bubbles.
This result stems from the fact that small distributed bubbles
produce comparable overall levels of bending to large local-
ized ones, but unlike localized bubbles also appear to increase
the overall flexibility of the analyte. How this finding might
impact model selection for fitting cyclization data depends
both on the detailed sequences used and the degree of bend-
ing required to complete the cycle. Specifically, for the 2 bp
bubble considered here, it can easily be shown that the ener-
getic cost for initiating a second base unpairing event at the
site of the first is 1–2 kcal/mol (18), while the alternative
(two randomly located 1 bp bubbles) incurs an additional
energetic cost in the same range, depending on the exact
sequence (18).
Thus, at similar energetic cost, two closely spaced 1 bp
bubbles can be formed with larger local bending and
decreased levels of stiffness, as compared with a localized
2 bp bubble. In cyclization experiments requiring very
sharp local bending of short dsDNA fragments, i.e. when
the free energy cost of forming the required bended structure
far exceeds that of forming two-melted bubbles, our experi-
mental results indicate that the kinkable worm-like chain
model including two closely spaced melting bubble is more
plausible for explaining the spontaneous, sharp bending
of DNA.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to the National Science Foundation grants
DMR0551185 and CMS0510239 for supporting this study.
Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this
article was provided by DMR0551185.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Swinger,K.K. and Rice,P.A. (2004) IHF and HU: flexible architects
of bend DNA. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., 14, 28–35.
2. Crothers,D.M., Drak,J., Kahn,J.D. and Levene,S.D. (1992) DNA
bending, flexibility and helical repeat by cyclization kinetics.
Meth. Enzymol., 212, 3–29.
3. Shore,D., Langowski,J. and Baldwin,R.L. (1981) DNA flexibility
studied by covalent closure of short fragments into circles. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA, 78, 4833–4837.
4. Zhang,Y. and Crothers,D.M. (2003) Statistical mechanics of
sequence-dependent circular DNA and its application for DNA
cyclization. Biophys. J., 84, 136–153.
5. Shimada,J. and Yamakawa,H. (1984) Ring-closure probabilities for
twisted wormlike chains-application to DNA. Macromolecules,
17, 689–698.
6. Cloutier,T.E. and Widom,J. (2004) Spontaneous sharp bending of
double-stranded DNA. Mol. Cell, 14, 355.
7. Cloutier,T.E. and Widom,J. (2005) DNA twisting flexibility and the
formation of sharply looped protein–DNA complex. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA, 102, 3645.
8. Yan,J. and Marko,J.F. (2004) Localized single-standed bubble
mechanism for cyclization of short double helix DNA. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
93, 108–108.
9. Wiggins,P.A., Phillips,R. and Nelson,P.C. (2005) Exact theory of
kinkable eleastic polymers. Phys. Rev. E, 71, 021909.
10. Yan,J., Kawamura,R. and Marko,J.F. (2005) Statistics of loop
formation along double helix DNAs. Phys. Rev. E Stat. Nonlin.
Soft Matter Phys., 71, 061905.
11. Du,Q., Smith,C., Shiffeldrim,N., Vologodskaia,M. and Vologodksii,A.
(2005) Cyclization of short DNA fragments and bending fluctuations of
the double helix. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 102, 5397.
12. Spies,M.A. and Schowen,R.L. (2002) The trapping of a
spontaneously ‘flipped-out’ base from double helical nucleic acids by
host–guest complexation with b-cyclodextrin: the intrinsic
base-flipping rate constant for DNA and RNA. J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 124, 14049–14053.
13. Kahn,J.D., Yun,E. and Crothers,D.M. (1994) Detection of localized
DNA flexibility. Nature, 368, 163–166.
14. Schallhorn,K.A., Freedman,K.O., Moore,J.M., Lin,J. and Ke,P.C.
(2005) Single-molecule DNA flexibility in the presence of base-pair
mismatch. App. Phys. Lett., 87, 033901.
15. Yuan,C., Rhoades,E., Heuer,D.M. and Archer,L.A. (2005) Mismatch
induced NDA ‘unbending’ upon duplex opening. Biophys. J., 89, 2564.
16. Vishwasrao,H.D., Heikal,A.A., Kasischke,K.A. and Webb,W.W.
(2005) Conformational dependence of intracellular NADH on
metabolic state revealed by associated fluorescence anisotropy. J. Biol.
Chem., 280, 25119–25126.
17. Dragan,A.I., Klass,J., Read,C., Churchill,M.E., Crane-Robinson,C. and
Privalov,P.L. (2003) DNA binding a non-seqeunce-specific HMG-D
protein is entropy driven with a substantial non-electrostatic
contribution. J. Mol. Biol., 331, 795–813.
18. SantaLucia,J. and Hicks,D. (2004) The thermodynamics of DNA
structural motifs. Annu. Rev. Biomol. Struct., 33, 415.
19. Yahovchuk,P., Protozanova,E. and Frank-Kamenetskii,M.D. (2006)
Base-stacking and base-pairing contributions into thermal stability of
the DNA double helix. Nucleic Acids Res., 34, 564–574.
20. Mills,J.B. and Hagerman,P.J. (2004) Origin of the intrinsic rigidity of
DNA. Nucleic Acids Res., 13, 4055–4059.
21. Stuhmeier,F., Welch,J.B., Murchie,A.I.H., Lilley,D.M.J. and
Clegg,R.M. (1997) Global structure of three-way DNA junctions with
and without additional unpaired bases: a fluorescence resonance energy
transfer analysis. Biochemistry, 36, 13.
22. Murphy,M.C., Rasnik,I., Cheng,W., Lohman,T.M. and Ha,T. (2004)
Probing single-stranded DNA conformational flexibility using
fluorescence spectroscopy. Biophys. J., 86, 2530–2537.
23. Smith,S.B., Cui,Y. and Bustamante,C. (1996) Overstretching B-DNA:
the elastic response of individual double-stranded and single-stranded
DNA molecules. Science, 271, 795–799.
24. Olson,W.K. (1975) Configurational statistics of polynucleotide chains:
a single virtual bond treatment. Macromolecules, 8, 272–275.
25. Parkhurst,K.M. and Parkhurst,L.J. (1995) Donor–acceptor distance
distribution in a double-labeled fluorescent oligonucleotide both as a
single strand and in duplexes. Biochemistry, 34, 293–300.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 16 4559
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 4, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
26. Lakowicz,J.R. (1999) Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy. 2nd ed.
Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York, pp. 395–397.
27. Wilhelm,J. and Frey,E. (1996) Radial distribution function of
semiflexible polymers. Phys. Rev. Lett., 77, 2581–2584.
28. Williams,S.L., Parkhurst,L.K. and Parkhurst,L.J. (2006) Changes in
DNA bending and flexing due to tethered cations detected by
fluorescence resonance energy transfer. Nucleic Acids Res.,
34, 1028–1035.
29. Parkhurst,L.J. (2004) Distance parameters derived from time-resolved
Forster resonance energy transfer measurements and their use in
structural interpretations of thermodynamic quantities associated with
protein DNA. Meth. Enzymol., 379, 235–262.
4560 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 16
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 4, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
