Regulation of androgen receptor and histone
deacetylase 1 by Mdm2-mediated ubiquitylation
Luke Gaughan, Ian R. Logan, David E. Neal1 and Craig N. Robson*
Prostate Research Group, Northern Institute for Cancer Research, Paul, O’Gorman Building, University of Newcastle
Upon Tyne, Medical School, Framlington Place, Newcastle Upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK and 1MRC Cancer Cell Unit,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 2X2, UK
Received November 12, 2004; Revised and Accepted December 1, 2004
ABSTRACT
The androgen receptor (AR) is a member of the
nuclear hormone receptor family of transcription fac-
tors and plays a critical role in regulating the expres-
sion of genes involved in androgen-dependent
and -independent tumour formation. Regulation of
the AR is achieved by alternate binding of either his-
tone acetyltransferase (HAT)-containing co-activator
proteins, or histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). Factors
that control AR stability may also constitute an
important regulatory mechanism, a notion that has
been confirmed with the finding that the AR is a
direct target for Mdm2-mediated ubiquitylation and
proteolysis. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) and re-ChIP analyses, we show that Mdm2
associates with AR and HDAC1 at the active
androgen-responsive PSA promoter in LNCaP prost-
ate cancer cells. Furthermore, we demonstrate that
Mdm2-mediated modification of AR and HDAC1
catalyses protein destabilization and attenuates AR
sactivity, suggesting that ubiquitylation of the AR
and HDAC1 may constitute an additional mechanism
for regulating AR function. We also show that HDAC1
and Mdm2 function co-operatively to reduce AR-
mediated transcription that is attenuated by the
HAT activity of the AR co-activator Tip60, suggesting
interplay between acetylation status and receptor
ubiquitylation in AR regulation. In all, our data indic-
ates a novel role for Mdm2 in regulating components
of the AR transcriptosome.
INTRODUCTION
The androgen receptor (AR) is a member of the nuclear
hormone receptor (NR) superfamily of transcription factors,
and in response to androgenic signals derived from the testes,
plays a pivotal role in regulating genes involved in growth,
development and transformation of the prostate (1,2). Similar
to other NR family members, the AR contains several inde-
pendently functioning domains which facilitate the mechanics
of receptor activity, including nuclear localization, DNA- and
ligand-binding and transcriptional activation (3,4). Although
predominantly cytoplasmic in the absence of its cognate ligand
androgen, the AR rapidly translocates to the nucleus upon
hormone association and subsequently binds and activates
numerous androgen-responsive genes (5,6).
AR-mediated transcription requires the concerted function
of two inherent transcriptional activation domains, namely the
N-terminal activation function 1 (AF-1) and the C-terminal
activation function 2 (AF-2) (3). Although not clearly defined,
several lines of evidence suggest that the N- and C-termini
of the AR interact in a ligand-dependent manner to provide a
suitable platform for co-accessory protein interactions that
are requisites for AR regulation (7,8). To date, numerous
co-accessory proteins have been characterized to either
enhance (co-activate) or reduce (co-repress) AR-mediated
transcription [for review, see (9–11)]. Intriguingly, most co-
activators and co-repressors share the capacity to influence
transcriptional potential of the receptor by regulating the
acetylation status of androgen responsive genes and/or the
AR itself, via their respective histone acetyltransferase (HAT)
or histone deacetylase (HDAC) activities. Indeed, we and
others have demonstrated that the co-activators Tip60 (12),
p300 and PCAF (13) enhance the inherent transcriptional
activity of the AR by direct receptor acetylation and up-regulate
transcriptional rate by histone acetylation of AR target genes.
Conversely, AR activity has been shown to be down-regulated
by histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) in a deacetylase-dependent
manner (12,14), suggesting that reversal of HAT activity is
important for abrogating AR function.
Ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis represents an important
mechanism for controlling protein turnover and is pertinent
to the regulation of numerous transcription factors (15,16).
Protein ubiquitylation is catalysed by a trimeric enzymatic
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +44 191 222 4266; Fax: +44 191 222 4301; Email: c.n.robson@ncl.ac.uk
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use permissions, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org.
ª 2005, the authors
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 33 No. 1 ª Oxford University Press 2005; all rights reserved
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1 13–26
doi:10.1093/nar/gki141
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 6, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
reaction containing an E1 ubiquitin-activating enzyme, which
acts to prime the 76 amino acid ubiquitin peptide for attach-
ment; an E2 conjugating enzyme which aids in ubiquitin
conjugation to lysine residues within the target; and an E3
ubiquitin ligase protein which is important for establishing
reaction specificity (17). In most cases, catalysis terminates
after numerous cycles resulting in the formation of long
polyubiquitin chains upon the target protein that are duly
recognized by the 26S proteasome as a signal for destruction.
The recent evidence that several NRs are targets for direct
ubiquitylation and subsequent destruction provides an
additional mechanism for receptor regulation. For example,
both the oestrogen receptor (ER) (18–20) and glucocorticoid
receptor (21,22) are rapidly ubiquitylated and destroyed after
binding to their cognate hormone, suggestive of a highly acute
transcriptional regulatory process. Furthermore, additional
data regarding the ER have indicated that while the proteaso-
mal machinery is required for ER destruction, it also plays
a vital role in ER-mediated transcription (20), indicating
that there is an intimate relationship between the activation
and destruction of the ER that are both regulated in part by
components of the proteolytic machinery.
In keeping with other NR family members, the AR has
recently been shown to be a target for ubiquitylation and
destruction by the 26S proteasome (23), revealing another
level of AR down-regulation in addition to that imposed by
HDAC1. Furthermore, the demonstration that inhibition
of proteasomal activity by the small molecule inhibitor
MG132 abolishes productive rounds of AR-mediated tran-
scription upon the androgen-responsive PSA promoter (24)
suggests that AR turnover is intrinsically linked to transcrip-
tional activity. This notion was further supported with the
finding that the S1 subunit of the 19S proteasome sub-complex
is recruited to the active PSA promoter with association
kinetics parallel to the AR (24).
Of the many candidate E3 ligases for AR ubiquitylation, the
mdm2 proto-oncogene Mdm2 E3 ligase has recently been
shown to catalyse AR ubiquitylation and proteolysis in vivo
(25). Although this work confirmed a role for Mdm2 as an E3
ligase for the AR, the mechanics of androgen-dependent Mdm2
function remain largely ill-defined. Given that Mdm2 has
recently been shown to associate directly with the active
oestrogen-responsive pS2 promoter in complex with the ER
(20), we sought to investigate a potential involvement of Mdm2
in AR-mediated transcription at the PSA promoter. Using a
combination of chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and
re-ChIP analyses, we show that Mdm2 associates directly
with the active PSA promoter and is a component of a pro-
moter-bound multimeric complex containing AR and HDAC1.
By western analysis and immunoprecipitation experiments, we
demonstrate that both AR and HDAC1 are ubiquitylated in
response to androgen and that HDAC1 is a direct target for
modification by Mdm2. Furthermore, we provide evidence that
the deacetylase activity of HDAC1 is required for optimal
Mdm2-mediated AR ubiquitylation and destruction that is
attenuated by the acetyltransferase activity of Tip60, suggest-
ing competition between ubiquitylation and acetylation status
is a mechanisms of receptor regulation, as seen for p53 (26). In
all, our data provide a novel insight into the function of Mdm2
in the acute regulation of AR-mediated gene expression that
may provide new targets for therapeutic intervention.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Plasmids
The following plasmids have been described previously:
pPSALuc, pCMV-b-gal, pcDNA3-AR, pCMV-Tip60,
pCMV-Tip60Q377E/G380E (27), pBJ5-FLAG-HDAC1 and
pBJ5-FLAG-HDAC1H141A (gifts from Stuart Schreiber,
Harvard Medical School) (28,29), pxj41-Mdm2 and the
ubiquitylase-dead mutant pxj41-Mdm2C462A (gifts from
Bohdan Wasylyk, Institute of Genetics and Molecular and
Cellular Biology, Illkirch Cedex, France) (30,31), pcDNA3-
His-Ubiquitin (gift from David Lane, University of Dundee,
UK) and pCMV-c-abl (gift from Ygal Haupt, The Hebrew
University Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem) (32).
Cell culture and DNA transfection
Cell culture and DNA transfection were performed as des-
cribed previously (12). COS-7 cells were maintained in
RPMI 1640 media containing 10% fetal calf serum (FCS)
(Gibco BRL), 1% penicillin and 1% streptomycin. For reporter
assays, 1 · 104 COS-7 cells were routinely plated per well in
48 microtitre plates (Corning). After 24 h, the cells were
transfected using Superfect (Qiagen) according to the manu-
facturer’s recommendations. After 2 h, the cells were washed
and incubated in RPMI 1640 containing 10% FCS which had
been stripped of steroids by treatment with dextran-coated
charcoal prior to experimentation with 10 nM R1881
(synthetic androgen analogue). After 48 h, the cells were har-
vested and assayed for luciferase activity according to the
manufacturer’s guidelines (Promega). Luciferase activity was
corrected for the corresponding b-galactosidase activity to give
relative activity, as described previously (27). For immuno-
precipitation of ectopically expressed proteins, 5 · 105 COS-7
cells were plated per 90 mm dish (Corning), and transfected as
above with 5 mg of each expression vector.
Unless indicated, co-transfection experiments for reporter
assays using COS-7 cells incorporated 50 ng of each expres-
sion vector and 200 ng of each reporter construct. Fold
increases were determined for 50 ng expression vector by
comparing activity with empty pCMV-driven vector. Each
experiment was performed in triplicate and repeated a
minimum of three times. Transfection of 90 mm dishes incor-
porated 10 mg of each expression vector for COS-7 cells. An
aliquot of 10 nM R1881, 1 mM of the proteasomal inhibitor
MG132, 1 mM of the deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A
(TSA) and 1 mM of the translation inhibitor cycloheximide
(CHX) were routinely used for all experiments.
Western blotting and antibodies
Western analysis was performed as described previously (12).
Monoclonal antibodies for AR (BD Pharmingen), HDAC1
(Upstate Biotechnology), Mdm2 and ubiquitin (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology) were used according to the manufacturer’s
recommendations.
Immunoprecipitation
AR immunoprecipitation from LNCaP cells was performed as
described previously (12) using a polyclonal anti-AR antibody
(Santa Cruz), while HDAC1 was immunoprecipitated from the
same cell lines using a monoclonal HDAC1 antibody (Upstate
14 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 6, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Biotechnology). Immunoprecipitates were boiled in SDS
sample buffer (10% b-mercaptoethanol, 125 mM Tris–HCl
(pH 6.8), 2% SDS, 10% glycerol and 0.005% bromophenol
blue) for 10 min and subject to western analysis (see
above). To assess AR ubiquitylation by Mdm2, plasmids
for AR, Mdm2 or the ubiquitylase-dead Mdm2C462A mutant
together with pcDNA3-His-ubiquitin were transiently
transfected into COS-7 cells and after 48 h, lysed in His-lysis
solution (6 M guanidinium–Cl, 0.1 M, Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4,
0.01 M Tris–HCl, pH 8, 5 mM imidazole and 10 mM
b-mercaptoethanol). To immunoprecipitate ubiquitylated
proteins, 50 ml equilibrated nickel–agarose (Ni-NTA Qiagen)
was added to each sample and incubated at 4C for 8 h,
followed by stepwise washes of the pelleted agarose in
wash solutions 1 (8 M urea, 0.1 M Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4,
0.01 M Tris–HCl, pH 8, 10 mM b-mercaptoethanol) and 2
(8 M urea, 0.1 M Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4, 0.01 M Tris–HCl,
pH 6.3,10 mM b-Mercaptoethanol and 0.1% triton). Proteins
were eluted from the agarose using 70 ml elution solution
(200 mM imidazole, 0.15 M Tris–HCl, pH 6.7, 30% glycerol,
0.72 M b-mercaptoethanol and 5% SDS), followed by boiling
in SDS sample buffer as above. Immunoprecipitates were
subject to western analysis using an anti-AR antibody.
ChIP assays
ChIP assays were performed as described previously (12). For
immunoprecipitation, 2 mg of polyclonal AR antibody and 2 mg
monoclonal HDAC1, Mdm2 and ubiquitin antibodies were
used as indicated. Re-ChIP analysis was performed as
described previously (20). Briefly, AR, Mdm2 and ubiquitin
antibodies were added to chromatin extracts for 5 h followed
by the addition of 60 ml salmon sperm/protein A agarose
(Upstate Biotechnology) to recover immunocomplexes.
AR-, Mdm2- and ubiquitin-containing complexes were eluted
by 1 h incubation in re-ChIP buffer [0.5 mM DTT, 1% Triton
X-100, 2 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl and 20 mM Tris (pH 8.1)]
and subsequently re-immunoprecipitated by the addition of
2 mg antibodies for AR, Mdm2, HDAC1 or anti-VP16 for
control, to an equal volume of eluted material. Recovery
and preparation of DNA was performed as described pre-
viously (12). Semi-quantitative PCR was performed with 10 ml
of DNA, BioTaq DNA polymerase and [a32-P]dATP, using
the following primers: ARE IF: TCT GCC TTT GTC CCC
TAG AT and ARE IR: AAC CTT CAT TCC CCA GGA CT to
amplify 235 bp of the proximal PSA promoter, encompassing
the ARE I (see Figure 1A); ARE IIIF: CCT CCC AGG TTC
AAG TGA TT and ARE IIIR: GCC TGT AAT CCC AGC
ACT TT to amplify the distal ARE III; ARE XF: CTG TGC
TTG GAG TTT ACC TGA and ARE XR: GCA GAG GTT
GCA GTG AGC C to amplify a non-ARE containing portion
of the PSA promoter. PCR products were resolved, dried and
then exposed to X-ray film for 2–12 h. ChIP data are repres-
entative of triplicate experiments performed using similar
passage number LNCaP cells.
RESULTS
Mdm2 associates with the AR-responsive PSA promoter
in an androgen-dependent manner
The demonstration that abrogation of proteasomal activity
by the small molecule inhibitor MG132 increases AR stability
provided evidence that AR proteolysis constitutes an addi-
tional mechanism for AR regulation (23). This notion was
confirmed with the finding that the AR is a direct target for
Mdm2-mediated ubiquitylation and proteasomal destruction
(33). In light of the fact that Mdm2 has been identified
A
B
Figure 1. Mdm2 association with the PSA promoter is up-regulated in an androgen-dependent manner. ChIP assays were performed in LNCaP cells to investigate
Mdm2 association with the PSA promoter in the presence and absence of androgen (R1881). (A) Schematic representation of PSA promoter and ChIP PCR: length of
PCR product is shown by black bars and numbers. (B) Soluble chromatin extracts from LNCaP cells treated with or without 10 nM androgen for 0–120 min were
immunoprecipitated with antibodies against Mdm2 followed by semi-quantitative PCR incorporating primers specific for ARE I (i and iii), ARE III (ii) or AREX (iv).
Input samples containing crude chromatin extracts prior to immunoprecipitation were also analysed.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1 15
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 6, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
to associate with the ER at the active ER-responsive pS2
promoter (20), suggestive of a role for the E3 ligase in ER
function, we figured that Mdm2 may also have the potential to
associate with the AR at active androgen-responsive genes as a
mechanism of transcriptional regulation. Using ChIP assays in
AR-expressing LNCaP prostate cancer cells, incorporating an
Mdm2 antibody, we examined the association of the E3 ligase
with the AR-responsive PSA promoter in the presence and
absence of the synthetic androgen, R1881. Using primers
specific to both the proximal ARE I and distal ARE III (see
Figure 1A), we sought to examine potential differences in
Mdm2 association at these AR-binding sites. As shown in
Figure 1B, in the absence of androgens, a small amount of
Mdm2 was detected at both ARE I and ARE III, but not at a
region lacking a functional androgen response element
(ARE X), indicating that Mdm2 may associate with the
proximal and distal AREs of the inactive promoter. However,
the fact that both AR and HDAC1 associate with the promoter
in the absence of androgen (Figure 2A) suggests that it is a
common phenomenon and may be explained by the promis-
cuity of the endogenous ART877A mutant, expressed in LNCaP
cells, for binding trace levels of androgens and other steroids
within our experimental system (34,35). A 60 min exposure
of cells to androgen caused a robust increase in Mdm2
association at AREI that was increased further after 120 min
hormone treatment [Figure 1B (i), compare lanes2and 3with 1].
A similar pattern of Mdm2 recruitment was observed at the
AREIII site [Figure 1B (ii)], but not at AREX [Figure 1B (iv)],
suggesting that Mdm2 association is conserved at both the
proximal and enhancer regions of the PSA promoter and is
dependent upon AR-binding sites.
Mdm2 associates with AR and HDAC1
at the PSA promoter
Our previous findings that both AR and HDAC1 are recruited
to ARE I of the PSA promoter after 20 min androgen treatment
was suggestive of an acute mechanism for AR regulation (12).
To assess a role for Mdm2 in AR regulation at the promoter, we
first extended our ChIP analysis to examine AR and HDAC1
association over a period of 120 min. As shown in Figure 2A,
both AR and HDAC1 recruitment to ARE I increased after
30 min hormone treatment as expected, decreased after 60 min
and subsequently increased after 120 min stimulation, suggest-
ing in a manner similar to that observed for the ER and com-
ponents of the ER transcriptosome (20), active AR and HDAC1
A B
C
D
Figure 2. Mdm2 co-associates with AR and HDAC1 at the PSA promoter. ChIP assays were performed in LNCaP cells, using primers specific to ARE I, to assess
HDAC1 and AR association with the PSA promoter. (A) Soluble chromatin extracts from LNCaP cells treated with or without 10 nM androgen for 0–120 min were
immunoprecipitated with antibodies against AR or HDAC1 followed by semi-quantitative PCR. (B and C) To investigate potential interaction between AR, Mdm2
and HDAC1 at the PSA promoter, re-ChIP analysis was performed using LNCaP cells treated with or without androgen for 120 min. Chromatin extracts
immunoprecipitated with anti-AR (B) or -Mdm2 (C) antibodies were re-immunoprecipitated with antibodies to AR, Mdm2, HDAC1 or VP16 for control
followed by semi-quantitative PCR incorporating primers specific for ARE I and ARE X. (D) To examine changes to the ubiquitylation status of the AR
transcriptosome upon the PSA promoter, ChIP analysis was performed using an anti-ubiquitin antibody followed by re-ChIP analysis using antibodies for AR,
Mdm2, HDAC1 and VP16.
16 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 6, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
display dynamic association-dissociation kinetics upon the
PSA promoter. In contrast, Mdm2 recruitment to ARE I is
minimal after 30 min androgen stimulation [Figure 1B (iii)],
but increases after 60 min and further by 120 min hormone
addition. In all, while AR and HDAC1 display altered asso-
ciation kinetics to that of Mdm2 from 0 to 60 min androgen
treatment, data from the 120 min time-point provide evidence
that AR, Mdm2 and HDAC1 may co-associate upon the prox-
imal PSA promoter. Given the recent evidence regarding the
cyclical nature of Mdm2 upon the ER-responsive pS2 reporter
(20), it is likely that our broad time-frames for the analysis are
unable to resolve the true nature of Mdm2 kinetics, and by
incorporating additional time-points, we speculate that AR,
Mdm2 and HDAC1 co-association is a more common event.
To test whether AR, Mdm2 and HDAC1 are associated in
the same complex on the ARE I of the PSA promoter,
we performed ChIP analysis in LNCaP cells with an anti-
body against AR and then re-chromatin immunoprecipitated
(re-ChIP) the crosslinked AR-containing complexes with anti-
bodies specific to AR, Mdm2 and HDAC1 as well as an
anti-VP16 antibody for control. In the absence of androgen,
antibodies to AR and HDAC1 failed to generate PCR products
for the ARE I region of the PSA promoter, while the Mdm2
antibody produced a weak signal that may suggest the presence
of a sub-population of Mdm2 that is not directly associated
with the AR, but does interact with ARE I of the PSA pro-
moter. After 120 min androgen stimulation, the amount of AR,
Mdm2 and HDAC1 immunoprecipitated from the initial
AR-containing complex increased at ARE I (Figure 2B,
+R1881), but not at ARE X, indicating that AR, Mdm2 and
HDAC1 co-associate specifically at AR-responsive regions of
the PSA promoter in response to androgen stimulation. The
fact that the control anti-VP16 antibody failed to generate PCR
products both in the presence and absence of ligand provides
evidence that our experimental system is specific in identify-
ing components of the AR complex at the PSA promoter and
indicates no cross-reactivity between antibodies used in the
primary ChIP with those used to re-ChIP the immunocomplex.
To confirm the notion that AR, Mdm2 and HDAC1
co-associate at the active PSA promoter, we performed the reci-
procal experiment using an anti-Mdm2 antibody for ChIP, and
antibodies for AR, Mdm2, HDAC1 and VP16 in re-ChIP,
followed by PCR using primers for ARE I. As shown in
Figure 2C, in the absence of ligand, we observed a small
amount of Mdm2, AR and HDAC1 at ARE I, which was
increased robustly upon androgen treatment, confirming that
AR, Mdm2 and HDAC1 co-associate upon the PSA promoter
in response to AR activation.
Given that Mdm2 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase, and that AR
(23,33), HDAC1 (36,37) and Mdm2 (38) are each targets for
ubiquitylation, we next sought to establish whether these
components of the AR transcriptosome are ubiquitylated at
the PSA promoter. The recent demonstration that components
of the ER signalling cascade are subject to ubiquitylation at the
oestrogen-responsive pS2 promoter indicated that ubiquitylase
activity occurs at an early stage in the transcriptional process
and is likely mediated by promoter-bound E3 ligases, such as
Mdm2 (20). Using an anti-ubiquitin antibody in ChIP analysis,
and then antibodies against Mdm2, AR and HDAC1 in re-ChIP
analysis, we examined the association of Mdm2, AR and
HDAC1 with the ubiquitylated protein fraction at ARE I
and ARE X of the PSA promoter in the absence and presence
of androgens. In the absence of hormone, AR and HDAC1,
but not Mdm2 or the negative control VP16, were identified in
the ubiquitylated fraction (Figure 2D, R1881), suggesting
that the small amount of AR and HDAC1 identified at the
inactive ARE I (Figure 2A) is either directly ubiquitylated or is
associated with a modified chromatin complex. After 120 min
hormone treatment, AR, Mdm2 and HDAC1 association
with the ubiquitylated fraction increased strongly (Figure 2D,
+R1881), indicating that the extent of ubiquitylation at ARE I
is responsive to the ligand-bound status of the AR, and may
suggest that Mdm2, AR and HDAC1 are all targets for
ubiquitylation at this early stage of the transcriptional process.
Furthermore, the failure of the ARE X primers to generate a
PCR signal in both the presence and absence of androgens
indicates that changes to the ubiquitylation status at the PSA
promoter is specific to sites of AR association.
AR is ubiquitylated in response to androgen treatment
The correlation between increased association of AR with the
ubiquitylated protein fraction and androgen treatment led us to
investigate changes in the ubiquitylation status of the receptor
upon hormone stimulation. Considering that AR (and HDAC1)
were potentially modified after 2 h AR activation in re-ChIP
analysis, we monitored changes to AR mobility by
western analysis, incorporating an anti-AR antibody, follow-
ing 0–5 h androgen exposure. Furthermore, to enhance
visualization of potentially ubiquitylated receptor proteins,
LNCaP cells were treated with 1 mM MG132 prior to ligand
treatment. After 1 h androgen exposure, we observed the
appearance of two higher molecular weight AR species,
110 and 135 kDa in size, indicative of mono- and tri-
ubiquitylated receptor proteins (Figure 3A, compare lanes
2–5 with lane 1). The appearance and increase in intensity
of an additional slower-migrating receptor form of 250 kDa
between 3 and 5 h post-hormone addition (Figure 3A, see lanes
4 and 5) was suggestive of a polyubiquitylated AR protein
whose presence, like both the 120 and 135 kDa species, was
androgen dependent. To confirm androgen-dependent AR
ubiquitylation, we immunoprecipitated AR from 5 h andro-
gen-treated LNCaP cells and examined AR ubiquitylation
using an anti-ubiquitin antibody. As shown in Figure 3B,
AR ubiquitylation is markedly enhanced after hormone treat-
ment compared with AR immunoprecipitated from cells not
stimulated with androgen, indicating that AR activity
correlates with ubiquitylation status, and may initiate at the
promoter level.
Given that polyubiquitination, in general, constitutes a
destructive signal recognized by the proteasome, it was
pertinent to examine changes to AR protein levels during
hormone stimulation. Extending the time-course in Figure 3A
to 8 h androgen exposure, we show that receptor levels decrease
modestly between 2 and 4 h, but fail to decrease further after 8 h
hormone addition (Figure 3C, left panel). The fact that the AR
gene is a direct target for AR-mediated transcription (39) may
suggest that the active receptor maintains its own protein levels
by up-regulating the AR production in response to increased
proteolysis. To test this hypothesis, we analysed changes to AR
protein levels as before, but from cells pre-treated with 1 mM of
the translation inhibitor CHX. We figured that analysis of
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1 17
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 6, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
a single receptor population may provide a more decisive
model for testing the effects of androgen-dependent ubiquity-
lation. As shown in Figure 3C (right panel), AR protein levels
decreased rapidly after 2 h androgen treatment leading to a near
complete loss of the receptor 8 h post-hormone addition, in-
dicating androgen-stimulated receptor ubiquitylation confers a
signal for protein destabilization that is seen to be amplified
when examining a single AR population in the absence of
de novo protein synthesis.
Mdm2-mediated AR ubiquitylation and
destruction is blocked by c-abl
We next tested the ability for Mdm2 to directly ubiquitylate
the AR by immunoprecipitation in an effort to confirm
previous reports (33). COS-7 cells transiently transfected with
AR, His-tagged ubiquitin and either Mdm2, a ubiquitylase-
inactive Mdm2 mutant, Mdm2C462A, or an empty vector for
control, in the presence of androgen and 1 mM MG132, were
subject to immunoprecipitation using nickel–agarose (to bind
his-ubiquitylated proteins) followed by western analysis
incorporating an AR antibody. As shown in Figure 4A,
ectopic expression of Mdm2, but not the ubiquitylase-dead
Mdm2C462A mutant, resulted in increased levels of higher
molecular weight AR species that was not due to unequal
loading of the samples (Figure 4A, see input). In the absence
of MG132, AR protein levels were reduced in the presence of
ubiquitylase activity (Figure 4B), confirming the previous
finding that Mdm2-mediated AR ubiquitylation is necessary
for receptor destruction (33).
A B
C
Figure 3. AR is a target for androgen-dependent ubiquitylation. (A) To investigate whether androgen treatment stimulates AR modification, LNCaP cells were
treated with 1mM MG132 for 8 h and 10 nM R1881 for 0–5 h, and higher molecular weight AR species were identified by western analysis using an anti-AR antibody.
(B) Following 0 or 5 h R1881 and 8 h MG132 treatment, LNCaP cells were subject to immunoprecipitation using an anti-AR antibody and ubiquitylated species were
detected by western analysis using an anti-ubiquitin antibody. (C) To assess whether hormone-dependent AR ubiquitylation confers AR destabilization, we examined
AR protein levels in LNCaP cells treated with androgen for 0–8 h by western analysis as above. AR synthesis was attenuated with 1 mM CHX treatment for 8 h to
assess turnover of a single receptor population.
18 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 6, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
The ubiquitylase activity of Mdm2 is regulated, in part, by
the c-abl kinase. Direct c-abl-mediated Mdm2 phosphoryla-
tion reduces Mdm2 ubiquitylase activity and has been demon-
strated to stabilize p53 protein levels in response to numerous
cellular insults, including ionizing irradiation (32,40,41). To
investigate a role for c-abl in regulating Mdm2-mediated AR
destruction, COS-7 cells transiently transfected with combi-
nations of expression vectors for AR, Mdm2 and c-abl were
analysed by western analysis incorporating an anti-AR anti-
body. As expected, in the presence of Mdm2, AR protein
levels are greatly reduced compared with cells transfected
with AR alone (Figure 4C, compare lanes 1 and 2). Interest-
ingly, in the presence of c-abl kinase activity, AR protein
levels are increased to near normal levels (compare lanes 1
and 3) indicating, in a manner similar to that observed for
p53, attenuation of Mdm2 activity by c-abl enhances receptor
stability, suggesting potential cross-talk between regulation of
p53 and AR.
HDAC1 is a target for Mdm2-mediated
ubiquitylation and destruction
The recent demonstration that HDAC1 is a target for direct
ubiquitylation provided evidence of an additional regulatory
mechanism for HDAC1 activity (36). Our re-ChIP analysis
provided evidence that either direct HDAC1 ubiquitylation or
association with a ubiquitylated complex at the PSA promoter
is enhanced in the presence of hormone (Figure 2D). To assess
the potential of direct HDAC1 ubiquitylation in response to
androgen treatment, LNCaP cells treated with or without
10 nM androgen were subject to immunoprecipitation using
an anti-HDAC1 antibody and then analysed by western
blotting incorporating antibodies against HDAC1 (Figure 5A,
top panel) and ubiquitin (Figure 5A, lower panel). To increase
the potential for HDAC1 ubiquitylation, we extended andro-
gen treatment from 2 h, as used in the re-ChIP analysis, to 4 h
and also pre-treated cells with 1 mM MG132 to prevent
potential HDAC1 proteolysis. As shown in Figure 5A, no
ubiquitylated HDAC1 species were observed in the absence
of androgen. However, after 4 h hormone treatment, we iden-
tified three higher molecular weight HDAC1 species of 120,
130 and 160 kDa, indicative of hyperubiquitylated HDAC1
proteins. In contrast, unmodified HDAC1 protein levels were
comparable in the presence and absence of androgen, indic-
ating that the differences observed using the anti-ubiquitin
antibody were not due to unequal protein loading.
In keeping with our AR experiments, we next investigated
whether increased ubiquitylation could confer HDAC1 desta-
bilization. As shown in Figure 5B, 4 h androgen treatment of
LNCaP cells, grown in the absence of MG132, caused a
marked reduction in HDAC1 protein levels (compare lanes 1
and 2), which was attenuated in the presence of 1 mM MG132
(Figure 5B, compare lanes 1 and 3), implicating a role for the
proteasome in ubiquitylated HDAC1 turnover.
The correlation between androgen-facilitated HDAC1 and
Mdm2 co-association at the PSA promoter (Figure 2B and C)
with elevated HDAC1 ubiquitylation (Figures 2D and 5A)
suggests that HDAC1 may be modified by the ubiquitylase
activity of Mdm2. To test this, the ubiquitylation status of
ectopically expressed HDAC1 was analysed in the presence
A
B
C
Figure 4. AR is targeted for Mdm2-mediated ubiquitylation and destruction. (A) To confirm Mdm2 catalyses AR ubiquitylation, COS-7 cells transfected with AR,
His-tagged ubiquitin, and either wild-type Mdm2 or an Mdm2 ubiquitylase-dead mutant Mdm2C462A was treated with 1 mM MG132 for 8 h prior to
immunoprecipitation with nickel–agarose (His-ubiquitin-bound proteins) followed by immunoblotting with an anti-AR antibody. (B) To assess a role for the
enzymatic activity of Mdm2 in AR destabilization, COS-7 cells were transfected as above and AR protein levels analysed by western analysis. (C) To examine
potential cross-talk between p53 and AR pathways, the effect of c-abl kinase on Mdm2-mediated AR destruction was examined. COS-7 cells were transiently
transfected with AR and combinations of Mdm2 and c-abl followed by western analysis using an anti-AR antibody.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1 19
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 6, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
of transiently transfected wild-type Mdm2 or Mdm2C462A
in COS-7 cells. As before, the cells were treated with
1 mM MG132 prior to immunoprecipitation with an
HDAC1 antibody to maximize the detection of ubiquitylated
proteins. As shown in Figure 5C (upper panel), we observed an
additional HDAC1-specific band at 160 kDa in the
presence of Mdm2, but not by the inactive Mdm2C462A mutant
(compare lanes 2 and 3 with 1), suggesting that Mdm2 has the
potential to ubiquitylate HDAC1. This was confirmed using an
anti-ubiquitin antibody to probe the HDAC1 immunocomplex;
a band corresponding to 160 kDa was observed in the presence
of the active E3 ligase (Figure 5C, lower panel, lane 2). This
data indicate that the overexpression of Mdm2 in vivo
enhances HDAC1 ubiquitylation, thus extending the substrate
specificity of Mdm2 to modify HDAC1. Furthermore, it is the
first identification to date of a known E3 ligase for HDAC1.
To assess the functional significance of Mdm2-mediated
HDAC1 ubiquitylation, we examined changes to the stability
A C
B
D
Figure 5. HDAC1 is a target for androgen-dependent ubiquitylation and destruction by Mdm2. Given that HDAC1 associates with Mdm2 and is associated with a
ubiquitylated complex at the PSA promoter, we investigated changes to the ubiquitylation status and stability of HDAC1 after hormone treatment and in the presence
of Mdm2. (A) HDAC1 was immunoprecipitated from LNCaP cells treated with or without 10 nM androgen for 4 h and 1 mM MG132 for 8 h, followed by western
analysis using an anti-ubiquitin antibody. (B) LNCaP cells were treated with 10 nM androgen, as before, with or without 1 mM MG132 and HDAC1 protein analysed
by western analysis. (C) To assess a role for Mdm2 in HDAC1 ubiquitylation, COS-7 cells were transiently transfected with HDAC1 together with either Mdm2,
Mdm2C462A or empty vector, in the presence of 10 nM MG132 and treated with 1 mM MG132 for 8 h, and subject to immunoprecipitation using an anti-HDAC1
antibody followed by western analysis incorporating an antibody against ubiquitin. (D) COS-7 cells were transiently transfected with HDAC1, increasing amounts of
Mdm2 or Mdm2C462A in the presence of 10 nM R1881 and treated with or without 1 mM MG132 for 8 h prior to immunoblot analysis using an anti-HDAC1 antibody.
20 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 6, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
of HDAC1 in the presence and absence of Mdm2 ubiquitylase
activity (Figure 5D). Increasing amounts of Mdm2 (50–200 ng)
correlated with decreased HDAC1 stability (see upper left
panel, compare lanes 2–4 with lane 1) that was reduced
in the presence of MG132 (see upper right panel, compare
lanes 2–4 with lane 1), indicating that Mdm2-mediated
HDAC1 destruction is via the proteasome. To provide evid-
ence that the observed effect was due to the ubiquitylase
activity of Mdm2, we replaced wild-type Mdm2 with 50
and 200 ng of Mdm2C462A and monitored HDAC1 protein
levels. Unexpectedly, in the presence of 50 ng Mdm2C462A,
HDAC1 was reduced to levels equivalent to that observed
upon expression of 50 ng wild-type Mdm2, suggesting that
Mdm2 may lower HDAC1 protein levels in an ubiquitylase-
independent manner (Figure 5D, upper left panel, compare
lanes 1 and 5). However, recent evidence has suggested
that at low levels, ubiquitylase-inactive Mdm2 mutants may
retain the ability to dimerize with their endogenous wild-type
counterparts (42) and direct target protein modification and
destruction, while in greater amounts, we speculate that the
mutants act in a dominant negative fashion and thus perturb
Mdm2 activity. We confirmed this notion with the finding that
200 ng Mdm2C462A resulted in stabilization of HDAC1 protein
levels (upper left panel, compare lanes 1 and 6), and thus
indicated that Mdm2 reduces HDAC1 protein levels in an
ubiquitylase-dependent manner.
Mdm2 and HDAC1 work co-operatively to
down-regulate AR protein levels
The recent demonstration that HDAC1 activity is required for
Mdm2-mediated ubiquitylation and destruction of transcrip-
tionally active p53 indicated that deacetylase and ubiquitylase
activities synergize to provide an efficient down-regulatory
mechanism for p53 function (26). The fact that lysine residues
of the conserved KSKK motif of p53 are targeted for both
acetylation and ubiquitylation (43) suggests that HDAC1 facil-
itates p53 ubiquitylation by directly deacetylating active p53
and exposing the lysine-rich sequence to Mdm2-mediated
modification. Although the residues for AR ubiquitylation are
presently unknown, the similarity between the KSKK motif of
p53 and the KLKK motif within the hinge domain of the AR,
which is also a target for acetylation (12,13), suggests that the
lysine-rich sequence of the AR is modified by ubiquitylation.
Therefore, in keeping with mechanisms of p53 repression, we
hypothesized that deacetylase activity may be important for
ubiquitylation and destruction of the activated receptor.
To assess a role for HDAC activity in hormone-dependent
receptor ubiquitylation, AR protein was immunoprecipitated
from LNCaP cells grown in androgen-containing media in the
presence and absence of 100 nM of the HDAC inhibitor TSA
(as indicated in Figure 6A) and subjected to western analysis
incorporating an anti-ubiquitin antibody. According to our
hypothesis, HDAC inhibition would reduce AR modification
and so to facilitate identification of flux to receptor ubiquityla-
tion status, the cells were grown in the presence and absence of
1 mM MG132. As shown in Figure 6A, 12 h MG132 treatment
greatly enhanced endogenous AR ubiquitylation over back-
ground levels, with the appearance of a smear between 130
and 250 kDa, indicative of hyperubiquitylated AR species
(Figure 6A, compare lanes 1 and 2). A combination of
MG132 and TSA dramatically reduced AR ubiquitylation
to near basal levels (Figure 6A, compare lanes 1 and 3),
indicating that deacetylase activity is important for AR
ubiquitylation in vivo.
We next sought to examine the potential co-operativity
between HDAC1 and Mdm2 in regulating AR stability.
COS-7 cells ectopically expressing AR and combinations of
Mdm2, HDAC1 and a deacetylase-inactive HDAC1 mutant,
HDAC1H141A, were subjected to western analysis, incorpor-
ating an anti-AR antibody, to examine changes to receptor
degradation. As expected, AR turnover was increased robustly
in the presence of Mdm2 (Figure 6B, compare lanes 1 and 2),
which was further enhanced upon co-expression of Mdm2 and
HDAC1 (Figure 6B, compare lanes 2 and 3), suggesting that
HDAC1 and Mdm2 function in synergy to enhance receptor
turnover. In contrast, the failure of the HDAC1H141A mutant to
stimulate Mdm2-mediated receptor destruction (Figure 6B,
compare lanes 3 and 4) suggests that the deacetylase activity
of HDAC1 is required to facilitate the function of Mdm2.
To assess the existence of a trimeric complex between AR,
Mdm2 and HDAC1, LNCaP cells grown in the presence and
absence of hormone were subject to immunoprecipitation
using both AR and HDAC1 antibodies followed by western
analysis using antibodies for AR, HDAC1 and Mdm2.
As shown in Figure 6C, both HDAC1 and Mdm2 were
co-immunoprecipitated with the AR that was enhanced in a
ligand-dependent manner, while both Mdm2 and AR were
shown to interact with HDAC1, indicating that AR, Mdm2
and HDAC1 are likely components of a hormone-dependent
complex.
We next analysed the effect of a combination of deacetylase
and ubiquitylase activities on AR-mediated gene expression
using the androgen-responsive PSA luciferase reporter as
described previously (12). As shown in Figure 6D (i), the
3-fold induction of AR activity in response to androgen
was reduced by 50% in the presence of Mdm2 and
60% by HDAC1, but was not effected by the overexpression
of HDAC1H141A, as reported previously (12,33). The
co-expression of Mdm2 with HDAC1 reduced AR-mediated
transcription to basal levels, while HDAC1H141A attenuated
the repressive effect of Mdm2, indicating that not only do
deacetylase and ubiquitylase activities function co-operatively,
the failure for Mdm2 to function in the presence of the
dominant negative HDAC1H141A mutant suggests that
HDAC1 activity is necessary to facilitate Mdm2-mediated
AR ubiquitylation.
To examine potential interplay between ubiquitylation and
acetylation in regulating AR activity, the above experiment
was repeated with the inclusion of wild-type Tip60 and a
HAT-inactive Tip60Q377E/G380E mutant. We figured that if
deacetylation was required for Mdm2-mediated AR inactiva-
tion, overexpression of Tip60, an established co-activator and
factor acetyltransferase protein for AR, would cause hyper-
acetylation of the receptor to counteract the effect of Mdm2
upon AR function. In keeping with this notion, overexpression
of wild-type, but not HAT-defective Tip60 attenuated Mdm2-
mediated AR inactivation [Figure 6D (ii)], providing evidence
that the acetylase activity of Tip60 competes with HDAC1/
Mdm2 in AR regulation and further credits the hypothesis that
acetylation and ubiquitylation share overlapping sites within
the receptor.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1 21
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 6, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
DISCUSSION
The AR, similar to many NRs, is a target for several post-
translational modifications that govern numerous facets of
receptor function. Of these, two have recently emerged as
major mechanisms for regulating AR-mediated transcription
and stability. Acetylation and the interplay between HAT and
HDAC proteins constitutes an important transcriptional switch
that controls the transcriptional potential of the AR (12,13,44),
while ubiquitylation has been demonstrated to signal receptor
destruction providing an absolute mechanism of AR inact-
ivation (33). Intriguingly, factors that catalyse acetylation,
deacetylation and ubiquitylation have been shown to co-exist
in macromolecular complexes upon active NR-responsive
genes, indicating that changes to acetylation and ubiquityla-
tion status is likely to enable acute control of transcriptional
activity and protein stability at the promoter (20). The data
presented here demonstrate that the E3 ligase Mdm2 associ-
ates with the active PSA promoter and is in complex with both
the AR and HDAC1 suggesting that, in a manner similar to
other NR family members, factors involved in regulating acet-
ylation and ubiquitylation are present upon active androgen-
responsive genes. Although the time-frames for ChIP analysis
were less detailed in comparison with reports regarding ER
transcriptosome recruitment to the active pS2 gene (20), our
data unequivocally show that Mdm2 recruitment to the endo-
genous PSA promoter increases robustly over a period of 2 h
and Mdm2 co-associates with AR and HDAC1 at the 2 h
A
C
B
22 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 6, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
time-point. However, given the recent evidence indicating
rapid association/disassociation kinetics of Mdm2 and other
ER-binding factors to ER-responsive promoters (20), it will be
pertinent to extend our ChIP analysis by including additional
time-frames, to identify potential overlap in recruitment
between Mdm2, AR, HDAC1 and other AR transcriptosome
components. Although Mdm2 associated with both the
proximal ARE I and distal ARE III of the PSA promoter
(Figure 1B), suggesting an equal affinity for the two distinct
response elements, examining other AR-responsive genes,
such as p21 and phosphatidic acid phosphatase (PAP),
could confirm Mdm2 as a bona fide component of the AR
transcriptional complex.
The emergence of re-ChIP analysis as a tool for identifying
both transcription factor associations and post-translational
modifications at promoter elements has increased our under-
standing of the divergent processes involved during initiation
and elongation of transcription. Indeed, we successfully used
re-ChIP analysis to confirm our ChIP data that Mdm2, AR and
HDAC1 are closely associated at the PSA promoter (Figure 2B
and C). Furthermore, incorporating an anti-ubiquitin antibody
into our analysis, we provided evidence that the AR, HDAC1
and Mdm2 were potentially hyperubiquitylated in response
to androgen stimulation and suggesting that the ubiquitylase
activity of Mdm2 may be active during the transcriptional
process (Figure 2D).
While polyubiquitination of proteins is widely acknowl-
edged as a signal for destruction by the proteasome (45),
monoubiquitination, although presently ill-defined, has been
shown to influence numerous cellular events, including endo-
cytosis and meiosis (46,47). To extrapolate our re-ChIP data
and to assess the propensity for mono- or polyubiquitylation
of the AR and HDAC1, we analysed androgen-dependent
changes to the ubiquitylation status of both AR and HDAC1
in LNCaP cells by western analysis and immunoprecipitation.
The rapid appearance of two slower-migrating immuno-
reactive AR species (110 and 130 kDa) after 1 h androgen
treatment indicated that the AR is potentially mono- and
tri-ubiquitylated upon activation (Figure 3A). Whether this
mono- and tri-ubiquitylation of the AR is a genuine modifica-
tion or is a result of inefficient polyubiquitination will need to
be addressed. Recently, Burgdorf and co-workers (48) have
identified tumour susceptibility gene 101 (TSG 101) as an
AR-interacting partner that enhances the stability of a mono-
ubiquitylated form of the receptor in MCF-7 breast cancer
cells. It is thought that upon androgen stimulation, receptor
ubiquitylation is limited to a single site by the binding of
TSG101 that prevents polyubiquitylation and destruction of
the AR. It is interesting to speculate that in LNCaP cells,
a similar scenario exists in which hormone-dependent AR
ubiquitylation is limited to mono- or tri-modification by the
binding of TSG101 or a related factor. This hypothesis is
further strengthened with the demonstration that AR protein
levels remain stable between 1 and 2 h androgen treatment
(Figure 3C). Moreover, it was suggested that additional signals
during transcription may signal the release of TSG101 and
allow hyperubiquitylation and destruction of the AR (48).
In keeping with this notion, the formation of numerous higher
molecular weight AR species after 3 h hormone treatment,
ranging from 150 to 250 kDa in size, was indicative of poly-
ubiquitination and resulted in a correlative destabilization of
the receptor protein (Figure 3). We suggest that the concerted
D(i) D(ii)
Figure 6. HDAC1 and Mdm2 co-operate to down-regulate AR activity and stability. (A) To assess whether HDAC activity is important for AR ubiquitylation, LNCaP
cells treated with 10 nM androgen, and combinations of 1 mM TSA and 1 mM MG132 were subject to immunoprecipitation using an anti-AR antibody followed by
western analysis incorporating an anti-ubiquitin antibody. (B) To gain an insight into Mdm2 and HDAC1 co-operativity, COS-7 cells were transiently transfected
with AR together with Mdm2 and either HDAC1 or a deacetylase-inactive HDAC1H141A mutant prior to western analysis using an anti-AR antibody. (C) The
formation of a trimeric complex between AR, Mdm2 and HDAC1 was examined by immunoprecipitation of AR or HDAC1 from LNCaP cells, grown in the presence
and absence of 10 nM R1881 for 8 h, followed by immunoblotting using AR, Mdm2 and HDAC1 antibodies. (D) (i) To assess the impact of Mdm2 and HDAC1
co-operation upon AR activity, COS-7 cells were transfected as before and including the androgen-responsive PSA-luciferase reporter, and b-galactosidase reporter
for control. Results shown are the average of three independent experiments performed in quadruplicate–SD. (ii) To examine potential interplay between acetylation
and ubiquitylation in AR regulation, the above experiment was repeated, but with the inclusion of wild-type or a HAT-inactive Tip60 mutant
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1 23
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 6, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
increase in Mdm2 association at the PSA gene between 0 and
2 h androgen treatment may negate potential anti-ubiquitylase
activities present at the active promoter and subsequently
polyubiquitylate the AR rendering it a target for destruction.
In a manner similar to AR, HDAC1 protein levels were
decreased robustly between 3 and 4 h hormone stimulation
as a result of hyperubiquitylation of the protein (Figure 5).
In addition to androgens, glucocorticoids have recently been
shown to increase HDAC1 turnover, albeit after 24 h
stimulation (49), indicating that destruction of HDAC1 may
be a common event in transcriptional regulation of NRs. The
demonstration that HDAC1 is a target for androgen-dependent
Mdm2-mediated ubiquitylation and proteolysis provides the
first demonstration that HDAC1 is directly ubiquitylated by a
known E3 ligase (Figure 5C and D). Together with our re-ChIP
analysis, our data indicate both HDAC1 and AR are targets
for ubiquitylation by Mdm2, potentially at the promoter level,
that is likely to confer protein destabilization and provide an
additional mechanism for AR and HDAC1 regulation.
At present, the target sites for Mdm2-mediated AR
and HDAC1 ubiquitylation are unknown. For HDAC1, a
C-terminal lysine-rich sequence corresponding to residues
432–482 downstream of a PEST sequence has been shown
to be hyperubiquitylated in vitro (36). For the AR, evidence
suggests that the KLKK motif, and possibly other flanking
lysine residues, is directly modified by Mdm2. First, the
KSKK of p53 and KLKK motif of AR are both targets for
p300- and PCAF-mediated acetylation (13,50,51), suggesting
these sequences are conducive to identical catalytic events.
Second, the demonstration that deacetylase activity is required
to facilitate Mdm2-mediated AR ubiquitylation, as previously
reported for p53 (26), implies acetylation and ubiquitylation
share overlapping lysine sites, with the KLKK motif a likely
candidate for both.
The finding that the deacetylase activity of HDAC1 is
required to enhance AR ubiquitylation and turnover by
Mdm2 provided a novel insight into a co-operative role of
HDAC1 and Mdm2 in AR regulation (Figure 6). Although
the exact mechanism of interplay between the two factors
is ill-defined, evidence from our ChIP analysis may indicate
a sequential mode of AR inhibition at the PSA promoter.
HDAC1 recruitment to the active promoter occurs after
20 min androgen exposure, suggesting that catalytic activity
may be employed at the very early stages of transcription to
negate AR activity by directly deacetylating the receptor
and concurrently exposing the ubiquitin target sites. The
AR is then primed for ubiquitylation by a rapidly associating
Mdm2 population at the PSA promoter between 1 and 2 h
androgen treatment that is likely to target both AR and
HDAC1 for ubiquitylation and destruction. Thus, it may be
pertinent to suggest that the tandem ubiquitylation and
destruction of AR and HDAC1 between 2 and 4 h androgen
treatment, as demonstrated in Figures 3 and 5, respectively,
may act to clear the promoter allowing for new rounds of
transcription to be initiated. However, the predominance of
HAT proteins at active promoter elements complicates this
simplified model. We have previously shown Tip60
co-associates with HDAC1 upon the active PSA promoter
directly acetylates the AR and attenuates HDAC1-mediated
AR deacetylation (12). We have also demonstrated that the
HAT activity of Tip60 can counteract the repressive effect of
Mdm2 [Figure 6E (ii)], indicating that interplay between
HATs and HDACs at the PSA and other AR-responsive
genes may render the AR either active or a target for destruc-
tion. An additional consideration is the fact that Mdm2 and
other E3 ligase enzymes have broad substrate specificities.
Of interest is the recent finding that Mdm2 catalyses ubiqui-
tylation and destruction of Tip60 (52) and PCAF (53), both
co-activators for the AR. Therefore, it is likely that at active
genes, the recruitment of Mdm2 results in a rapid, but dis-
criminate modification of numerous members of the AR tran-
scriptosome, including both positive and negative regulatory
factors, which likely pre-disposes the AR for ubiquitylation
and proteolysis.
Finally, monoubiquitylation of histone H2B has been asso-
ciated with transcriptionally active foci in several eukaryotic
organisms (54). During transcriptional activation of the Gal1
gene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, histone H2B succumbs to
Rad6/Bre-1-mediated ubiquitylation that induces histone H3
methylation, indicating that ubiquitylase activity at the pro-
moter facilitates transcription by altering the histone code
(55,56). Although the role of histone H2B ubiquitylation
during transcriptional activation in mammals is not clearly
understood, the limited evidence implicates roles in both tran-
scriptional activation and repression (54). The association of
Mdm2 at the active PSA promoter may be deemed as a pre-
dominantly negative event for AR-mediated transcription. The
concurrent increase in ubiquitylation at the gene, as shown by
re-ChIP analysis, may indicate that in addition to members of
the AR transcriptional complex, histone proteins may consti-
tute a bona fide Mdm2 target that facilitates attenuation of
receptor function. At present, we are establishing a re-ChIP
procedure to examine changes to histone ubiquitylation at the
active PSA promoter.
In all, our data have provided a novel insight into the role
of Mdm2 in regulating AR-mediated transcription and the
interplay between HDAC and HAT proteins in the mechanics
of Mdm2 function. Further investigation may focus upon the
relative levels of these proteins in different stages of prostate
cancer to identify whether flux to ubiquitylase, HAT and HDAC
activities exerts an influence upon cellular transformation.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are very grateful for the various plasmids received from
Stuart Schreiber, Ygal Haupt, David Lane and Bohdan
Wasylyk. This work was supported by the Association for
International Cancer Research and the NCRI (DoH, CRUK
and MRC; grant no. G0100100/64424). Funding to pay the
Open Access publication charges for this article was provided
by the Association for International Cancer Research (AICR).
REFERENCES
1. Culig,Z., Hobisch,A., Bartsch,G. and Klocker,H. (2000) Androgen
receptor—an update of mechanisms of action in prostate cancer.
Urol. Res., 28, 211–219.
2. Abate-Shen,C. and Shen,M.M. (2000) Molecular genetics of prostate
cancer. Genes Dev., 14, 2410–2434.
3. Brinkmann,A.O., Blok,L.J., de Ruiter,P.E., Doesburg,P., Steketee,K.,
Berrevoets,C.A. and Trapman,J. (1999) Mechanisms of androgen
receptor activation and function. J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol., 69,
307–313.
24 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 6, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
4. Gnanapragasam,V.J., Robson,C.N., Leung,H.Y. and Neal,D.E.
(2000) Androgen receptor signalling in the prostate. BJU Int., 86,
1001–1013.
5. Tyagi,R.K., Lavrovsky,Y., Ahn,S.C., Song,C.S., Chatterjee,B. and
Roy,A.K. (2000) Dynamics of intracellular movement and
nucleocytoplasmic recycling of the ligand-activated androgen receptor
in living cells. Mol. Endocrinol., 14, 1162–1174.
6. Janne,O., A.Palvimo,J.J., Kallio,P. and Mehto,M. (1993) Androgen
receptor and mechanism of androgen action. Ann. Med., 25, 83–89.
7. He,B., Kemppainen,J.A., Voegel,J.J., Gronemeyer,H. and Wilson,E.M.
(1999) Activation function 2 in the human androgen receptor ligand
binding domain mediates interdomain communication with the
NH(2)-terminal domain. J. Biol. Chem., 274, 37219–37225.
8. He,B., Kemppainen,J.A. and Wilson,E.M. (2000) FXXLF and WXXLF
sequences mediate the NH2-terminal interaction with the ligand binding
domain of the androgen receptor. J. Biol. Chem., 275, 22986–22994.
9. Torchia,J., Glass,C. and Rosenfeld,M.G. (1998) Co-activators and
co-repressors in the integration of transcriptional responses. Curr. Opin.
Cell Biol., 10, 373–383.
10. Hermanson,O., Glass,C.K. and Rosenfeld,M.G. (2002) Nuclear receptor
coregulators: multiple modes of modification. Trends Endocrinol.
Metab., 13, 55–60.
11. McKenna,N.J. and O’Malley,B.W. (1999) From ligand to response:
generating diversity in nuclear receptor coregulator function. J. Steroid
Biochem. Mol. Biol., 74, 351–356.
12. Gaughan,L., Logan,I.R., Cook,S., Neal,D.E. and Robson,C.N. (2002)
Tip60 and histone deacetylase 1 regulate androgen receptor activity
through changes to the acetylation status of the receptor. J. Biol. Chem.,
277, 25904–25913.
13. Fu,M.F., Wang,C.G., Reutens,A.T., Wang,J., Angeletti,R.H.,
Siconolfi-Baez,L., Ogryzko,V., Avantaggiati,M.L. and Pestell,R.G.
(2000) p300 and p300/cAMP-response element-binding
protein-associated factor acetylate the androgen receptor at sites
governing hormone-dependent transactivation. J. Biol. Chem., 275,
20853–20860.
14. Shang,Y.F., Myers,M. and Brown,M. (2002) Formation of the androgen
receptor transcription complex. Mol. Cell, 9, 601–610.
15. Freiman,R.N. and Tjian,R. (2003) Regulating the regulators: lysine
modifications make their mark. Cell, 112, 11–17.
16. Nawaz,Z. and O’Malley,B.W. (2004) Urban renewal in the nucleus:
is protein turnover by proteasomes absolutely required for nuclear
receptor-regulated transcription? Mol. Endocrinol., 18, 493–499.
17. Ciechanover,A., Orian,A. and Schwartz,A.L. (2000) Ubiquitin-mediated
proteolysis: biological regulation via destruction. Bioessays, 22,
442–451.
18. Nawaz,Z., Lonard,D.M., Dennis,A.P., Smith,C.L. and O’Malley,B.W.
(1999) Proteasome-dependent degradation of the human estrogen
receptor. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 96, 1858–1862.
19. Lonard,D.M., Nawaz,Z., Smith,C.L. and O’Malley,B.W. (2000) The 26S
proteasome is required for estrogen receptor-alpha and coactivator
turnover and for efficient estrogen receptor-alpha transactivation.
Mol. Cell, 5, 939–948.
20. Reid,G., Hubner,M.R., Metivier,R., Brand,H., Denger,S., Manu,D.,
Beaudouin,J., Ellenberg,J. and Gannon,F. (2003) Cyclic,
proteasome-mediated turnover of unliganded and liganded ERalpha on
responsive promoters is an integral feature of estrogen signaling.
Mol. Cell, 11, 695–707.
21. Wallace,A.D. and Cidlowski,J.A. (2001) Proteasome-mediated
glucocorticoid receptor degradation restricts transcriptional signaling
by glucocorticoids. J. Biol. Chem., 276, 42714–42721.
22. Kinyamu,H.K. and Archer,T.K. (2003) Estrogen receptor-dependent
proteasomal degradation of the glucocorticoid receptor is coupled
to an increase in mdm2 protein expression. Mol. Cell. Biol., 23,
5867–5881.
23. Sheflin,L., Keegan,B., Zhang,W. and Spaulding,S.W. (2000) Inhibiting
proteasomes in human HepG2 and LNCaP cells increases endogenous
androgen receptor levels. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.,
276, 144–150.
24. Kang,Z.G., Pirskanen,A., Janne,O.A. and Palvimo,J.J. (2002)
Involvement of proteasome in the dynamic assembly of the androgen
receptor transcription complex. J. Biol. Chem., 277, 48366–48371.
25. Lin,H.K., Altuwaijri,S., Lin,W.J., Kan,P.Y., Collins,L.L. and Chang,C.S.
(2002) Proteasome activity is required for androgen receptor
transcriptional activity via regulation of androgen receptor nuclear
translocation and interaction with coregulators in prostate cancer cells.
J. Biol. Chem., 277, 36570–36576.
26. Ito,A., Kawaguchi,Y., Lai,C.H.,Kovacs,J.J., Higashimoto,Y., Appella,E.
and Yao,T.P. (2002) MDM2-HDAC1-mediated deacetylation of p53
is required for its degradation. EMBO J., 21, 6236–6245.
27. Brady,M.E., Ozanne,D.M., Gaughan,L., Waite,I., Cook,S., Neal,D.E.
and Robson,C.N. (1999) Tip60 is a nuclear hormone receptor coactivator.
J. Biol. Chem., 274, 17599–17604.
28. Hassig,C.A., Tong,J.K., Fleischer,T.C., Owa,T., Grable,P.G., Ayer,D.E.
and Schreiber,S.L. (1998) A role for histone deacetylase activity in
HDAC1-mediated transcriptional repression. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA,
95, 3519–3524.
29. Hassig,C.A., Fleischer,T.C., Billin,A.N., Schreiber,S.L. and Ayer,D.E.
(1997) Histone deacetylase activity is required for full transcriptional
repression by mSin3A. Cell, 89, 341–347.
30. Argentini,M., Barboule,N. and Wasylyk,B. (2000) The contribution
of the RING finger domain of MDM2 to cell cycle progression.
Oncogene, 19, 3849–3857.
31. Argentini,M., Barboule,N. and Wasylyk,B. (2001) The contribution of
the acidic domain of MDM2 to p53 and MDM2 stability. Oncogene,
20, 1267–1275.
32. Goldberg,Z., Vogt Sionov,R., Berger,M., Zwang,Y., Perets,R.,
Van Etten,R.A., Oren,M., Taya,Y. and Haupt,Y. (2002) Tyrosine
phosphorylation of Mdm2 by c-Abl: implications for p53 regulation.
EMBO J., 21, 3715–3727.
33. Lin,H.K., Wang,L., Hu,Y.C., Altuwaijri,S. and Chang,C.S. (2002)
Phosphorylation-dependent ubiquitylation and degradation of androgen
receptor by Akt require Mdm2 E3 ligase. EMBO J., 21, 4037–4048.
34. Tan,J., Sharief,Y., Hamil,K.G., Gregory,C.W., Zang,D.Y., Sar,M.,
Gumerlock,P.H., White,R.W.D., Pretlow,T.G., Harris,S.E.,
Wilson,E.M., Mohler,J.L. and French,F.S. (1997)
Dehydroepiandrosterone activates mutant androgen receptors expressed
in the androgen-dependent human prostate cancer xenograft CWR22
and LNCaP cells. Mol. Endocrinol., 11, 450–459.
35. Veldscholte,J., Berrevoets,C.A., Risstalpers,C., Kuiper,G., Jenster,G.,
Trapman,J., Brinkmann,A.O. and Mulder,E. (1992) The androgen
receptor in LNCaP cells contains a mutation in the ligand binding domain
which affects steroid binding characteristics and response to
antiandrogens. J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol., 41, 665–669.
36. David,G., Neptune,M.A. and DePinho,R.A. (2002) SUMO-1
modification of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) modulates its biological
activities. J. Biol. Chem., 277, 23658–23663.
37. Zhou,Q., Melkoumian,Z.K., Lucktong,A., Moniwa,M., Davie,J.R. and
Strobl,J.S. (2000) Rapid induction of histone hyperacetylation and
cellular differentiation in human breast tumor cell lines following
degradation of histone deacetylase-1. J. Biol. Chem., 275, 35256–35263.
38. Fang,S.Y., Jensen,J.P., Ludwig,R.L., Vousden,K.H. and Weissman,A.M.
(2000) Mdm2 is a RING finger-dependent ubiquitin protein ligase for
itself and p53. J. Biol. Chem., 275, 8945–8951.
39. Dai,J.L. and Burnstein,K.L. (1996) Two androgen response elements in
the androgen receptor coding region are required for cell-specific
up-regulation of receptor messenger RNA. Mol. Endocrinol.,
10, 1582–1594.
40. Sionov,R.V., Moallem,E., Berger,M., Kazaz,A., Gerlitz,O.,
Ben-Neriah,Y., Oren,M. and Haupt,Y. (1999) c-Abl neutralizes the
inhibitory effect of Mdm2 on p53. J. Biol. Chem., 274, 8371–8374.
41. Sionov,R.V., Coen,S., Goldberg,Z., Berger,M., Bercovich,B.,
Ben-Neriah,Y., Ciechanover,A. and Haupt,Y. (2001) c-Abl regulates p53
levels under normal and stress conditions by preventing its nuclear
export and ubiquitylation. Mol. Cell. Biol., 21, 5869–5878.
42. Linares,L.K., Hengstermann,A., Ciechanover,A., Muller,S. and
Scheffner,M. (2003) HdmX stimulates Hdm2-mediated ubiquitination
and degradation of p53. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 100,
12009–12014.
43. Li,M.Y., Luo,J.Y., Brooks,C.L. and Gu,W. (2002) Acetylation of
p53 inhibits its ubiquitination by Mdm2. J. Biol. Chem., 277,
50607–50611.
44. Fu,M.F., Rao,M., Wang,C.G., Sakamaki,T., Wang,J., Di Vizio,D.,
Zhang,X.P., Albanese,C., Balk,S., Chang,C.S. et al. (2003) Acetylation
of androgen receptor enhances coactivator binding and promotes prostate
cancer cell growth. Mol. Cell. Biol., 23, 8563–8575.
45. Pickart,C.M. (2004)Back to the future with ubiquitin.Cell, 116, 181–190.
46. Hicke,L. (2001) Protein regulation by monoubiquitin. Nature Rev.
Mol. Cell. Biol., 2, 195–201.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1 25
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 6, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
47. Di Fiore,P.P., Polo,S. and Hofmann,K. (2003) When ubiquitin meets
ubiquitin receptors: a signalling connection. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell.
Biol., 4, 491–497.
48. Burgdorf,S., Leister,P. and Scheidtmann,K.H. (2004) TSG101 interacts
with apoptosis-antagonizing transcription factor and enhances androgen
receptor-mediated transcription by promoting its monoubiquitination.
J. Biol. Chem., 279, 17524–17534.
49. Wiper-Bergeron,N., Wu,D., Pope,L., Schild-Poulter,C. and Hache,R.J.
(2003) Stimulation of preadipocyte differentiation by steroid through
targeting of an HDAC1 complex. EMBO J., 22,
2135–2145.
50. Gu,W. and Roeder,R.G. (1997) Activation of p53 sequence-specific
DNA binding by acetylation of the p53 C-terminal domain. Cell,
90, 595–606.
51. Liu,L., Scolnick,D.M., Trievel,R.C., Zhang,H.B., Marmorstein,R.,
Halazonetis,T.D. and Berger,S.L. (1999) p53 sites acetylated in vitro
by PCAF and p300 are acetylated in vivo in response to DNA damage.
Mol. Cell. Biol., 19, 1202–1209.
52. Legube,G., Linares,L.K., Lemercier,C., Scheffner,M., Khochbin,S. and
Trouche,D. (2002) Tip60 is targeted to proteasome-mediated degradation
by Mdm2 and accumulates after UV irradiation. EMBO J., 21,
1704–1712.
53. Jin,Y., Zeng,S.X., Lee,H. and Lu,H. (2004) MDM2 mediates
p300/CREB-binding protein-associated factor ubiquitination and
degradation J. Biol. Chem., 279, 20035–20043.
54. Jason,L.J.M., Moore,S.C., Lewis,J.D., Lindsey,G. and Ausio,J. (2002)
Histone ubiquitination: a tagging tail unfolds? Bioessays, 24, 166–174.
55. Henry,K.W., Wyce,A., Lo,W.S., Duggan,L.J., Emre,N.C., Kao,C.F.,
Pillus,L., Shilatifard,A., Osley,M.A. and Berger,S.L. (2003)
Transcriptional activation via sequential histone H2B ubiquitylation and
deubiquitylation, mediated by SAGA-associated Ubp8. Genes Dev.,
17, 2648–2663.
56. Kao,C.F., Hillyer,C., Tsukuda,T., Henry,K., Berger,S.L and
Osley,M.A. (2004) Rad6 plays a role in transcriptional activation
through ubiquitylation of histone H2B. Genes Dev., 18,
184–195.
26 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 6, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
