The Molecular Biology Database Collection:
2006 update
Michael Y. Galperin*
National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20894, USA
Received October 28, 2005; Revised and Accepted November 1, 2005
ABSTRACT
The NAR Molecular Biology Database Collection is
a public online resource that contains links to all
databases described in this issue of Nucleic Acids
Research. In addition, this collection lists databases
that have been featured in previous issues of NAR,
as well as selected other databases that are freely
available to the public and may be useful to the
molecular biologist. The 2006 update includes 858
databases, 139more than the previous one. The data-
basescomewithbriefsummaries,manyofwhichhave
been updated recently. Each database is assigned
a stable accession number that does not change if
the database moves to a new location and its URL,
authors’ names or the contact person address are
updated. The complete database list and summaries
are available online at the Nucleic Acids Research
website http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/.
COMMENTARY
This is the 13th annual database issue of Nucleic Acids
Research, and the first one that goes entirely paperless. The
list of molecular biology databases keeps getting bigger, and
despite negative connotations sometimes connected to this
growth, the databases are getting better and even more diverse.
The current release of the Nucleic Acids Research online
Molecular Biology Database Collection (Supplementary
Table 1) includes 92 new databases, first described in this
issue, and 49 additional new databases, featured in Bioinform-
atics, BMC Bioinformatics and other journals. These include
first ever databases from Ireland, Portugal and United Arab
Emirates (1–3) and a variety of other databases maintained all
over the world.
Meanwhile, existing databases show remarkable resilience:
out of 719 databases featured in the last year’s release (4), only
2 were no longer maintained because their authors graduated,
retired or changed focus, and one more has shifted to restricted
access. In contrast, three databases, ABCdb, EID and KDBI,
that were considered dead last year and had been crossed off
the list, have now been resurrected. In each case, their authors
have moved to new work places and were able to resume
maintenance of their databases. As promised last year, their
accession numbers have not been re-used and these databases
are now listed under the same entry numbers, 157, 32 and
138, respectively, that they had in previous releases. These
numbers can be used to gain access to updated summaries
of these databases on the NAR website, e.g. http://www.
oxfordjournals.org/nar/database/summary/157. Similarly,
PUMA2 (5), which replaced the WIT2 database, has kept its
number 118 in list.
After 12 years of database issues and 8 years of the accom-
panying web supplement, it was interesting to check if they are
really having an impact. In other words, how many people
really care about them and use them? To evaluate the impact of
the NAR database issues, I have used a tool that, despite all
complaints and caveats, is commonly utilized for evaluating
research productivity, namely the Science Citation Index
produced by the Institute for Scientific Information. If data-
bases are put on the web for the benefit of the research com-
munity, the frequency with which people use (and cite) a given
database could serve as an indication of whether this database
serves a useful purpose. An inspection of the citation figures
for the 141 papers published 2 years ago in the 2004 NAR
Database Issue (all citation data are as of October 15, 2005)
revealed a very encouraging trend. Most of the papers were
well—or very well—cited. Only five papers have not been
cited at all and the same number of database descriptions —
five—have been cited >100 times, becoming, in ISI parlance,
instant ‘citation classics’. Whatever the caveats, the fact that
the paper describing the Pfam domain database [http://www.
sanger.ac.uk/Software/Pfam/, NAR Collection entry no. 210,
Ref. (6)] has been cited 375 times in <2 years definitely indic-
ates that this database is widely used by the research com-
munity. Indeed, comparing a protein sequence against Pfam
has become standard practice in sequence analysis, particu-
larly in genome annotation. It is probably no coincidence that
the first author of the Pfam paper also serves as the Editor of
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 301 435 5910; Fax: +1 301 435 7794; Email: galperin@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D3–D5
doi:10.1093/nar/gkj162
the NAR database issues. In the interest of full disclosure,
I have cited this Pfam paper myself eight times since its
publication in 2004.
The second best cited database, Gene Ontology (GO) [http://
www.geneontology.org/, NAR Collection entry no. 487,
Ref. (7)] provides structured, controlled vocabularies and
classifications that are also widely used in genome annota-
tion, as well as for a variety of bioinformatics tasks. Other
databases in the top five, UniProt [http://www.uniprot.org,
NAR Collection entry no. 318, Ref. (8)], SMART [http://
smart.embl.de/, NAR Collection entry no. 218, Ref. (9)]
and KEGG [http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/, NAR Collection
entry no. 112, Ref. (10)], are also used by scientists all over
the world. It is worth noting that each of these databases
allows free downloading of its full content: they work by
adding valuable expertise to the sequence data and have
nothing to hide.
The databases that form the International Nucleotide
Sequence Database Collaboration, NCBI’s GenBank, EMBL
Nucleotide database and Japanese DDBJ (NAR Collection
entries no. 1–3), also attract a respectable number of citations,
even though they are usually mentioned in the literature with-
out a formal citation. The same is true for the Protein Data
Bank (PDB) (NAR Collection entry no. 276). More databases
are probably headed the same way of becoming household
names that are not considered to need a citation.
On the other side of the spectrum are the databases that
have never been cited in these 2 years, even by their own
authors. This does not mean, of course, that these databases
do not offer a useful content but one could always suggest
a reason why nobody has used this or that database. Usually
these databases were too specific in scope and offered content
that could be easily found elsewhere. For example, TopoSNP
[http://gila-fw.bioengr.uic.edu/snp/toposnp/, NAR Collection
entry no. 590, Ref. (11)], maps single nucleotide polymorph-
isms onto known protein structures, allowing one to trace
the location of the affected amino acid residues and correlate
it with disease phenotypes. However, most of its data are
extracted from OMIM (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/,
NAR Collection entry no. 143), which is where the user
would probably go first. VirGen [http://bioinfo.ernet.in/
virgen/virgen.html, NAR Collection entry no. 397, Ref. (12)]
is a database of complete genome sequences of plant and
animal viruses. However, it often takes a while for the server
to produce a response, which contains little information that
would not be available in other databases, such as VIPERdb
[http://viperdb.scripps.edu/, NAR Collection entry no. 761,
Ref. (13)], Viral Bioinformatics Resource Center (http://
www.virology.ca/, NAR Collection entry no. 798), VIDA
(http://www.biochem.ucl.ac.uk/bsm/virus_database/VIDA.
html, NAR Collection entry no. 201) or the NCBI Viral
Genomes (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/VIRUSES/
viruses.html, NAR Collection entry no. 602). The Ribosomal
Protein Gene database (RPG) [http://ribosome.miyazaki-med.
ac.jp/, NAR Collection entry no. 573, Ref. (14)] lists ribosomal
proteins from just a handful of organisms, offering a tiny
fraction of information that is available through Pfam,
UniProt, KEGG orthology groups and a variety of other
sources. The same problem plagues EyeSite, a database of
protein families in the eye [http://eyesite.cryst.bbk.ac.uk/,
NAR Collection entry no. 464, Ref. (15)]. Even the terrific
graphics on its front page cannot compensate for the fact that
researchers interested in eye proteins can get their sequences
fromUniProt and other sequence databases and their structures
from PDB. Finally the Signal Transduction Classification
Database (STCDB) [http://bibiserv.techfak.uni-bielefeld.de/
stcdb/, NAR Collection entry no. 395, Ref. (16)] offers an
interesting approach to the hierarchical classification of euka-
ryotic signaling proteins. However, so many people use the
GO classification that it has become de facto standard and
nobody is looking for alternative classification schemes.
Thus, the fact that this comment will most probably be the
first time in 2 years that TopoSNP, VirGen, RPG, EyeSite
or STCDB are mentioned in the literature could be a direct
consequence of the overwhelming success of other databases.
It is an open global marketplace of ideas, tools and approaches;
fortunately, nobody goes out of business.
Suggestions for the inclusion of additional databases in this
Collection should be directed to the author at galperin@
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.
SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Supplementary Data are available at NAR Online.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I thank Rich Roberts, Alex Bateman and my colleagues at
NCBI for helpful comments. This study was supported by
the Intramural Research Program of the National Library of
Medicine at the US National Institutes of Health. The author’s
opinions do not necessarily reflect the views of the NCBI,
NLM or the National Institutes of Health. The Open Access
publication charges for this article were waived by Oxford
University Press.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Byrne,K. (2006) Visualizing syntenic relationships among the
hemiascomycetes with the Yeast Gene Order Browser.
Nucleic Acids Res., 34, D452–D455.
2. Tadmouri,G.O. (2006) CTGA: the database for genetic disorders
in Arab populations. Nucleic Acids Res., 34, D602–D606.
3. Sa´-Correia,I. (2006) The YEASTRACT database: a tool for the
analysis of transcription regulatory associations in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Nucleic Acids Res., 34, D446–D451.
4. Galperin,M.Y. (2005) The Molecular Biology Database Collection:
2005 update. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D5–D24.
5. Maltsev,N. (2006) PUMA2—grid-based high-throughput analysis of
genomes and metabolic pathways. Nucleic Acids Res., 34, D369–D372.
6. Bateman,A., Coin,L., Durbin,R., Finn,R.D., Hollich,V., Griffiths-
Jones,S., Khanna,A., Marshall,M., Moxon,S., Sonnhammer,E.L. et al.
(2004) The Pfam protein families database. Nucleic Acids Res.,
32, D138–D141.
7. Harris,M.A., Clark,J., Ireland,A., Lomax,J., Ashburner,M.,
Foulger,R., Eilbeck,K., Lewis,S., Marshall,B., Mungall,C. et al. (2004)
The Gene Ontology (GO) database and informatics resource.
Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D258–D261.
8. Apweiler,R., Bairoch,A., Wu,C.H., Barker,W.C., Boeckmann,B.,
Ferro,S., Gasteiger,E., Huang,H., Lopez,R., Magrane,M. et al. (2004)
UniProt: the Universal Protein knowledgebase. Nucleic Acids Res.,
32, D115–D119.
9. Letunic,I., Copley,R.R., Schmidt,S., Ciccarelli,F.D., Doerks,T.,
Schultz,J., Ponting,C.P. and Bork,P. (2004) SMART 4.0: towards
genomic data integration. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D142–D144.
D4 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
10. Kanehisa,M., Goto,S., Kawashima,S., Okuno,Y. and Hattori,M.
(2004) The KEGG resource for deciphering the genome. Nucleic
Acids Res., 32, D277–D280.
11. Stitziel,N.O., Binkowski,T.A., Tseng,Y.Y., Kasif,S. and Liang,J. (2004)
topoSNP: a topographic database of non-synonymous single
nucleotide polymorphisms with and without known disease association.
Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D520–D522.
12. Kulkarni-Kale,U., Bhosle,S., Manjari,G.S. and Kolaskar,A.S. (2004)
VirGen: a comprehensive viral genome resource. Nucleic Acids
Res., 32, D289–D292.
13. Shepherd,C.M., Borelli,I.A., Lander,G., Natarajan,P., Siddavanahalli,V.,
Bajaj,C., Johnson,J.E., Brooks,C.L., III and Reddy,V.S. (2006)
VIPERdb: a relational database for structural virology. Nucleic Acids
Res., 34, D386–D389.
14. Nakao,A., Yoshihama,M. and Kenmochi,N. (2004) RPG:
the Ribosomal Protein Gene Database. Nucleic Acids Res., 32,
D168–D170.
15. Lee,D.A., Fefeu,S., Edo-Ukeh,A.A.,Orengo,C.A. andSlingsby,C. (2004)
EyeSite: a semi-automated database of protein families in the eye.
Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D148–D152.
16. Chen,M., Lin,S. and Hofestaedt,R. (2004) STCDB: Signal
Transduction Classification Database. Nucleic Acids Res., 32,
D456–D458.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D5
