DNA microarrays on nanoscale-controlled surface
Bong Jin Hong, Vijaya Sunkara and Joon Won Park*
Department of Chemistry, Center for Integrated Molecular Systems, Division of Molecular and
Life Sciences, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang 790-784, Korea
Received April 24, 2005; Revised and Accepted June 21, 2005
ABSTRACT
We have developed new surface to ensure a proper
spacing between immobilized biomolecules. While
DNA microarray on this surface provided each
probe DNA with ample space for hybridization with
incoming target DNAs, the microarray showed
enhanced discrimination efficiency for various
types of single nucleotide polymorphism. The high
discrimination efficiency holds for all tested cases
(100:,1 for internal mismatched cases; 100:,28 for
terminal mismatched ones). In addition, by invest-
igating influence of hybridization temperature and
washing condition on the fluorescence intensity
and the discrimination efficiency with and without
controlled mesospacing, it was observed that the
nanoscale-controlled surface showed good discrim-
ination efficiency in a wide range of temperature
(37–50C), and hybridization behavior on the surface
was in agreement with the solution one. Intriguingly,
it was found that washing process after the hybrid-
ization was critical for the high discrimination effici-
ency. For the particular case, washing process was
so efficient that only 30 s washing was sufficient to
reach the optimal discrimination ratio.
INTRODUCTION
Immobilized biomolecules on surface have found application
in various fields such as a biosensor, a biochip, an affinity
chromatography, an ELISA, a bead assay, an SPR spectro-
scopy, etc. While all the biomolecules have inherent activity
and function in aqueous phase, a part of its property is distorted
frequently through interaction with the surface (1–3). Undesir-
able orientation, reduced degree of freedom, and significant
interaction with non-innocent surface are main causes of the
distortion. In addition, poorly controlled packing of biomole-
cules on surface disturbs pristine biomolecular interaction due
to severe electrostatic disturbance and/or steric hindrance.
These problems can generally be alleviated through proper
surface design and rational conjugation approach.
Immobilization of biomolecules with precise control has
been studied extensively since early 1990s (4–9), while the
importance of the lateral spacing between the biomolecules
was recognized only recently. Until now, mixed self-
assembled monolayers have been generally utilized to control
the lateral spacing between biomolecules on surface (10–16).
However, statistics governs distribution of the spacing for the
case. Usually the situation gets worse, because molecules with
the similar functional group are inclined to associate closely to
form aggregates. On the other hand, a cone-shaped dendrimer
molecule, ‘dendron’ ensures the regular distance between bio-
molecules on surface when its termini are glued to the surface
(Scheme 1) (17–19). A dendron, which is a word to call one
branch of a dendrimer, has uniform size and molecular weight
as well as well-defined structure unlike a typical polymer
(20–22). Because it is possible to control its size and structure
precisely, we can regulate the lateral spacing between each
dendron molecule on a surface. Previously, we reported
preparation of DNA microarray on the second generation
dendron-modified surface and beneficial influence of the
mesospacing (18,19). Here we report, examination of the
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +82 54 279 2119; Fax: +82 54 279 0653; Email: jwpark@postech.ac.kr
 The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
Scheme 1. Dendron-modified slide, silanated slide and the employed dendron
molecule.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 12 e106
doi:10.1093/nar/gni109
microarray for detecting various mutant types and investiga-
tion on the performance in several hybridization and washing
conditions. For comparison, DNA microarrays were fabricated
also on silanated slides which have high surface density of
reactive amine functionality.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
All chemicals and solvents for synthesis of the dendron were
of reagent grade from Sigma-Aldrich and Mallinckrodt
Laboratory Chemicals. The silane coupling reagent
(3-glycidoxypropyl)methyldiethoxysilane was purchased
from Gelest, Inc. and all other chemicals for surface reaction
were of reagent grade from Sigma-Aldrich. Reaction solvents
for the silylation are anhydrous ones in Sure/Seal bottles from
Aldrich. All washing solvents for the substrates are of HPLC
grade from Mallinckrodt Laboratory Chemicals. Glass slides
(2.5 cm · 7.5 cm) were purchased from Corning Co. Silanated
slides purchased from Telechem International, Inc. are amine-
modified ones. All of the oligonucleotides were purchased
from Metabion. Ultrapure water (18 M W/cm) was obtained
from a Milli-Q purification system (Millipore).
Instruments
Oligonucleotides were spotted using MicroSys5100 micro-
arrayer (Cartesian Technologies, Inc.) or Piezorray (Perkin-
Elmer LAS). Hybridization was performed with GeneTAC
HybStation (Genomic Solutions, Inc.) or HS4800 (TECAN).
The fluorescence signal of the microarray was measured with
both ScanArray Lite (GSI Lumonics) and ArrayWorx
(Applied Precision, Inc.), and the images were analyzed
with an Imagene 4.0 software (Biodiscovery).
Preparation of the dendron-modified slides
The dendron-modified slide was prepared according to the pro-
cedure as described previously (19) and a detailed procedure is
included in Supplementary Material.
Arraying probe oligonucleotides on the
dendron-modified slides
The deprotected dendron-modified slides were incubated in the
acetonitrile solution dissolving di(N-succinimidyl)carbonate
(25 mM) and a catalytic amount of DIPEA. After 4 h reaction
under nitrogen atmosphere, the slides were placed in DMF
with stirring for 30 min and washed with methanol. After being
dried in a vacuum chamber, probe oligonucleotides (20 mM) in
a spotting buffer solution [25 mM NaHCO3, 5.0 mM MgCl2
and 10% DMSO (pH 8.5)] were printed on the surface with a
microarrayer, and the spots were arranged to make a 4 · 4
format. The microarrays were incubated in a humidity cham-
ber (80% humidity) for half a day to give the amine-tethered
oligonucleotides sufficient reaction time. The slides were then
placed in a stirred hybridization buffer solution [2· SSPE
buffer (pH 7.4) dissolving 7.0 mM SDS] at 37C for 30 min
and subsequently in boiling water for 5 min to remove
non-specifically bound oligonucleotides. Finally, the DNA-
functionalized microarrays were dried under a stream of
nitrogen and stored at 4C for the next step.
Arraying probe oligonucleotides on the silanated slides
Purchased silanated slides were incubated in a mixed solvent
[DMF/pyridine 90:10 (v/v)] dissolving 1,4-phenylenediisothio-
cyanate (PDITC) linker (12.5 mM). After reaction for 2 h, the
plates were sonicated three times each in methanol and acet-
one in a sequential manner. The washed plates were dried in
a vacuum chamber (30–40 mTorr). Probe oligonucleotides
dissolved in sodium carbonate/bicarbonate buffer solution
(100 mM, pH 9.0) were printed on the PDITC-modified slides
with a microarrayer, and the spots were arranged to make a
4 · 4 format. The slides were incubated in a saturated humid-
ity chamber at 37C for 1 h to immobilize the amine-tethered
oligonucleotides. The slides were then soaked in 1% NH4OH
aqueous solution for 3 min. Finally, the DNA-functionalized
slides were washed with deionized water several times and
dried under a stream of nitrogen.
Hybridization
A hybridization buffer solution dissolving a target oligonuc-
leotide tagged with a Cy3 fluorescent dye was allowed to
contact with the microarray using an automatic hybridization
machine. After hybridization, the microarrays were washed
with the hybridization buffer solution, and then with deionized
water at 20C for 1–2 s. For each hybridization experiment,
100 ml volume of a target DNA solution was utilized.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Surface density and spacing of a probe oligonucleotide
Previously, surface density of the active amino group on the
dendron-modified surface was measured by introducing a gold
nanoparticle onto the apex of the dendron molecule. In this
research, a direct measurement of the probe oligonucleotide
was carried out. The surface density of a probe oligonucleotide
on both slides was obtained from calibration graphs of fluor-
escence intensity versus surface loading of an oligonucleotide
tethering a Cy3. The density of the probe oligonucleotide on
the dendron slide turned out to be 0.03 Ea/nm2, which was
slightly smaller than previously reported dendron density
(0.05 Ea/nm2) (19). Decrease of the surface density could be
from steric hindrance and/or charge repulsion between oligo-
nucleotides. While fluorescence intensity of the tagged probe
on the silanated slide is three times higher than that on the
dendron slide, actual surface density of the probe oligonuc-
leotide on the silanated slide should be >0.09 Ea/nm2, because
the calibration curve showed that fluorescence was quenched
to a certain degree at this range. Therefore, it is reasonable to
assume each probe oligonucleotide on the dendron-modified
surface occupies 33 nm2 in average, and is away from neigh-
boring one with 6 nm separation.
Signal intensity versus concentration of a probe
oligonucleotide
To investigate dependence of fluorescence signal intensity
upon the concentration of a probe oligonucleotide, the amine-
tethered probe oligonucleotide (P1) of various concentrations
(2.0, 20, 50, 100 and 200 mM) was microarrayed on the
dendron-modified slide and the silanated one. The oligonuc-
leotide was immobilized on the silanated slides as described
e106 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 12 PAGE 2 OF 8
by Guo et al. (23) with slight modification. Use of
di(N-succinimidyl)carbonate linker on the silanated slide res-
ulted in low fluorescence intensity and non-uniform intensity
profile within a spot. On the other hand, PDITC linker assured
strong fluorescence signal and uniform profile (19). Also, the
linker-modified surface gave rise to low non-specific binding
of target DNA as little as that of the dendron-modified surface.
For hybridization, a complementary oligonucleotide (T1)
at 1.0 mM concentration was utilized to expose the DNA
microarray with sufficient amount of the target oligonuc-
leotide. After hybridization with the target tethering a Cy3
dye at 45C for 1 h, the microarray was washed with the
hybridization buffer solution at 37C for 1 min, and then
with deionized water briefly. Because salts and SDS left on
the surface prevent the slides from manifesting homogeneous
signal profile and low background, it is essential to wash salts
and SDS from the slides with water. The fluorescence signal
on the dendron-modified slide increased sharply from 2.0 to
20 mM probe concentration, and it was constant 20 mM
concentration, whereas that on the silanated slide saturated at
200 mM concentration (Figure 1). Rather low signal intensity
of the dendron-modified slide reflects lower surface density of
the probe. The data show that it is not necessary to use probe
concentration >20 mM concentration to maximize the signal
intensity for the latter case. The average value and error bar
were obtained from 16 spots on a slide.
Signal intensity versus concentration of
a target oligonucleotide
To investigate the correlation between fluorescence intensity
and concentration of a target oligonucleotide, the probe oli-
gonucleotide (P1) of 20 mM was spotted on the dendron-
modified slide, whereas that of 200 mM on the silanated
one. Thus-formed DNA microarrays were allowed for hybrid-
ization with the complementary counterpart (T1) at various
concentrations (100 pM, 1.0 nM, 10 nM, 100 nM and 1.0 mM)
(Figure 2). After hybridization at 45C for 1 h, the microarray
was washed with the hybridization buffer at 37C for 1 min.
The fluorescence intensity on the dendron-modified slide
increased with the concentration of the target oligonucleotide
continuously and saturated at a concentration 10 nM, while
that on the silanated slide at a concentration 100 nM.
Figure 1. Fluorescence signal intensity versus probe oligonucleotide concen-
tration (a) on the dendron-modified slide and (b) on the silanated slide. Target
concentration is 1.0mM. The average value at each condition was obtained from
16 spots on a slide and an error bar represents its SD. Laser power and photo-
multiplier tube (PMT) gain of a laser scanner were adjusted for the optimal
reliability, and fixed for a set of experiments.
Figure 2. Fluorescence signal intensity versus target oligonucleotide concen-
tration (a) on the dendron-modified slide and (b) on the silanated slide. Probe
oligonucleotide concentration is 20 mM for the former case, and 200 mM for the
latter case.
PAGE 3 OF 8 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 12 e106
Because the saturation point is a function of surface density of
the probe oligonucleotide and hybridization efficiency, beha-
vior of the microarray on the dendron-modified surface is quite
understandable. In other words, early saturation and smaller
signal intensity reflect higher hybridization efficiency and
lower surface density (19). This is in harmony with previously
observed surface nature of the dendron-modified surface. It
is worth noting sensitive signal dependence on the target
concentration between 100 pM and 1.0 nM for the dendron-
modified case.
SNP discrimination efficiency of DNA microarrays
To examine single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) discrim-
ination efficiency of DNA microarrays on the dendron-
modified slide and the silanated one, various types of
mismatches including internal mismatch, insertion and dele-
tion were tested. Probe and target oligonucleotides utilized
in this work were listed in Table 1. For fair comparison,
identical oligonucleotide in a solution was used for both slides,
and all probe oligonucleotides were spotted on a single slide.
Hybridization process was performed at 45C for 1 h, followed
by rinsing the microarrays with the hybridization buffer at
50C for 1 min. Because the discrimination efficiency depends
on washing condition and hybridization temperature, the opti-
mal condition should be employed for the highest efficiency.
For the both microarrays under scrutiny, the above condition
was optimal coincidentally (vide infra).
Figure 3a shows position of the various oligonucleotides
spotted on a single slide. P1 is the complementary probe
oligonucleotide, P2–P4 the oligonucleotides with one base
mismatch at the middle position, and P5–P7 those with one
base mismatch at the second last position from the 30 end. P8
oligonucleotide has extra one base at the middle position, and
P9–P11 designate oligonucleotides with deletion at three dif-
ferent positions. For the DNA microarray on the dendron-
modified slide, all mismatched cases showed discrimination
ratio (i.e. the fluorescence intensity of the mismatched duplex
divided by that of the complementary one) <1%, except one
terminal deletion case giving 10% (Figure 3b and Table 2).
In general, it is difficult to discriminate the DNA duplex with
one base deletion at the terminal site from the complementary
one due to the tiny difference of Gibbs free energy (DG) and
melting temperature (Tm). On the other hand, the DNA
microarray on the silanated slide showed inferior discrimina-
tion efficiency: Most of the ratios are much larger than 1%
except P2 case (Figure 3c and Table 2). Our previous study
showed that the dendron-modified surface discriminated
internal mismatched cases efficiently as if the oligonucleotides
were in solution phase (19). Here, we demonstrated that the
dendron-modified surface could ensure efficient discrimina-
tion for many other mismatched cases, and the lateral spacing
between probe oligonucleotides must be one of the key factors
to be considered for the good discrimination efficiency.
To understand characteristics of the dendron-modified slide
further, we also tested single base mismatches at the terminal
site. It is challenging to discriminate single terminal mis-
matches with a DNA microarray. The nearest neighbor
model shows that difference in DG and Tm in solution is
only 0.45–0.87 kcal/mol and 1.2–2.4C, which is too small
Figure 3. Fluorescence images after the hybridization for various mutant types. (a) Each position of probe oligonucleotides is shown. Image (b) was obtained from
the microarray on the dendron-modified surface, and image (c) from one on the silanated surface. Fluorescence images were obtained after the hybridization with T1
target oligonucleotide. Laser power and PMT gain of a laser scanner were adjusted to record the reasonable signals of mismatched pairs while avoiding saturation of
the signal of the matched one.
Table 1. Sequences and nomenclature of probe and target oligonucleotides
Designation Sequence
P1 50-NH2-C6-CATTCCGAGTGTCCA-30
P2 50-NH2-C6-CATTCCGTGTGTCCA-30
P3 50-NH2-C6-CATTCCGGGTGTCCA-30
P4 50-NH2-C6-CATTCCGCGTGTCCA-30
P5 50-NH2-C6-CATTCCGAGTGTCAA-30
P6 50-NH2-C6-CATTCCGAGTGTCTA-30
P7 50-NH2-C6-CATTCCGAGTGTCGA-30
P8 50-NH2-C6-CATTCCGAAGTGTCCA-30
P9 50-NH2-C6-CATTCCG_GTGTCCA-30
P10 50-NH2-C6-CATTCCGAGTGTC_A-30
P11 50-NH2-C6-CATTCCGAGTGTCC_-30
P12 50-NH2-C6-CATTCCGAGTGTCCT-30
P13 50-NH2-C6-CATTCCGAGTGTCCG-30
P14 50-NH2-C6-CATTCCGAGTGTCCC-30
P15 50-NH2-C6-ACAAGCACAGTTAGG-30
T1 50-Cy3-TGGACACTCGGAATG-30
Table 2. Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) discrimination ratio
Discrimination ratioa
P1 P11 P10 P9 P8 P7 P6 P5 P4 P3 P2
Dendron-modified
slide
100 10 0.4 0.1 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.4 0 0.5 0
Silanated slide 100 30 15 4 9 22 21 22 6 22 0.3
aThe Discrimination ratio represents the fluorescence intensity of the
mismatched pair divided by that of the complementary one in percentage.
e106 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 12 PAGE 4 OF 8
in comparison with those of the internal mismatched cases
(1.97–3.26 kcal/mol and 5.7–9.8C) (http://ozone2.chem.
wayne.edu.) With three oligonucleotides (P12–P14), the
observed discrimination ratios were 16, 28 and 14% (T:T,
G:T and C:T) (Figure 4a). On the other hand, the DNA
microarray fabricated on the silanated slide showed poor dis-
crimination ratios, i.e. 66, 96 and 61% (T:T, G:T and C:T)
(Figure 4b). For the G:T mismatched pair, that signal is
almost indistinguishable with that of the matched case.
Here, capability to discriminate even the most challenging
terminal mismatched case is demonstrated for the DNA
microarrays on the mesospaced surface.
Signal intensity and discrimination efficiency in various
conditions: washing time, washing temperature and
hybridization temperature
We have measured the signal intensity and the discrimination
efficiency in various conditions, such as washing time and
washing/hybridization temperature. In this study, P1–P4 and
T1 oligonucleotides were employed, and the silanated slide
was utilized for comparative purpose.
Washing time
After hybridization at 45C for 1 h, the microarray was washed
with the hybridization buffer solution at 37C. Figure 5 shows
change of the fluorescence intensity and the discrimination
ratio with the washing time. For both DNA microarrays on
the dendron-modified slide and the silanated one, the signal
intensity decreased as the washing time increased, but slope of
the decrease and saturation behavior are quite different. In the
case of DNA microarray on the dendron-modified slide, the
intensity decreased moderately for the matched pair, while
steep decrease during the first 10 s was observed for three
mismatched ones. For T:G mismatched one, the discrimination
Figure 4. Fluorescence images for the terminal mutant types. Image (a) was
obtained from the microarray on the dendron-modified slide, and image
(b) from that on the silanated slide.
Figure 5. Effect of washing time on the fluorescence signal intensity and the discrimination ratio (a and b) on the dendron-modified slide and (c and d) on the
silanated one. (a and c) Fluorescence signal intensity versus washing time and (b and d) discrimination ratio versus washing time. PM signifies perfect match and IMM
one base internal mismatch. The discrimination ratio represents the fluorescence intensity of the mismatched pair divided by that of the complementary one.
PAGE 5 OF 8 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 12 e106
ratio dropped from 90 to 15% during the time. It was observed
that the short washing time was sufficient to achieve the
saturation value of the discrimination efficiency. The sharp
initial decrease for the mismatched cases is a peculiarity of
the dendron-modified surface, and the phenomenon seems to
be associated with facile dissociation of the target oligonuc-
leotide weakly associated through abnormal fashion, of which
nature has yet to be understood. Because melting points of the
duplex for the mismatched cases (40–45C) are slightly over
the washing temperature, steeper decrease of intensity is what
expected. However, the initial decrease during the first 10 s is
too fast to explain with the melting points. This is the reason
why a working hypothesis involving an unusual and weak
binding mode is proposed.
On the other hand, DNA microarray on the silanated slide
showed relatively slow signal decrease for the mismatched
pairs as well as the matched one. After the initial decrease,
the signal kept decreasing until 3 min. Also, the initial
decrease for the mismatched cases is not as steep as the
dendron-modified slide. While the elongated washing time
up to 3 min enhanced the discrimination efficiency marginally,
its values never reached those of the dendron-modified sur-
face. As a result, it is observed that the washing process
for DNA microarrays on the dendron-modified surface is so
effective that only short washing time is required to reach the
saturation point. It is interesting to note that the discrimination
efficiency for both slides is enhanced during the washing step.
This observation suggests a washing step should be implemen-
ted for even continuous monitoring systems, such as some
electrochemical devices if high discrimination efficiency is
an important goal to achieve.
Washing temperature
We studied the effect of the washing temperature on the signal
intensity and the discrimination efficiency. After hybridization
with the target oligonucleotide at 45C for 1 h, the microarray
was washed with the hybridization buffer solution at various
temperatures for 1 min.
For DNA microarray fabricated on the dendron-modified
slide, the discrimination efficiency for all three mismatched
pairs was enhanced up to 50C, and the best discrimination
(<1%) was obtained at 50C (Figure 6b). Because calculated
Tm values of each duplex are 50.2
C (complementary), 42.2C
(T:T mismatch), 44.5C (T:G mismatch) and 40.4C (T:C
mismatch) in solution (http://ozone2.chem.wayne.edu.), the
above result is in harmony with the expectation. At elevated
temperature such as 55C, tarnished discrimination was
observed, mainly because the temperature was high enough
to dissociate even matched target oligonucleotide. This
is evident in Figure 6a, where the signal intensity for all
four cases decreases to almost zero. Moderately good
Figure 6. Effect of washing temperature on the fluorescence signal intensity and the discrimination ratio (a and b) on the dendron-modified slide and (c and d) on the
silanated one. (a and c) Fluorescence signal intensity versus washing temperature and (b and d) discrimination ratio versus washing temperature.
e106 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 12 PAGE 6 OF 8
discrimination efficiency is maintained at 37 and 45C as well,
and this suggests the efficiency is not hyper-sensitive to wash-
ing temperature. The latter characteristic is quite beneficial,
because for a certain application >10 000 different oligonuc-
leotides were spotted in a single slide. For the last case, DNA
duplexes with a rather broad range of Tm values should be
treated at a fixed condition, and the tolerance should be of help
to maintain the high discrimination efficiency. For a compar-
ison, DNA microarrays on the silanated slide were tested. It
was also true that the DNA microarray showed the best dis-
crimination efficiency at 50C (Figure 6d). In addition, its
discrimination ratio rebounded over 50C as the previous
case, but its discrimination efficiency in the entire range
could not reach that of the former DNA microarray.
Hybridization temperature
Hybridization temperature has been a key factor under scru-
tiny for enhanced performance of DNA microarrays. It is
expected that the temperature should be strongly associated
with range and distribution of melting points of DNA duplexes
of the entire pixels. In this study, hybridization was allowed at
various temperatures (37, 45, 50 and 60C), and the slide was
washed with hybridization buffer solution at 37C for 1 min.
Figure 7 shows change of the fluorescence intensity and
the discrimination ratio with the hybridization temperature.
In the case of DNA microarray on the dendron-modified
slide, the discrimination ratio of all three mismatched pairs
decreased as the hybridization temperature increased up to
45C, but rebounded over 50C (Figure 7b), mostly because
the fluorescence intensity of the matched one was constant up
to 45C, but dropped drastically over 45C (Figure 7a). While
hybridization at 45C or 50C can provide the highest
discrimination efficiency, the fluorescence intensity at 45C
is twice as high as that at 50C. As far as the discrimination
efficiency is concerned, the tolerance holds again.
This optimal hybridization condition depends absolutely on
Tm values of the DNA duplexes utilized for this particular
DNA microarray. Considering calculated Tm values of the
DNA duplexes in the hybridization salt condition used in
this work, we may say the above results agrees very well
with the general concept that the discrimination in solution
between a matched duplex and a mismatched one becomes
the highest at the temperature near or right below Tm of the
complementary duplex (24). Also, this obedient behavior is
another evidence that mesopaced surface realized through the
dendron allows unhindered hybridization. In the previous work,
we showed that DNA microarray on the dendron-modified
slide could achieve the same discrimination efficiency as
that in solution. Therefore, these evidences support that the
dendron-modified surface could establish an environment
similar to the solution phase on the two dimensional space.
Figure 7. Effect of hybridization temperature on the fluorescence signal intensity and the discrimination ratio (a and b) on the dendron-modified slide and (c and d) on
the silanated one. (a and c) Fluorescence signal intensity versus hybridization temperature and (b and d) discrimination ratio versus hybridization temperature.
PAGE 7 OF 8 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 12 e106
On the other hand, the DNA microarray fabricated on the
silanated slide did not show any enhancement of the discrim-
ination efficiency as hybridization temperature increased from
37 to 60C (Figure 7d). In other words, change of its discrim-
ination ratio does not coincide with the above general concept.
It is not straightforward to explain why fluorescence intensity
of the mismatched cases increases when the hybridiza-
tion temperature increases from 37 to 45C. This unexpected
increase results in the deterioration of the discrimination effi-
ciency at elevated temperatures. We may say this ought to be
associated with a complicated environment far from the ideal
in the silanated surface. In addition, its highest discrimination
efficiency is far inferior to that of the DNA microarray on the
dendron-modified slide. Overall, it can be said that effect of
the hybridization temperature on the discrimination efficiency
is very dependent on the nature of the surface, and sufficient
spacing on surface provides DNA microarrays that are pre-
dictable with a model calculation.
CONCLUSION
This nanoscale-controlled surface provided DNA microarrays
close to ideal, in which each probe DNA strand was given
ample space for the incoming target DNA resulting in far
superior SNP discrimination efficiency to that of the DNA
microarray on the surface where spacing was poorly con-
trolled. Detailed investigation showed that the washing pro-
cess was an essential step for the effective discrimination,
and its efficacy depends critically on the nature of the surface.
In addition, the DNA microarray fabricated on the dendron-
modified slide showed excellent discrimination efficiency in a
wide range of hybridization and washing temperature. More-
over, its optimal condition for the discrimination efficiency
and the signal intensity is in harmony with the melting points
of the duplexes calculated with a model calculation. Its
predictability is very important to design diagnosing DNA
microarrays that require high reliability and reproducibility.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Material is available at NAR Online.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Student fellowships of the Brain Korea 21 are greatly
acknowledged, and also the work is supported by the Korea
Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF) through Center
for Integrated Molecular Systems. Funding to pay the Open
Access publication charges for this article was provided by
Pohang University of Science and Technology.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Southern,E., Mir,K. and Shchepinov,M. (1999) Molecular interactions on
microarrays. Nature Genet., 21, 5–9.
2. Scha¨ferling,M. and Kambhampati,D. (2004) Protein microarray surface
chemistry and coupling schemes. In Kambhampati,D (ed.), Protein
Microarray Technology. Wiley-VCH Verlang GmbH & Co. KgaA,
Weinheim, pp. 11–38.
3. Angenendt,P., Glo¨kler,J., Murphy,D., Lehrach,H. and Cahill,D.J. (2002)
Toward optimized antibody microarrays: a comparison of current
microarray support materials. Anal. Biochem., 309, 253–260.
4. Prime,K.L. and Whitesides,G.M. (1991) Self-assembled organic
monolayers: model systems for studying adsorption of proteins at
surfaces. Science, 252, 1164–1167.
5. Prime,K.L. and Whitesides,G.M. (1993) Adsorption of proteins onto
surfaces containing end-attached oligio(ethylene oxide): a model system
using self-assembled monolayers. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 115, 10714–10721.
6. Rabinow,B.E., Ding,Y.S., Qin,C., McHalsky,M.L., Schneider,J.H.,
Ashline,K.A., Shelbourn,T.L. and Albrecht,R.M. (1994) Biomaterials
with permanent hydrophilic surfaces and low protein adsorption
properties. J. Biomater. Sci. Polym. Ed., 6, 91–109.
7. Chapman,R.G., Ostuni,E., Liang,M.N., Meluleni,G., Kim,E., Yan,L.,
Pier,G., Warren,H.S. and Whitesides,G.M. (2001) Polymeric thin films
that resist the adsorption of proteins and the adhesion of bacteria.
Langmuir, 17, 1225–1233.
8. Holmlin,R.E., Chen,X., Chapman,R., Takayama,S. and Whitesides,G.M.
(2001) Zwitterionic SAMs that resist nonspecific adsorption of protein
from aqueous buffer. Langmuir, 17, 2841–2850.
9. Luk,Y., Kato,M. and Mrksich,M. (2000) Self-assembled monolayers of
alkanethiolates presenting mannitol groups are inert to protein adsorption
and cell attachment. Langmuir, 16, 9604–9608.
10. Roberts,C., Chen,C.S., Mrksich,M., Martichonok,V., Ingber,D.E. and
Whitesides,G.M. (1998) Using mixed self-assembled monolayers
presenting RGD and (EG)3OH groups to characterize long-term
attachment of bovine capillary endothelial cells to surfaces.
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 120, 6548–6555.
11. Lahiri,J., Isaacs,L., Grzybowski,B., Carbeck,J.D. and Whitesides,G.M.
(1999) Biospecific binding of carbonic anhydrase to mixed SAMs
presenting benzenesulfonamide ligands: a model system for studying
lateral steric effects. Langmuir, 15, 7186–7198.
12. Lahiri,J., Isaacs,L., Tien,J. and Whitesides,G.M. (1999) A strategy for the
generation of surfaces presenting ligands for studies of binding based on
an active ester as a common reactive intermediate: a surface plasmon
resonance study. Anal. Chem., 71, 777–790.
13. Peterson,A.W., Wolf,L.K. and Georgiadis,R.M. (2002) Hybridization of
mismatched or partially matched DNA at surfaces. J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
124, 14601–14607.
14. Yeo,W., Yousaf,M.N. and Mrksich,M. (2004) Dynamic interfaces
between cells and surfaces: electroactive substrates that sequentially
release and attach cells. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 125, 14994–14995.
15. Oh,S.J., Cho,S.J., Kim,C.O. and Park,J.W. (2002) Characteristics of
DNA microarrays fabricated on various aminosilane layers. Langmuir,
18, 1764–1769.
16. Shchepinov,M.S., Case-Green,S.C. and Southern,E.M. (1997) Steric
factors influencing hybridisation of nucleic acids to oligonucleotide
arrays. Nucleic Acid Res., 25, 1155–1161.
17. Hong,B.J., Shim,J.Y., Oh,S.J. and Park,J.W. (2003) Self-assembly of a
dendron through multiple ionic interaction to give mesospacing between
reactive amine groups on the surface. Langmuir, 19, 2357–2365.
18. Choi,Y., Yoon,C.W., Lee,H.D., Park,M. and Park,J.W. (2004) Efficient
protein-ligand interaction by guaranteeing mesospacing between
immobilized biotins. Chem. Commun., 11, 1316–1317.
19. Hong,B.J., Oh,S.J., Youn,T.O., Kwon,S.H. and Park,J.W. (2005)
Nanoscale-controlled spacing provides DNA microarrays with the SNP
discrimination efficiency in solution phase. Langmuir, 21, 4257–4261.
20. DeMattei,C.R., Huang,B. and Tomalia,D.A. (2004) Designed dendrimer
syntheses by self-assembly of single-site, ssDNA functionalized
dendrons. Nano Lett., 4, 771–777.
21. Zeng,F. and Zimmerman,S.C. (1997) Dendrimers in supramolecular
chemistry: from molecular recognition to self-assembly. Chem. Rev., 97,
1681–1712.
22. Bosman,A.W., Janssen,H.M. and Meijer,E.W. (1999) About dendrimers:
structure, physical properties and applications. Chem. Rev., 99,
1665–1688.
23. Guo,A., Guilfoyle,R.A., Thiel,A.J., Wang,R. and Smith,L.M. (1994)
Direct fluorescence analysis of genetic polymorphisms by hybridization
with oligonucleotide arrays on glass supports. Nucleic Acids Res., 22,
5456–5465.
24. Cantor,C.R. and Smith,C.L. (1999) Genomics: The Science and
Technology Behind The Human Genome Project. John Wiley & Sons:,
NY, pp. 71–77.
e106 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 12 PAGE 8 OF 8
