Ultradeep Bisulfite Sequencing Analysis of DNA Methylation
Patterns in Multiple Gene Promoters by 454 Sequencing
Kristen H. Taylor,
1
Robin S. Kramer,
2
J. Wade Davis,
3
Juyuan Guo,
1
Deiter J. Duff,
1
Dong Xu,
2
Charles W. Caldwell,
1
and Huidong Shi
1
1Department of Pathology and Anatomical Sciences, Ellis Fischel Cancer Center; 2Department of Computer Sciences and Christopher S.
Bond Life Sciences Center; and 3Department of Statistics and Health Management and Informatics, University of Missouri-Columbia,
Columbia, Missouri
Abstract
We developed a novel approach for conducting multisample,
multigene, ultradeep bisulfite sequencing analysis of DNA
methylation patterns in clinical samples. A massively parallel
sequencing-by-synthesis method (454 sequencing) was used
to directly sequence >100 bisulfite PCR products in a single
sequencing run without subcloning. We showed the utility,
robustness, and superiority of this approach by analyzing
methylation in 25 gene-related CpG rich regions from >40
cases of primary cells, including normal peripheral blood
lymphocytes, acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), follicular lymphoma (FL), and
mantle cell lymphoma (MCL). A total of 294,631 sequences was
generated with an average read length of 131 bp. On average,
>1,600 individual sequences were generated for each PCR
amplicon far beyond the few clones (<20) typically analyzed by
traditional bisulfite sequencing. Comprehensive analysis of
CpG methylation patterns at a single DNA molecule level using
clustering algorithms revealed differential methylation pat-
terns between diseases. A significant increase in methylation
was detected in ALL and FL samples compared with CLL and
MCL. Furthermore, a progressive spreading of methylation
was detected from the periphery toward the center of select
CpG islands in the ALL and FL samples. The ultradeep
sequencing also allowed simultaneous analysis of genetic and
epigenetic data and revealed an association between a single
nucleotide polymorphism and the methylation present in the
LRP1B promoter. This new generation of methylome sequenc-
ing will provide digital profiles of aberrant DNA methylation
for individual human cancers and offers a robust method for
the epigenetic classification of tumor subtypes. [Cancer Res
2007;67(18):8511–8]
Introduction
Epigenetic processes control the packaging and function of the
human genome and contribute to normal and pathologic states,
including cancer. It is increasingly being recognized that epigenetic
alterations play a major role in driving tumor initiation and
progression. The main processes that contribute to the epigenome
of a cell are DNA methylation and histone modifications.
Methylation of cytosine residues at CpG dinucleotides is the best-
studied epigenetic modification in mammalian genomes and is
known to have profound effects on gene expression. This epigenetic
event occurs globally in the normal genome, affecting 70% to 80%
of all CpG dinucleotides (1, 2). However, f1-kb stretches of GC-
rich DNA called CpG islands (CGI), most of which are located within
or near regulatory regions of genes, seem to be protected from this
modification in normal somatic cells (3). Accumulating evidence
indicates that CGI methylation within promoters of specific tumor
suppressor genes is associated with transcriptional silencing that
compromises control of cell proliferation (4). Thus, aberrant
methylation is now being investigated as a potential biomarker
and for the development of pathway-specific therapeutic targets.
Bisulfite genomic sequencing, which examines multiple sub-
clones of a bisulfite PCR product, is time consuming and is
potentially affected by bias (5) and heteroduplex amplification (6).
In this method, only a few clones are typically analyzed (<20), which
results in a SE of the estimate of methylation that is generally
excessively wide. Furthermore, because the clones are typically
obtained from only a few biological samples, it is difficult to
generalize the results to a larger population. To reduce the bias
introduced by subcloning, the human epigenome project in Europe
used direct sequencing of bisulfite PCR products (7, 8). In this
method, the methylation present at any given CpG site is estimated
by taking the average of all fragments (thousands) generated during
PCR and results in a more statistically robust representation of
the methylation present compared with subcloning. However, this
approach is not without limitations. For example, it is not possible
to determine the methylation patterns of individual DNAmolecules,
and there is a lack of sensitivity in cases involving low levels of
methylation.
Recently, a novel massively parallel sequencing-by-synthesis
method was commercialized that is based on pyrosequencing in
picoliter-scale reactions (454 sequencing). Approximately 300,000
DNA templates can be simultaneously sequenced in a single 5.5-h
run to an average read length of 100 bases, with an accuracy of
99.6% (9). This highly parallel sequencing system potentially has
many important applications. In this study, we investigated the use
of this technology for bisulfite genomic sequencing. Due to the vast
throughput capabilities of this technology, we were able to conduct
a multisample, multigene, ultradeep bisulfite sequencing analysis
in primary lymphoma and leukemia samples. The results indicate
that this large-scale genomic bisulfite sequencing approach will
provide an efficient method for deeply exploring the human cancer
epigenome.
Materials and Methods
DNA pooling and bisulfite treatment. Tissue and blood samples of
patients diagnosed with precursor B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
K.H. Taylor and R.S. Kramer contributed equally to this work.
Requests for reprints: Huidong Shi or Charles W. Caldwell, Department of
Pathology and Anatomical Sciences, University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, MO
65212. Phone: 573-882-5523; E-mail: shihu@health.missouri.edu or caldwellc@health.
missouri.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1016
www.aacrjournals.org 8511 Cancer Res 2007; 67: (18). September 15, 2007
Research Article
(ALL) or non–Hodgkin’s lymphomas at the Ellis Fischel Cancer Center
(Columbia, MO) were obtained in compliance with the local Institutional
Review Board. DNA was isolated using the QIAamp DNA Mini kit (Qiagen)
from a total of 40 specimens: 10 of each from mantle cell lymphoma (MCL),
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), follicular lymphoma (FL), and ALL
(Supplementary Table S1). Equal amounts of DNA from each patient sample
were pooled by disease type. Commercial peripheral blood lymphocyte
(PBL) DNAs derived from a pool of multiple individuals (two different
female pools and two different male pools) were combined and used to
create the DNA pool referred to as normal PBL. DNA (1 Ag) from each pool
was treated with sodium bisulfite using an EpiTect kit (Qiagen).
Amplicon design and PCR. Disease-specific primers were developed for
25 genes using MethPrimer. Each gene studied has a core primer sequence
that is identical across all groups. In addition, a four-nucleotide disease-
specific tag was added to the 5¶ end of each core primer sequence so that
each group could be computationally separated after 454 sequencing
analysis. Each primer pair was amplified in a 25 AL reaction using a
touchdown PCR at annealing temperatures from 60jC to 56jC (one cycle at
each temperature) followed by 30 cycles at an annealing temperature of
56jC. Denaturation (95jC), annealing, and extension (72jC) times are 15 s,
30 s, and 1 min, respectively. For each gene, five disease-specific amplicons
were generated by PCR. Each amplicon was individually prepared, purified,
and quantified. One hundred twenty-two amplicons (total of 3 Ag DNA)
were then pooled in equimolar amounts in a single tube before sequencing
by 454 Life Sciences Corp. according to Margulies et al. (9).
Standard bisulfite genomic sequencing analysis. Amplified bisulfite
PCR products for ADAM12 from pooled ALL, FL, and PBL DNA samples
described above and an SssI-treated PBL DNA sample were subcloned using
the TOPO-TA cloning system (Invitrogen). Plasmid DNA of 30 insert-
positive clones for each PCR product was isolated using the Montage
Plasmid Miniprep96 kit (Millipore Corp.) and sequenced using an ABI 3730
sequencing system (Applied Biosystems).
Quantitative real-time methylation-specific PCR assay. To further
validate the bisulfite sequencing data generated using the 454 GS20
sequencer, DNA was also isolated from 7 normal PBL samples, 19 follicular
hyperplasia samples, 29 CLL samples, 13 FL samples, 24 MCL samples, and
10 ALL samples. These DNA samples were treated with sodium bisulfite and
examined using quantitative real-time methylation-specific PCR (qMSP)
assay for DLC-1 and DAPK methylation. The sequences of qMSP primers
and probe sets of DLC-1 and DAPK were reported previously (10, 11). The
probes were labeled with two fluorescent dyes (5¶-FAM and 3¶-BHQ1) and
synthesized by Integrated DNA Technologies. In addition, the five bisulfite-
treated pooled DNA samples were used for qMSP as described previously
(10). The qMSP data specific for methylated DNA were expressed as percent
of methylated reference (PMR) values and calculated similarly to a previous
report (12). The percentage of fully methylated molecules at a specific locus
was calculated by dividing the GENE to ACTB ratio of a sample by the
GENE to ACTB ratio of SssI-treated PBL DNA (methylated reference DNA)
and multiplying by 100.
Amplicon identification and dynamic programming alignment
programs. Computational analysis of the 454 bisulfite sequencing results
for multiple patient groups was conducted using the National Center for
Biotechnology Information C toolkit for parsing the files.4 Each DNA
sequence was assigned to 1 of the 25 genes based on the tags and primers.
To determine the methylation state for each CpG site in a CGI, the amplicon
sequences (i.e., the DNA sequences for the PCR products) for the 25 genes
were obtained and then subjected to in silico bisulfite conversion. A direct
comparison was done between a sequence from the 454 sequencer and its
corresponding bisulfite-converted amplicon sequence based on a dynamic
programming technique. Detailed procedures and algorithms used for the
computational analysis can be found in the Supplementary Materials and
Methods.
Cluster analysis. Cluster analysis of the methylation patterns in several
amplicons, such as PON3, CYP27B1 , and LRP1B , was conducted using
Hierarchical Clustering Explorer version 3.5. The clusters were generated by
UPGMA (average score clustering), and the similarity between CpG
nucleotides on two reads was the count matching of methylated and
unmethylated nucleotides or simple matching of nominals.
Statistical analysis. Statistical analyses were carried out using Statistical
Analysis System 9.1, Statistical Package for the Social Sciences 14.0, and
R 2.4. For the general linear models, some explanatory variables were log
transformed to stabilize variance, and residual analysis was used to assess
Figure 1. Experimental design for
bisulfite sequencing using 454 Genome
Sequencer 20.
4 ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/toolbox/ncbi_tools
Cancer Research
Cancer Res 2007; 67: (18). September 15, 2007 8512 www.aacrjournals.org
model adequacy. The reported observed significance levels computed in the
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis were based on asymptotic
statistics and are two sided. The expected number of cell counts was always
greater than five so that the m2 distribution was appropriate.
Results
Preparation of amplicons for 454 sequencing. A massively
parallel sequencing-by-synthesis method was used to conduct an
ultradeep bisulfite sequencing analysis of 25 gene-related CGIs in
five groups of primary cells: (a) normal PBL, (b) ALL, (c) CLL, (d)
FL, and (e) MCL. For each sample group, DNA samples isolated
from 10 individuals with the same diagnosis were pooled and
bisulfite treated (Fig. 1). The genes included in this study
(Supplementary Table S2) were previously shown to be methylated
in hematologic neoplasms, including lymphoma and leukemia
(10, 13–15). For each gene promoter, a group-specific four-
nucleotide tag was added to the 5¶ end of each PCR primer
(Fig. 1) so that the amplicons from the five groups could be
computationally separated after sequencing. Individual amplicons
were generated by PCR from each of the five groups for each of the
25 gene-related CGIs. A complete list of the 125 primer pairs is
available in Supplementary Table S3, and the locations of the
amplicons relative to transcription start sites can be found in
Supplementary Fig. S1. Each amplicon was examined by gel
electrophoresis, purified, quantified, and then pooled together in
equal molar ratios. Three PCRs did not yield high-quality PCR
products after several repeated attempts and were excluded from
the analysis. The remaining 122 amplicons were sequenced using
the GS20 sequencer from 454 Life Sciences.
Mapping the bisulfite sequencing results. All 454 sequences
comprised one FASTA file with one sequence read per entry,
including quality control information. A total of 294,631 sequences
was obtained in a single 5.5-h machine run and included both
forward and reverse strand sequences. The average read length
was 131 bp (range, 35–300 bp). Bioinformatic analysis consisted of
the following three steps: (a) match a 454 sequence to a unique
primer, (b) align the sequence with the in silico bisulfite-converted
amplicon sequences, and (c) compile information from the forward
and reverse strands and trim the sequences. A dynamic pro-
gramming alignment algorithm was used to map each sequence
to the in silico bisulfite-converted amplicon sequences (see Sup-
plementary Materials and Methods). Of the 294,631 sequences,
288,358 (97.9%) were mapped to a unique amplicon (Table 1).
On average, 1,697 sequence reads (including both forward and
reverse strands) were obtained for each amplicon. However, some
amplicons had many fewer sequence reads than others and
occasionally sequences from one strand significantly outnumbered
the sequences from the opposite strand. Because the amplicons
were examined and quantified before pooling, we suspect that
these variations are a result of the series of linker ligation and
emulsion PCR amplification steps done in the library preparation
protocol used by 454 sequencing. A general linear model was used
to determine that the number of sequences obtained is signifi-
cantly influenced by specific gene, disease type, and the direction of
the sequence read. These factors explain 99.6% of the observed
variation in the number of reads. The estimated marginal means
of the number of reads for each gene by disease type are included
in supplementary information (Supplementary Fig. S2). These
variations may be caused by the unique sequence structure of
each amplicon, including amplicon length, GC content, overall
methylation status, and the number of homopolymers present
after bisulfite treatment. Because most of them are confounded
with gene or gene by disease interaction, they were not included in
the model. However, a statistically significant negative correlation
was observed between the number of reads and amplicon length
(P < 0.001) and number of the homopolymer (P < 0.001). The
sequencing error rate (Table 1) was similar to previously reported
values (9). Bisulfite treatment efficiency was determined by
calculating the C to T conversion rate for all cytosine bases other
than those in CpG dinucleotides (this includes CpA, CpC, or CpT
dinucleotides and is from this point referred to as CpH). This was
calculated by summing the number of C nucleotides aligned to a
CpH and then dividing by the number of C and T nucleotides
aligned at CpHs. The primer sequences and filtered reads were
not included in this analysis. The bisulfite conversion rate was
estimated to be 98.8% (Table 1); however, it could not be
Table 1. Summary of statistics
Statistic Value
Genes analyzed 25
Patient groups 5
Amplicons generated 122
Mean amplicon length 223.28
Mean number of CpGs per amplicon 17.16
Mean C + G percentage per amplicon 62%
Total sequence reads from 454 sequencer GS20 294,631
Total number of sequences mapped to unique amplicons 288,358
Total number of sequences used for methylation analysis (above 90% sequence identity) 207,011
Total number of sequences used for methylation analysis from forward read 103,755
Total number of sequences used for methylation analysis from reverse read 103,256
Percentage of analyzed CpG sites methylated at or above 0.20 in control group 4.25%
Percentage of analyzed CpG sites methylated at or above 0.20 in noncontrol group 45.64%
Percentage of analyzed CpG sites methylated at or above 0.50 in control group 0.70%
Percentage of analyzed CpG sites methylated at or above 0.50 in noncontrol group 16.24%
CpH conversion efficiency 98.8%
454 sequencing accuracy 99.8%
454 Sequencing Analysis of DNA Methylation
www.aacrjournals.org 8513 Cancer Res 2007; 67: (18). September 15, 2007
determined if any of the unconverted cytosines were due to de novo
CpH methylation.
Quantitative DNA methylation analysis of multiple promoter
CGIs. Based on the quality of the alignment, reads with a sequence
identity <90% were filtered from the analysis. An example illus-
trating the alignments of nonfiltered (sequence identity >90%) and
filtered (sequence identity <90%) sequences is included in supple-
mentary information (Supplementary Fig. S3). After filtering, a
total of 207,011 sequences (70.3%) was used for computing the
methylation levels present in the samples. The methylation status
of each CpG site in each sequence read was determined based on
a C to T conversion at each CpG site on the forward strand and a
G to A conversion on the reverse strand. The percentage of
methylation at each CpG site within each amplicon, for each
sample group, was calculated based on the number of sequences
containing methylated CpG sites versus the total number of
sequences analyzed (Fig. 2). Most of the CpG sites within the
amplicons were analyzed by sequencing from both forward and
Figure 2. Methylation profiles of 25 genes in five groups of
samples. Each box represents a CpG site in each DNA sequence.
The names of the genes are listed on the left side of each row .
The numbers at the end of each row indicate the number of the
forward and reverse strand sequences generated by the sequencer.
The color indicates the methylation level. Yellow, no methylation;
blue, methylation; red, SNP site; white, no sequencing data. The
proportion of blue and yellow in each box indicates the percentage
of sequences harboring the methylated CpG sites at this position.
Asterisk, three PCRs failed and were not included in the analysis.
Cancer Research
Cancer Res 2007; 67: (18). September 15, 2007 8514 www.aacrjournals.org
reverse directions. However, TRIM36, ZNF566, PTPN6, DAPK,
CDKN2B , and ZNF677 had missing data for more than two CpG
sites, which is likely a function of the read length limitation
of the 454 technology. Overall, the methylation present in the
25 genes analyzed was consistent with what we and others have
previously reported (10, 13). However, the results of this study
provide greater detail about the quantitative methylation at each
single methylcytosine and also provide a methylation profile for
each individual fragment analyzed. Although a pooling strategy
was used in this pilot study, there was a clear difference between
the normal controls and the tumor samples. For instance, the
percentage of analyzed CpG sites methylated at or above 20%
was 10 times higher in the tumor samples than in the normal
PBL samples (45.64% versus 4.25%; see Table 1). Interestingly, the
methylation levels at many CpG sites in ALDH1L1, LRP1B, PON3,
PCDHGA12 , and ADAM12 were exceedingly high (>70%) in ALL
and FL samples compared with normal PBL and CLL or MCL
samples. This seems to be consistent with our previous findings
in which a significantly higher number of methylated genes
were identified in FL compared with CLL and MCL (10, 13).
Because DNA samples from 10 patients in each diagnostic group
were pooled, the presence of CpG methylation in a high
proportion of sequence reads for a given amplicon suggests that
the majority of patients within the group are methylated at a
particular site. Therefore, these unique methylation sites (Fig. 2)
have great potential to serve as tumor-specific biomarkers for
diagnosis.
To compare the 454 sequencing results with standard bisulfite
sequencing, four bisulfite PCR amplicons were generated from an
in vitro–methylated PBL DNA sample and three pooled DNA
samples (PBL, ALL, and FL; see Materials and Methods) analyzed
by 454 sequencing using the core primer developed for ADAM12
but lacking the disease-specific tag designed for the 454 sequencing
assay. The four amplicons were cloned and sequenced using the
traditional Sanger sequencing method. As shown in Fig. 3, the
454 sequencing results correlate with standard bisulfite sequencing.
To examine the quantitative nature of the parallel sequencing
method, the 454 sequencing results were compared with qMSP
results from DAPK and DLC-1 . The primers and probes used in the
qMSP reaction exactly match sequences in the DAPK and DLC-1
amplicons (Supplementary Fig. S4A and C). The average methyl-
ation levels of all CpG sites included in the qMSP primers and
probes determined from the 454 sequencing assay were compared
with the PMR values obtained from qMSP results and were in good
agreement for DLC-1 but to a lesser degree for DAPK (Supplemen-
tary Fig. S4B and D). The 454 sequencing results were also
compared with qMSP data from individual patients (Supplemen-
tary Fig. S4B and D). DLC-1 and DAPK methylation were analyzed
using qMSP in a total of 102 primary normal and tumor samples
(see Supplementary Fig. S5). The average PMR value from each
disease group was compared with the qMSP results of pooled DNA
samples as well as the sequencing results. A better agreement
among three methods was obtained for DLC-1 . Overall, the
confirmatory studies validated the ultradeep bisulfite sequencing
results.
DNA methylation patterns in individual CGIs. Twenty of 25
amplicons examined showed an increase in methylation in various
types of diseases compared with normal PBL controls. Many also
showed quantitatively different levels of methylation between
diseases. Particularly, for many of these amplicons, significant
increases in methylation densities were observed in FL and ALL
compared with CLL and MCL. Because a pooling strategy was used,
the contribution of each individual tumor sample to the overall
level of methylation could not be assessed. Only 4 of 25 genes
(PON3, CYP27B1, DDX51 , and PCDHGA12) had significant methyl-
ation (>20%) at certain CpG sites in the normal controls but in
each of these genes there was an increase in the levels of
methylation present in the tumor samples. Interestingly, a
demarcation along the border of the CGIs of PON3 and CYP27B1
was observed in control normal PBLs, with little or no methylation
in the middle of the CGI but low to moderate levels (20–44%) of
methylation along the borders. Similarly, this demarcation line was
clearly seen in some tumor samples, but a significant increase in
methylation density at the border of the CGI was observed (Fig. 2).
Each PON3 and CYP27B1 sequence obtained was analyzed using a
Figure 3. Validation of the massively parallel bisulfite sequencing results of
ADAM12 by standard bisulfite sequencing. A, standard bisulfite sequencing of
ADAM12 in the pooled DNA (ALL, FL, and PBL) samples studied by 454
sequencing and an Sss I-treated PBL DNA sample. Row, sequence of individual
clones. ., methylated CpG sites; o, unmethylated CpG sites. B, comparison
of 454 sequencing results with standard bisulfite sequencing.
454 Sequencing Analysis of DNA Methylation
www.aacrjournals.org 8515 Cancer Res 2007; 67: (18). September 15, 2007
clustering program (Fig. 4). Compared with control normal PBL
samples, the methylation patterns for PON3 in FL and ALL seem to
suggest a progressive spreading of methylation from the border of
the CGI toward the center of the island (Fig. 4A). In these cases,
the demarcation line became less distinct and showed high levels
(>80%) of methylation along the border accompanied by an
increase in the number of methylated CpG sites in the promoter
area. Similar gradual changes in methylation were observed for
CYP27B1 in FL and ALL (Fig. 4B). These results seem to support
the theory that methylation spreads from the outside of the CGI
toward the center of the island.
Analysis of SNPs in amplicons. 454 sequencing has been used
for deep sequencing and for identifying rare mutations (16).
Because bisulfite treatment only modifies unmethylated cytosine,
but not adenine, guanine, or thymine, genetic changes in sequences
other than CpG dinucleotides were analyzed. A search of the SNP
database available at the University of California at Santa Cruz
genome Web site identified 11 SNPs in 8 of the 25 genes analyzed in
our study. One of these (rs4646696) was present within a CpG site
in the ALDH1L1 amplicon (Fig. 2). No disease-specific association
between any of the published SNPs and lymphoma or leukemia was
identified. However, one G!C polymorphism (rs1375610) created
an additional CpG site in the LRP1B amplicon. A clustering
algorithm was used to analyze the methylation patterns of
sequences with either the C allele or the G allele. As shown in
Fig. 5A , the C allele sequences can clearly be separated by the
methylation status of the SNP position. An overwhelming majority
of the fragments with a methylated cytosine at the SNP site were
also methylated at most of the remaining CpG sites within the
amplicon. To quantify the association between the G!C poly-
morphism and methylation status within LRP1B , odds ratios were
computed for each CpG site within the amplicon. A positive log
odds ratio indicates that methylation, at that position, is associated
with the G!C polymorphism. As shown in Fig. 5B , methylation
was virtually always associated with the SNP (15 of 16) and
statistical significance was found at the vast majority of positions
(13 of 16). Averaging across all positions, the odds of methylation
were more than twice as high for the C allele versus the G allele.
Despite the fact that the statistical significance in the case of
pooled samples with many repeated measurements is an optimistic
estimate that should be interpreted loosely, the potential effect of
this SNP on the overall methylation of LRP1B warrants further
investigation.
Discussion
We have shown in this report that a massively parallel
pyrosequencing (454 sequencing) technology can be used in the
high-throughput sequencing of bisulfite PCR amplicons. Currently,
several other parallel sequencing technologies are available or
under development from Solexa, Agencourt, and Helicos. At
present, the 454 platform generates the longest sequence reads
(average 100 bp compared with 25–35 bp with other technologies)
and therefore was the best suited for this experimental design.
However, the concept of this approach can be applied to other
emerging sequencing platforms if read lengths are significantly
improved. In this pilot study, a pooling strategy combined with a
single library preparation was used to sequence multiple disease
types and individuals in a single run. Because the GS20 sequencer
is capable of running 1, 4, or 16 different samples in a single
machine run, a combinatory experimental design using pooling
and primer tagging strategies could potentially maximize the
number of genes or samples analyzed in a single sequencing run.
This would also confer a considerable reduction in cost ($0.06
versus $1–5 for standard bisulfite sequencing) and in labor.
Bisulfite-based approaches are dependent on complete chemical
conversion of unmethylated cytosines in the DNA. Using an
ultradeep bisulfite sequencing approach, the conversion of a large
Figure 4. The spreading of DNA methylation from the periphery toward the center of select CGIs. A and B, top, location of the amplicons studied relative to the
transcription start site and within the CGI. The bar underneath each amplicon illustrates the relative location of each CpG within the amplicon (vertical bars ). C and D,
cluster analysis of the bisulfite sequencing data of the PON3 and CYP27B1 genes. Disease types are labeled on the top of each panel. The number of sequence reads
used for cluster analyses is listed under the disease label. The color indicates methylation status of each CpG site. Blue, methylation; yellow, no methylation.
Each column represents a CpG site within each amplicon. The bar graph on top shows the overall methylation level of each CpG site for the five pooled DNA samples.
The heat maps on the bottom represent cluster results.
Cancer Research
Cancer Res 2007; 67: (18). September 15, 2007 8516 www.aacrjournals.org
number of cytosine bases was assessed providing a reliable
estimation of the bisulfite conversion rate. Using the current
protocol, a 98.8% bisulfite conversion efficiency was achieved
(Table 1). Bisulfite treatment reduces the sequence diversity and
generates many AT-rich sequences in addition to creating
homopolymer stretches that can influence the accuracy of the
sequences generated using the 454 technology. However, our
results corroborate claims made by the company that this system is
capable of generating accurate sequences even in AT-rich regions
of the genome (9). Furthermore, the dynamic programming
algorithms used in this study were able to accurately align
fragments even if there were gaps present in a homopolymeric
region. Despite the many successes encountered, some amplicons
did not produce a sufficient number of high-quality sequence reads
for the quantification of methylcytosine methylation (i.e., DLC-1
in PBL). This is likely due to the amplification bias at the library
preparation step used at 454, resulting in a bias of the fragments
generated during the emulsion PCR reaction. Although this is a
major concern, only 2 of 122 amplicons had such a problem in this
pilot study.
The ultradeep bisulfite sequencing, to our knowledge, generated
the most comprehensive quantitative analysis of DNA methylation
patterns in multiple gene promoters and multiple tumor types. The
results show that the distribution of methylated sites is not equally
represented within a CGI. For example, progressive spreading of
methylation was identified from the boundary of the CGI and
gradually moving toward the transcription start site of genes, such
as PON3 and CYP27B1 . In the control normal PBLs analyzed, low
levels of methylation were seen in the 3¶ end ( first exon or intron)
or 5¶ end (upstream) boundary of the CGI but not in the promoter
area. A methylation wave may occur, progressively extending
from the boundary toward the promoter area of some CGIs in
lymphomas and leukemias. These results further confirm the
previous observations of the progressive spreading of RASSF1A
methylation in breast cancer in vivo (17) and of the spreading of
methylation in the E-cad and VHL CGIs in cultured fibroblasts
overexpressing DNA methyltransferase DNMT1 (18). Additionally,
the spreading of methylation seems to correlate with the overall
increase in promoter methylation in specific disease types. For
instance, the spreading of methylation in ALL and FL is more
significant than MCL and CLL and this is correlated with higher
numbers of methylated genes in ALL and FL. The underlying
mechanism of this epigenetic event is not clear but could relate to
lymphoma or leukemia genesis. One common feature of ALL and
FL is that, although these cells arise from two distinct maturation
stages of B-cell development, the cells from both tissues are
undergoing rapid mutations and rearrangements in DNA under
normal conditions. Because DNA methyltransferases are associated
with DNA repair (19), it is possible that DNA methyltransferases
are actively expressed during these two stages playing a mecha-
nistic role in the overabundance of methylated genes present in
these two diseases. Further, DNMT1 expression is significantly
higher in normal germinal center B cells than in normal naive,
memory, mantle zone, or marginal zone B cells (20). Consequently,
aberrantly functioning DNMT1 could explain the overabundance of
methylated genes in FL (derived from germinal center B cells)
when compared with CLL and MCL (derived from marginal zone B
cells).
Because of limited sample availability, gene expression analyses
could not be conducted using matched RNA samples. However, the
expression levels of DLC-1, LRP1B, CYP27B1, KCNK2, PCDHGA12,
DDX51, CCND1, p57 , and MME (CD10) in lymphoma and leukemia
cell lines were previously characterized and it was shown that
in vitro treatment with a demethylating agent could reactivate
these genes in cell lines possessing hypermethylated gene
promoters (10, 13, 21, 22). Furthermore, the expression levels of
DLC-1 and LRP1B were previously assessed in primary lymphoma
samples and a reciprocal correlation was found between hyper-
methylation and gene expression, indicating that promoter hyper-
methylation may play a role in the down-regulation of DLC-1 and
LRP1B gene expression in primary lymphoma samples (10, 13).
Figure 5. Cluster analysis of the bisulfite sequencing data of the LRP1B gene in
ALL samples. The color indicates methylation status of each CpG site. Blue,
methylation; yellow, no methylation; white, no methylation data. Each column
represents a CpG site within the LRP1B amplicon. Each row represents a
sequencing read. A, top, the 1,682 sequence reads were first grouped based on
the SNP genotype and the methylation status of the SNP site and then clustered
using the same clustering algorithms. B, at each relevant base position in the
LRP1B amplicon sequence, the natural logarithm of the odds ratio (odds of
methylation with C allele/odds of methylation with G allele) is given. Points lying
above the solid horizontal line, positive association between the G!C
polymorphism and methylation; points below the line, negative association;
broken vertical line, location of the polymorphism. Points represented by a solid
circle have a P value of <0.003. These points are significant with a family-wise
error rate of 5% using Bonferroni’s correction.
454 Sequencing Analysis of DNA Methylation
www.aacrjournals.org 8517 Cancer Res 2007; 67: (18). September 15, 2007
With recent developments in epigenomic technologies, our group
and others have discovered many novel methylated promoter CGIs
that may be tumor specific and have great potential as epigenetic
biomarkers. qMSP is a promising methylation analytic method
that could be used for developing clinical diagnostic assays but is
limited to the analysis of only a few CpG sites within a given CGI.
Therefore, it is critical that the CpG sites selected for designing such
assays are not biased. In this study, we generated a comprehensive,
in-depth analysis of the promoter methylation identified by our
microarray studies at a single molecule level and a single
methylcytosine resolution. The information obtained can be used
to guide the design of qMSP assays. In fact, several genes studied,
such as ADAM12, ALDH1L1 , and LRP1B , may be excellent candi-
dates for developing epigenetic biomarkers, which show a far
greater level of methylation than several selected candidate genes
that were previously shown to be methylated in lymphomas and
leukemias, such as p15 (CDKN2B) and SHP-1 (PTPN6). In addition,
this ultradeep sequencing approach is capable of identifying genetic
mutations and providing genotype information that could poten-
tially link genetic and epigenetic data, leading to the development
of comprehensive markers for disease classification and diagnosis.
Although a great potential for the application of next-generation
sequencing technologies in epigenetic studies was shown in this
study, several issues need to be addressed to fully use the
throughput capabilities of high-throughput parallel sequencing
instruments. In this proof-of-concept study, a large number of
individual PCR assays were done before pooling for sequencing.
Alternately, one could incorporate the Gene-Collector method,
which generates uniformly distributed multiplexed amplification
products with less bias (23), to increase the efficiency of amplicon
generation. Furthermore, careful optimization of the amplification
protocols, designing PCR amplicons of consistent length, and
addition of spiked controls should be considered in future studies.
In summary, this study provides evidence that high-throughput
parallel bisulfite sequencing can survey DNA methylation in
genomic regions of interest in an ultradeep fashion and at a single
methylcytosine resolution. Such a thorough analysis is expected
to provide insights into the progressive nature of aberrant DNA
methylation and its relationship to transcriptional silencing in the
neoplastic process and to assist in the design of quantitative
epigenetic biomarkers that can be used in diagnostic assays.
Acknowledgments
Received 3/19/2007; revised 6/15/2007; accepted 7/3/2007.
Grant support: National Cancer Institute grants CA123018 (H. Shi) and CA100055
and CA097880 (C.W. Caldwell), NIH Biomedical and Health Informatics Research
Training Program LM07089 (R.S. Kramer), and National Science Foundation grant
ITR-IIS-0407204 (D. Xu). C.W. Caldwell is Cancer Research Center Missouri Chair in
Cancer Research.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Dr. Michael X. Wang for kindly providing several DNA samples used in
this study.
References
1. Bird A. The essentials of DNA methylation. Cell 1992;
70:5–8.
2. Robertson KD, Jones PA. DNA methylation: past,
present and future directions. Carcinogenesis 2000;21:
461–7.
3. Craig JM, Bickmore WA. The distribution of CpG
islands in mammalian chromosomes. Nat Genet 1994;7:
376–82.
4. Jones PA, Baylin SB. The fundamental role of epigenetic
events in cancer. Nat Rev Genet 2002;3:415–28.
5. Grunau C, Clark SJ, Rosenthal A. Bisulfite genomic
sequencing: systematic investigation of critical experi-
mental parameters. Nucleic Acids Res 2001;29:E65.
6. Sandovici I, Leppert M, Hawk PR, Suarez A, Linares Y,
Sapienza C. Familial aggregation of abnormal methyla-
tion of parental alleles at the IGF2/H19 and IGF2R
differentially methylated regions. Hum Mol Genet 2003;
12:1569–78.
7. Eckhardt F, Lewin J, Cortese R, et al. DNA methylation
profiling of human chromosomes 6, 20 and 22.
Nat Genet 2006;38:1378–85.
8. Rakyan VK, Hildmann T, Novik KL, et al. DNA
methylation profiling of the human major histocompat-
ibility complex: a pilot study for the human epigenome
project. PLoS Biol 2004;2:e405.
9. Margulies M, Egholm M, Altman WE, et al. Genome
sequencing in microfabricated high-density picolitre
reactors. Nature 2005;437:376–80.
10. Shi H, Guo J, Duff DJ, et al. Discovery of novel
epigenetic markers in non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Carci-
nogenesis 2007;28:60–70.
11. Yegnasubramanian S, Kowalski J, Gonzalgo ML, et al.
Hypermethylation of CpG islands in primary and
metastatic human prostate cancer. Cancer Res 2004;64:
1975–86.
12. Widschwendter M, Siegmund KD, Muller HM, et al.
Association of breast cancer DNA methylation profiles
with hormone receptor status and response to tamox-
ifen. Cancer Res 2004;64:3807–13.
13. Rahmatpanah FB, Carstens S, Guo J, et al. Differential
DNA methylation patterns of small B-cell lymphoma
subclasses with different clinical behavior. Leukemia
2006;20:1855–62.
14. Esteller M. Profiling aberrant DNA methylation in
hematologic neoplasms: a view from the tip of the
iceberg. Clin Immunol 2003;109:80–8.
15. Taylor KH, Pena-Hernandez KE, Davis JW, et al. Large-
scale CpGmethylation analysis identifies novel candidate
genes and reveals methylation hotspots in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. Cancer Res 2007;67:2617–25.
16. Thomas RK, Nickerson E, Simons JF, et al. Sensitive
mutation detection in heterogeneous cancer specimens
by massively parallel picoliter reactor sequencing.
Nat Med 2006;12:852–5.
17. Yan PS, Shi H, Rahmatpanah F, et al. Differential
distribution of DNA methylation within the RASSF1A
CpG island in breast cancer. Cancer Res 2003;63:
6178–86.
18. Graff JR, Herman JG, Myohanen S, Baylin SB, Vertino
PM. Mapping patterns of CpG island methylation in
normal and neoplastic cells implicates both upstream
and downstream regions in de novo methylation. J Biol
Chem 1997;272:22322–9.
19. Li YQ, Zhou PZ, Zheng XD, Walsh CP, Xu GL.
Association of Dnmt3a and thymine DNA glycosylase
links DNA methylation with base-excision repair.
Nucleic Acids Res 2007;35:390–400.
20. Martin-Subero JI, Ballestar E, Esteller M, Siebert R.
Towards defining the lymphoma methylome. Leukemia
2006;20:1658–60.
21. Guo J, Burger M, Nimmrich I, et al. Differential DNA
methylation of gene promoters in small B-cell lympho-
mas. Am J Clin Pathol 2005;124:430–9.
22. Taylor KH, Liu J, Guo J, Davis JW, Shi H, Caldwell CW.
Promoter DNA methylation of CD10 in lymphoid
malignancies. Leukemia 2006;20:1910–2.
23. Fredriksson S, Baner J, Dahl F, et al. Multiplex
amplification of all coding sequences within 10 cancer
genes by Gene-Collector. Nucleic Acids Res 2007;35:e47.
Cancer Research
Cancer Res 2007; 67: (18). September 15, 2007 8518 www.aacrjournals.org
