The Small Subunit rRNA Modification Database
James A. McCloskey and Jef Rozenski1,*
Departments of Medicinal Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA and 1Rega
Institute for Medical Research, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Minderbroedersstraat 10, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium
Received August 17, 2004; Accepted September 17, 2004
ABSTRACT
The Small Subunit rRNA Modification Database pro-
vides a listing of reported post-transcriptionally
modifiednucleosidesandsequencesitesinsmallsub-
unit rRNAs from bacteria, archaea and eukarya. Data
are compiled from reports of full or partial rRNA
sequences, includingRNase T1 oligonucleotide cata-
logs reported in earlier literature in studies of phylo-
genetic relatedness. Options for data presentation
include full sequence maps, some of which have
been assembled by database curators with the aid
of contemporary gene sequence data, and tabular
forms organized by source organism or chemical
identity of the modification. A total of 32 rRNA
sequence alignments are provided, annotated with
sites of modification and chemical identities of mod-
ifications if known, with provision for scrolling full
sequences or user-dictated subsequences for com-
parative viewing for organisms of interest. The data-
base can be accessed through the World Wide Web
at http://medlib.med.utah.edu/SSUmods.
INTRODUCTION
Post-transcriptional nucleoside modification in rRNA was
recognized and reported in the early literature (1,2), but has
received far less attention than that for tRNA because of lim-
ited sequence studies carried out at the RNA level (which was
historically a frequent means of discovery of the new nucleo-
sides in tRNA), coupled with considerably less understanding
of modification structure–function relationships compared
with those of tRNA. Knowledge of the presence, chemical
identities and sequence locations of rRNA modifications has
steadily accumulated, even prior to the more recent avail-
abilityofcorresponding rRNAgenesequences.Although rRNA
gene sequences are now accumulating at a rapid rate (http://
www.rna.icmb.utexas.edu/) they unfortunately do not address
nucleotide modifications, which are performed by the actions
of specific modification enzymes after RNA transcription.
Nevertheless, the relevant modification data when extracted
from a variety of literature sources, particularly with regard
to RNA from the small ribosomal subunit due to the avail-
ability of extensive RNase T1 oligonucleotide catalogs (3),
have reached a point at which assembly into a single database
is useful to workers in multiple developing fields. These
include (4) studies of RNA modification enzymes, phylo-
genetic relationships between modification and evolution of
the organisms that contain them, and functions of highly
conserved modifications, for example through influence on
rRNA secondary and tertiary structure. Interest in the details
of rRNA structure/function is further propelled by reports of
the high-resolution crystal structures of small (5) and large (6)
ribosomal subunits.
The structures of presently known modified nucleosides in
rRNA are shown in Figure 1. Further information on each
nucleoside, including systematic chemical name, Chemical
Abstracts registry number useful for computer-based search-
ing and citations for original structure determination and chem-
ical synthesis, are given in Ref. (7) and in updated form at
http://medlib.med.utah.edu/RNAmods.
DATABASE DESCRIPTION
The Small Subunit (SSU) rRNA Modification Database is
accessible on the World Wide Web at http://medlib.med.
utah.edu/SSUmods. The site is divided into four main areas:
(i) OVERVIEW, which provides a description of the database,
sources of modification data and comments on numbering
systems, and the use of sequence alignments; (ii) MAP, in
which modifications can be displayed for selected organisms
in the three primary evolutionary domains either as a simple
list or as a full sequence map; (iii) ALIGN, which provides
modification-annotated aligned sequences for comparisons
among multiple sources, presently including 17 bacteria, 5
archaea, 8 eukarya, 1 chloroplast and 1 mitochondrion; and
(iv) BROWSE, providing two search functions for the user,
reported rRNA sequence locations for specific modifications
of interest and retrieval of literature citations from the database
files either for selected authors or publication names or years.
Comments on subdivisions and information in each of these
categories are as follows.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +32 16 33 73 90; Fax: +32 16 33 73 40; Email: jef.rozenski@rega.kuleuven.ac.be
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use permissions, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org.
ª 2005, the authors
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 33, Database issue ª Oxford University Press 2005; all rights reserved
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D135–D138
doi:10.1093/nar/gki015
Accuracy and completeness of database entries
Very few SSU rRNA modification maps are believed to be
complete, for example as is Escherichia coli [leading citations
in (8)] and Saccharomyces cerevisiae (9), generally due at the
time of the study, to the unavailability of the corresponding
gene sequence for use as a template, or by using inadequate
methods for nucleoside structure assignments. [Further com-
ments on reports of modification in the early rRNA literature
are given in Ref. (7).]
For some organisms in the database there are three major
sources of incomplete modification listings. The first is that
only portions of the rRNA molecule may have been
sequenced, thus giving the (possibly incorrect) appearance
in the comparative alignments that portions of the rRNA
are unmodified. For example in the case of Bacillus
stearothermophilus 16S rRNA only the 52 30-terminal nucleo-
tides were sequenced (10), as noted in the database tabular
listing, which produces an incomplete picture when the
B. stearothermophilus sequence is aligned against that from
E.coli, which is complete.
An additional source of incomplete listings was provided in
the data derived from RNase T1 catalogs in the earlier litera-
ture. Most such studies were made for the purpose of establish-
ing patterns of phylogenetic relatedness (11), in which most
reported catalog data omitted short sequences (whether mod-
ified or not) because they were of less use in establishing
characteristic ‘signature’ sequences. The extent of this pro-
blem is difficult to judge unless a total nucleoside modification
assay (as from HPLC or LC/MS analysis) had been carried
out to determine the identities and approximate numbers of
modifications.
A third source of incompleteness may result from the
method used for the detection of modification. For instance,
pseudouridine residues [abundant in eukarya (12)] would
be missed if the 14C-methionine method (9), indicating only
methylated nucleosides, had been used. Similarly, maps rep-
orting locations of pseudouridine have in recent years often
been based on the derivatization-reverse transcriptase method
of Ofengand (13), which is not intended to detect ribose
methylation. References to the original citations will usually
be required to establish whether the methodology used would
have influenced the reported modified nucleoside distribution.
Identification of the modified nucleoside
In many instances, most notably in the RNase T1 catalogs, the
presence—but not the identity—of modification at a given site
Figure 1. Chemical structures of presently known post-transcriptionally
modified nucleosides from rRNA. A, archaea; B, bacteria; and E, eukarya.
Symbols: m1A, 1-methyladenosine; m2A, 2-methyladenosine; m6A, N6-
methyladenosine; Am, 20-O-methyladenosine; m62A, N
6,N6-dimethyladeno-
sine; Im, 20-O-methylinosine;m3C, 3-methylcytidine;m4C,N4-methlycytidine;
m5C, 5-methlycytidine; Cm, 20-O-methylcytidine; ac4C, N4-acetylcyti
dine; m4Cm, N4,20-O-dimethylcytidine; m42Cm, N
4,N4,20-O-trimethylcytidine;
hm5C, 5-hydroxymethylcytidine; ac4Cm, N4-acetyl-20-O-methylcytidine;
m1G, 1-methylguanosine; m2G, N2-methylguanosine; m7G, 7-methylguano-
sine; Gm, 20-O-methylguanosine; m22G, N
2,N2-dimethylguanosine; C, pseu-
douridine; D, dihydrouridine; m3U, 3-methyluridine; m5U, 5-methyluridine;
cm5U, 5-carboxymethyluridine;Um, 20-O-methyluridine;m1C, 1-methylpseu-
douridine; m3C, 3-methylpseudouridine; Cm, 20-O-methylpseudouridine;
acp3U, 3-(3-amino-3-carboxypropyl)uridine; and m1acp3C, 1-methyl-3-(3-
amino-3-carboxypropyl)pseudouridine.
D136 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
was established. In some cases the designation ‘N’ was used in
the original literature for reporting oligonucleotide modifica-
tion, perhaps reflecting unusual modification, or uncertainty in
making structure assignments based solely on unusual elec-
trophoretic or chromatographic mobility of nuclease frag-
ments. Examples of such designations are found in the T1
catalogs from methanogens (14).
As discussed (7), the identification of modified nucleosides
in the early rRNA literature is somewhat problematic partly
due to the use of inadequate analytical methods of identifica-
tion. A related problem encountered during compilation of this
database arises when a conserved site of modification was
encountered during sequencing of the RNA, and the structure
of the modification then assigned without reported experi-
mental evidence as to how the nucleoside was actually iden-
tified. The most common example arises in assignment of the
very highly conserved modified sequence aaCCUG as m62A
m62ACCUGin stem–loop45, anassumptionwhich is likely tobe
correct in this particular case.
Sequence locations of modified nucleosides
Literature reports can be considered in terms of three likely
levels of accuracy.
(i) The modification position has unequivocally been
derived and the reported location was supported by cor-
relation with the corresponding gene sequence. Examples
are in E.coli (15), Sulfolobus solfataricus (16) and human
(17) rRNAs. Such modifications are color-coded in the
database.
(ii) The modification position has been determined by
sequencing of a nuclease fragment, which in turn has a
unique sequence context when compared with the gene
sequence, and has been thereby placed in the total rRNA
sequence by the database curators. This method of place-
ment is indicated in the ‘table of modifications’ listings
under MAP. Examples are found in the tables for
Methanococcus jannaschii and Rattus norvegicus
(Novikoff hepatoma) and are also color-marked.
(iii) The modification site was determined by sequencing of a
nuclease fragment, but the gene sequence permits place-
ment of the fragment in more than one site in the rRNA
molecule. In a limited number of cases, the database
curators have nonetheless placed the modified oligonu-
cleotide in the overall sequence because the modification
site is very highly conserved in rRNAs of related organ-
isms (within bacteria, archaea or eukarya). This circum-
stance is uniquely color-marked in ALIGN presentations
and in sequence and tabular listings under MAP. Good
examples of this fall under listings derived from nuclease
catalogs from R.norvegicus 18S rRNA (18), which was
an extensive and carefully carried out study in which
modified nucleotides were separately identified in the
sequenced RNA fragments.
Choice of SSU rRNA numbering systems
Two parallel numbering systems have been used throughout
the database: ‘unaligned numbering’, in which the absolute
numbering for a reported RNA sequence has been used; and
‘aligned numbering’, in which a ‘universal’ numbering system
from the European ribosomal RNA database (19) (http://
www.psb.ugent.be/rRNA/) has been adopted. The universal
system takes advantage of the generally conserved nature of
rRNA secondary structures within all three evolutionary
domains, by adopting residues numbers sufficiently broad
so as to include all presently reported SSU RNA sequences
so that meaningful alignments between RNAs from distantly
related organisms can be visualized.
Modification display options under MAP
The data compiled in the MAP section are derived primarily
from RNase T1 catalog data sets and are presented in the tabu-
lar form, showing those oligonucleotide sequences that were
reported to be modified. These tabular listings have been
somewhat arbitrarily divided into two categories as follows.
Modifications lists and maps show organisms for which
more extensive lists of modification sites are available, derived
from both T1 fragments and other types of data. Many of
these sites can be referenced to the full rRNA sequence and
may therefore be displayed as a full sequence map by using
either the aligned (universal) or unaligned (absolute) number-
ing system. If modification sites were originally determined
solely from the T1 catalogs, they are likely to be incomplete
because only 5mer or 6mer (and longer) sequences were
reported usually (14). If the modification site is ambiguous,
often as a consequence of multiple possibilities for placement
within the rRNA molecule, the location is shown as
‘unknown’.
RNase T1 catalog data show listings of modified T1 oligo-
nucleotides, usually from groups of related organisms, and
usually without reference to overall sequence of the rRNA.
For example, under Actinomycetes, modification data from 25
different organisms are presented. Therefore sequence maps,
which are generally not available in such cases, are not pro-
vided. The data are always presented in this subsection rather
than under ‘lists and maps’ when fewer than three types of
nucleoside modifications were originally reported.
In most instances, the position of the modification in the T1
fragment was reported but the identity of the modified nucleo-
side was not established. In the present database these mod-
ified sites are indicated by a lower case a, g, c or u. The
designation ‘N’ is used if listed in that fashion in the original
report, except when contemporary availability of the gene
sequence permits assignment as a, g, c or u.
Alignment of modification-annotated full SSU rRNA
sequences or subsequences
A total of 32 SSU rRNA sequences have been aligned by
the database curators, with reference in part to alignments
shown in the European ribosomal RNA database (19). In
some instances, reported T1 catalog data were placed in
full sequence context by the curators when made possible
by later reports of the gene sequences. Examples are in
sequence maps for Haloferax volcanii (20) and S.solfataricus
16S rRNAs (16). Color-coded annotations of individually
modified nucleotides as reported in the literature have been
performed, with modified nucleoside symbols (as in Figure 1)
included if known. Full sequences or user-dictated subse-
quences can be scrolled for comparative viewing for any
organism of interest.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D137
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank P. F. Crain for assistance and advice, G. E.
Fox and other colleagues for discussions, and S. C. Pomerantz
for structural drawings. We are grateful to N. Lombardo in the
Eccles Health Sciences Library for assistance in setting up the
database. Compilation of the database was supported by grant
GM29812 from the National Institute of General Medical
Sciences (J.A.M.) and grant 1.5.014.02 from the Fonds voor
Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek—Vlaanderen (J.R.).
REFERENCES
1. Littlefield,J.W. and Dunn,D.B. (1958) Natural occurrence of thymine
and three methylated adenine bases in several ribonucleic acids. Nature,
181, 254–255.
2. Smith,J.D. and Dunn,D.B. (1959) An additional sugar component of
ribonucleic acids. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 31, 573–575.
3. Fox,G.E., Pechman,K.R. and Woese,C.R. (1977) Comparative
cataloguing of 16S ribosomal RNA: molecular approach to prokaryotic
systematics. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol., 27, 44–57.
4. Grosjean,H. and Benne,R. (eds) (1998) Modification and Editing of
RNA. ASM Press, Washington, DC.
5. Wimberly,B.T., Brodersen,D.E., Clemons,W.M.,Jr, Morgan-
Warren,R.J., Carter,A.P., Vonrhein,C., Hartsch,T. and Ramakrishnan,V.
(2000) Structure of the 30S ribosomal subunit. Nature, 407,
327–339.
6. Ban,N., Nissen,P., Hansen,J., Moore,P.B. and Steitz,T.A. (2000) The
complete atomic structure of the large ribosomal subunit at 2.4 s
resolution. Science, 289, 905–920.
7. Limbach,P.A., Crain,P.F. and McCloskey,J.A. (1994) Summary:
the modified nucleosides of RNA. Nucleic Acids Res., 22,
2183–2196.
8. Bakin,A., Kowalak,J.A., McCloskey,J.A. and Ofengand,J. (1994) A
single pseudouridine residue in E. coli 16S RNA is located at position
516. Nucleic Acids Res., 22, 3681–3684.
9. Maden,B.E.H. (1990) The numerous modified nucleosides in eukaryotic
ribosomal RNA. Progr. Nucleic Acids Res. Mol. Biol., 39, 241–303.
10. Van Charldorp,R., Van Kimmende,A.M.A. and Van Knippenberg,P.H.
(1981) Sequence and secondary structure of the colicin fragment of
Bacillus stearothermophilus 16S ribosomal RNA. Nucleic Acids Res., 9,
4909–4918.
11. Woese,C.R. and Fox,G.E. (1977) Phylogenetic structure of the
prokaryotic domain: the primary kingdoms. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA,
74, 5088–5090.
12. Ofengand,J. and Fournier,M.J. (1998) The pseudouridine residues of
rRNA: number, location, biosynthesis, and function. In Grosjean,H. and
Benne,R. (eds), Modification and Editing of RNA. ASM Press,
Washington, DC, pp. 229–253.
13. Bakin,A. and Ofengand,J. (1993) Four newly located pseudouridylate
residues in Escherichia coli 23S ribosomal RNA are all at the peptidyl
transferase center: analysis by the application of a new sequencing
technique. Biochemistry, 32, 9754–9762.
14. Balch,W.E., Fox,G.E.,Magrum,L.J.,Woese,C.R. andWolfe,R.S. (1979)
Methanogens: reevaluation of a unique biological group. Microbiol.
Rev., 43, 260–296.
15. Brosius,J., Palmer,M.L., Kennedy,P.J. and Noller,H.F. (1978) Complete
nucleotide sequence of a 16S ribosomal RNA gene from Escherichia
coli. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 75, 4801–4805.
16. Olsen,G.J., Pace,N.R., Nuell,M., Kaine,B.P., Gupta,R. and Woese,C.R.
(1985) Sequence of the 16S rRNA gene from the thermoacidophilic
archaebacterium Sulfolobus solfataricus and its evolutionary
implications. J. Mol. Evol., 22, 301–307.
17. McCallum,F.S. and Maden,D.E.H. (1985) Human 18S ribosomal RNA
sequence inferred fromDNA sequence. Variations in 18S sequences and
secondary modification patterns between vertebrates. Biochem. J., 232,
725–733.
18. Choi,Y.C. and Busch,H. (1978) Modified nucleotides in T1 RNase
oligonucleotides of 18S ribosomal RNA of the Novikoff hepatoma.
Biochemistry, 17, 2551–2560.
19. Wuyts,J., Perriere,G. and Van de Peer,Y. (2004) The European
ribosomal RNA database. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D101–D103.
20. Gupta,R., Lanter,J.M. and Woese,C.R. (1983) Sequence of the 16S
ribosomal RNA from Halobacterium volcanii, an archaebacterium.
Science, 221, 656–659.
D138 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
