MIPS: analysis and annotation of proteins from
whole genomes in 2005
H. W. Mewes1,2,*, D. Frishman2, K. F. X. Mayer1, M. Mu¨nsterko¨tter1, O. Noubibou1,
P. Pagel1, T. Rattei2, M. Oesterheld1, A. Ruepp1 and V. Stu¨mpflen1
1Institute for Bioinformatics (MIPS), GSF National Research Center for Environment and Health,
Ingolsta¨dter Landstraße 1, D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany and 2Technische Universita¨t Mu¨nchen,
Chair of Genome Oriented Bioinformatics, Center of Life and Food Science, D-85350
Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany
Received September 15, 2005; Revised and Accepted October 28, 2005
ABSTRACT
TheMunich InformationCenter forProteinSequences
(MIPS at the GSF), Neuherberg, Germany, provides
resources related to genome information. Manually
curated databases for several reference organisms
are maintained. Several of these databases are
described elsewhere in this and other recent NAR
database issues. Inacomplementaryeffort, acompre-
hensive set of .400 genomes automatically annot-
ated with the PEDANT system are maintained. The
main goal of our current work on creating and main-
taining genome databases is to extend gene centered
information to information on interactions within a
generic comprehensive framework. We have concen-
tratedour efforts along three lines (i) the development
of suitable comprehensive data structures and
database technology, communication and query
tools to include a wide range of different types of
information enabling the representation of complex
information such as functional modules or networks
Genome Research Environment System, (ii) the
development of databases covering computable
information such as the basic evolutionary relations
among all genes, namely SIMAP, the sequence simil-
arity matrix and the CABiNet network analysis frame-
work and (iii) the compilation and manual annotation
of information related to interactions suchasprotein–
protein interactions or other types of relations (e.g.
MPCDB, MPPI, CYGD). All databases described and
the detailed descriptions of our projects can be
accessed through the MIPS WWW server (http://
mips.gsf.de).
FROM GENE-CENTRIC TO NETWORK-BASED
REPRESENTATION OF GENOME INFORMATION
Since the creation of the very first genome databases in 1992
(1), data structures as well as the information content of gen-
ome databases underwent little change. Essentially the concept
of genome databases is gene centered and the sequence asso-
ciated information does not reach beyond its individual func-
tional properties such as EC numbers or the annotation of
certain classification types such as functional categories
[e.g. FunCat (2) or GeneOntology (3)].
An important contribution of novel experimental techniques
during the last few years has been the computational analysis
of modules and networks based on the combination of inde-
pendent types of information (4,5). To understand complex
cellular processes, it is necessary to uncover the functional
context of any individual gene. As a consequence, there is an
urgent need to build information resources that enable
the integration of different types of data as well as the quant-
itative evaluation of their reliability at inferring function as
part of the annotation process. An essential but so far unsolved
challenge for the annotation of gene properties within the
functional context is the very dynamic change of the under-
lying data. In contrast to genome sequence data which are
complete for hundreds of species and for which robust and
mathematically rigorous algorithms are available, interaction
information for most organisms is highly incomplete and the
transfer of information between species is not straightforward
[e.g. (6)].
From the user’s point of view, a number of basic require-
ments have to be met for genome databases to provide com-
plex functional information. The gene centered view has to be
extended from the single-gene to encompass a network per-
spective and metabolic, regulatory and interactive dimensions
have to be included. In addition, to enable an interaction-based
comprehensible view, the so called ‘giant’ networks need to be
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +49 89 3187 3580; Fax: +49 89 3187 3585; Email: w.mewes@gsf.de
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D169–D172
doi:10.1093/nar/gkj148
subclustered to reflect their underlying modular structure and
the edges of the functional interaction graphs must be
quantitatively labeled. Both views need to be accessible
through browsers as well as through suitable computational
interfaces. Obviously, the current state of genome databases
does not fulfill these requirements. In this paper, we will
describe the current state of our developments to achieve
these long-term goals for a limited number of model organisms
(fungi including yeast, Arabidopsis thaliana and other plant
models, and the mouse genome).
GENRE, THE GENERIC MODEL FOR COMPLEX
GENOME INFORMATION
Genome information is traditionally stored in databases con-
taining entries as instances of predefined rigid data structures
(i.e. formats). However, the development of concepts to cope
with complex data structures within a database becomes prac-
tically unmanageable as soon as several independent data
sources have to be covered. Therefore information pointing
to the same biological objects is distributed over a large num-
ber of independent and often syntactically incompatible data-
bases (e.g. nucleic acids, proteins, protein interactions,
metabolic and regulatory networks and the like). While pass-
ive integration of these databases is feasible through database
indexing and integration of flat files or web resources [e.g.
PubMed (7)], it does not allow for any semantic integration
required for comprehensive annotation purposes (Table 1).
The Munich Information Center for Protein Sequences
(MIPS) Genome Research Environment System (GenRE) pro-
vides a flexible technology to cope with the needs of biological
data representation. It is a J2EE based multi-tier architecture,
implemented with established software design patterns. Seam-
less integration of distributed information resources (databases
and applications) is realized with Enterprise Java Beans
(EJBs) capable of retrieving information in XML format for
straightforward web publishing including expression based
queries similar to PubMed.
Internally, GenRE is based on three different types of
objects and components. Components of the first type are
responsible for the access of applications and databases.
These EJBs provide a uniform interface while hiding the
data resource dependent access mechanisms in the data integ-
ration tier. Databases for example are typically accessed via
Hibernate, an object-relational mapping tool, whereas applica-
tions are often directly accessed. Input and output are com-
monly XML documents and data objects. Data objects, which
represent the second type within GenRE abstract biological
entities such as genes, proteins or even complexes at a
semantic level. In this layered approach, the data object
level is unambiguously separated from the underlying data
sources. These objects are used for semantic integration
into a third type of component. They are realized as EJBs
and are responsible for any further information processing.
This allows the association of any biochemical entities (e.g.
RNA, drugs, etc.) with either an entity describing binary
relationships—e.g. protein interactions from yeast two-
hybrid experiments—with many to many relationships, e.g.
functional assignments using the MIPS FunCat (2).
Hence GenRE does not only allow for the flexible creation
of different object types needed to include various types of
‘omics’ data, but is also capable of incorporating relations
between instances from different data sources. Even complex
data models suitable for handling biological networks together
with functional annotation of the distinct nodes are realized. In
combination with integrated applications like SIMAP com-
ponents for comparative proteomics can be realized.
The MIPS protein–protein interaction resource (MPact) (8)
is illustrative of the advantage of our approach to extend the
single-protein view into a network perspective. The data
model allows extensions for interactions of proteins with
other biochemical entities (e.g. RNA, drugs, etc.). Interacting
objects can not only be associated with each other to represent
for example complexes, but also with external information
describing the corresponding experiments (e.g. yeast two-
hybrid, co-immunoprecipitation or mass spectrometry data).
In the same way information about the evidence of interactions
and various protein annotations such as functions, motifs and
Table 1. URL addresses for MIPS database resources
Project description Link
Project overview http://mips.gsf.de/projects/
Arabidopsis thaliana genome (MATDB) http://mips.gsf.de/projects/plants/thal
CABiNet: Comprehensive Network Analysis http://mips.gsf.de/genre/proj/CABiNet/
Complete Genomes (PEDANT server) http://pedant.gsf.de/
Comprehensive Yeast Genome Database (CYGD) http://mips.gsf.de/projects/fungi/yeast/
Database of Human cDNAs (DHGP) http://mips.gsf.de/proj/cdna/Human_cDNA/
FunCat: Functional Catalogue of Proteins http://mips.gsf.de/projects/funcat/
GABI: Genome analysis in plants http://mips.gsf.de/projects/plants/projects_html#gabi
GenRE: Genome Research Environment http://mips.gsf.de/genre/proj/
MIPS Neurospora crassa Database (MNCDB) http://mips.gsf.de/projects/fungi/neurospora/
MosDB: Rice Genome Database http://mips.gsf.de/projects/plants/rice/
MPPI: Mammalian Protein–Protein Interactions http://mips.gsf.de/proj/mppi/
SIMAP : Similarity Matrix of Proteins http://mips.gsf.de/genre/proj/simap/
The Lotus Genome Database (Lotus japonica) http://mips.gsf.de/proj/plants/lotus/
MPCDB Mammalian Protein Complex Data Base http://mips.gsf.de/genre/proj/mpcdb/
URMELDB (European Medicago and Legume Database (Medicago) http://mips.gsf.de/projects/plants/medicago/
FGDB: Fusarium graminearum genome database http://mips.gsf.de/genre/proj/fusarium/
MUMDB: Ustillago maydis genome database http://mips.gsf.de/genre/proj/ustilago/
MPACT: Representation of interaction data at MIPS http://mips.gsf.de/genre/proj/mpact/
D170 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
cellular localization are associated with the interacting
object. Owing to the object-oriented approach any instances
of the interacting object (notably a protein) can be furthermore
associated with the corresponding entry e.g. in a genome
database.
Our implementation allows two different approaches to
query the repository. On the one hand a gene-centric or
protein-centric query is possible where distinct interacting
objects can be retrieved within a specific context. Since the
proteins and interactions are ‘decorated’ with annotation
information, it is possible to query for specific attributes of
proteins (e.g. functions) or the interactions (e.g. evidence). On
the other hand, network-centric queries can be performed. It is
possible to query both for the nodes (the proteins) and the
edges (the interactions) of the graph. Based on functional
annotation a traversal of the network graph is possible. This
traversal can be used to quickly scan the network for false-
positive interactions between proteins whose functions and/or
localizations differ completely or to assign new functions to
proteins without functions which interact specifically within
a certain functional context. Furthermore extraction of
sub-networks based on any associated context (function, loc-
alization, experiment) is possible. It is relevant to point out that
our approach enables seamless context dependent views
starting from single genes and ending with complete
networks. MIPS databases are implemented in the GenRE
environment.
SIMAP AND CABINET: COMPUTATIONAL
METHODS TO GENERATE INFORMATION FOR
GENOME DATABASES
Pairwise similarity comparison of every protein against the set
of all known proteins is an indispensable step in any annotation
process. Many biological and evolutionary questions are
related to the structure of the sequence space and its partition-
ing into substructures represented by the all-against-all sim-
ilarity relations. However, individual searches for homologs
do not allow structuring the sequence universe. The MIPS
Similarity Matrix of Proteins (9), currently contains a matrix
of all-against-all comparisons of more than 4 million proteins
from >400 organisms including all UNIPROT sequences.
They have been generated by exhaustive sequence similarity
searches using FASTA (10). SIMAP is continuously updated
to keep up with the rapidly increasing amount of data. The
linked sequence feature database containing information on
protein domains as well as predicted transmembrane regions,
signal peptides and protein localization supports efficient post-
processing of homology lists into sub-clusters of homogen-
eous sequence properties. These steps are also essential to
identify inconsistencies in genome annotation. SIMAP serves
as an example of a system offering highly dynamic informa-
tion in the form of a persistent database to be explored
systematically at high performance. SIMAP is also used as
an annotation tool and generates similarity input information
for the PEDANT databases (11).
In contrast to the straightforward similarity matrix, the com-
pilation of biological interaction information requires methods
dealing with mostly incomplete but also inherently heterogen-
eous sets of data. To provide a system for comprehensive
network analysis, we have developed CABiNet (Comprehens-
ive Analysis of Biomolecular Networks) within the framework
of GenRE. CABiNet offers a set of methods for network
statistics, integration, analysis and clustering applied to
interaction data administered by GenRE as well as to user-
submitted network data. CABInet allows the user to browse
and query across any subset of the generated networks and
clusters. As with all methods in GenRE, the software design of
CABiNet allows an easy adoption of new functions into the
system. To address the issue of inconsistent use of protein
identifiers in different networks, a GenRE component to
resolve protein identifiers and aliases in all major sequence
databases is employed by CABiNet.
THE MAMMALIAN PROTEIN COMPLEX
DATABASE
High quality data collections are needed as a reference set for
testing computational methods in network analysis. In the case
of protein–protein interaction data, any collection from vari-
ous sources including high-throughput experiments contains
a considerable number of false-positive and false-negative
results (12). Thus, for the analysis of protein networks there
is a need for gold standards (12) in order to validate the quality
of data resources or as a reference for testing the reliability of
computational methods. The cooperation and interaction
of proteins is most unambiguously found in protein complexes
where several proteins simultaneously act together to perform
a single reaction. For the analysis of protein networks in lower
eukaryotes the protein complexes from yeast have become a
gold standard in the field (8).
Analysis of the even more elaborate protein networks in
mammals requires manually curated resources in its own right.
Information in Mammalian Protein Complex Database
(MPCDB) is extracted from scientific literature describing
individual experiments; data stemming from high-
throughput experiments has not been incorporated. Informa-
tion about protein complexes includes gene names of the
members as well as protein names, cross-references and lit-
erature references. If a protein complex has been analysed
from other mammals the orthologous mouse proteins are
presented. In addition, the type of experiment that was used
to analyse the protein complex is given. Evidence is structured
according to the MIPS evidence catalogue originally
developed for yeast protein complex and protein–protein inter-
action data and subsequently adopted for higher organisms.
This is in line with the requirements for PSI-MI compliant
annotation (8). Manual annotation of the respective proteins is
performed in the Mouse functional Genome Database
(MfunGD). Here, protein function annotation is performed
with the FunCat (2) annotation scheme, which in a comparison
of several individual features showing the highest predictive
power for the analysis of protein networks (13). Whereas
within the protein complex data in BIND (14) the vast majority
of protein complexes contain less than three different proteins,
the protein complexes within MPCDB contain 4.6 different
proteins on average. Currently, MPCDB contains 122 protein
complexes with a total of 643 proteins. High molecular weight
protein complexes like proteasomes and the eukaryotic
chaperonin TRiC perform central functions in cells like
protein degradation and protein folding, respectively. These
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D171
two protein complexes are examples that so far, are not
present in any manually curated publicly available database
of protein complexes. Hence, the MPCDB dataset provide
scientists with a reliable data resource for the analysis of
protein networks and functional modules in mammals.
SUMMARY
TheMIPS data resource aims to extend the scope of its curated
genome databases towards functional context information.
These databases include model systems for mammals (Mus
musculus, in progress), fungi (yeast, CYGD; Neurospora
crassa, MNDB; Ustillago maydis, MUMDB; Fusarium
graminearum, FGDB), plants (A.thaliana, MatDB; Oryza
sativa, MOsDB; Maize Genome Sequencing Project,
MGSP; European Medicago and Legume Database;
URMELDB, Lotus japonica), microorganisms (Chlamydiae,
Listeriae), the comprehensive automatic annotation of
genomes in the PEDANT database (11). In addition, we
have compiled manually curated reference protein–protein
interaction datasets for mammalia (MPPI) and yeast
(MPact) as well as the database for mammalian protein
complexes (MPCDB). Proteins in these databases are func-
tionally classified using the well established functional cata-
logue FunCat (2).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the Federal Ministry of Education,
Science, Research and Technology (BMBF: BFAM:
031U112C, GABI: 0312270/4, NGFN: 01KW9710) and the
Deutsche Forschungs-gemeinschaft (Bioinformatics Munich,
BIM). Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for
this article was provided by the GSF—National Research
Center for Environment and Health.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Oliver,S.G., van der Aart,Q.J., Agostoni-Carbone,M.L., Aigle,M.,
Alberghina,L., Alexandraki,D., Antoine,G., Anwar,R., Ballesta,J.P.,
Benit,P. et al. (1992) The complete DNA sequence of yeast chromosome
III. Nature, 357, 38–46.
2. Ruepp,A., Zollner,A., Maier,D., Albermann,K., Hani,J., Mokrejs,M.,
Tetko,I., Gu¨ldener,U., Mannhaupt,G., Mu¨nsterko¨tter,M. et al. (2004)
The FunCat, a functional annotation scheme for systematic classification
of proteins from whole genomes. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, 5539–5545.
3. Ashburner,M.,Ball,C.A.,Blake,J.A.,Botstein,D.,Butler,H.,Cherry,J.M.,
Davis,A.P., Dolinski,K., Dwight,S.S., Eppig,J.T. et al. (2000) Gene
ontology: tool for the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology
Consortium. Nature Genet., 25, 25–29.
4. von Mering,C., Huynen,M., Jaeggi,D., Schmidt,S., Bork,P. and Snel,B.
(2003) STRING: a database of predicted functional associations
between proteins. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 258–261.
5. Kelley,R. and Ideker,T. (2005) Systematic interpretation of genetic
interactions using protein networks. Nat. Biotechnol., 23,
561–566.
6. Pagel,P., Mewes,H.W. and Frishman,D. (2004) Conservation of
protein–protein interactions—lessons from ascomycota. Trends Genet.,
20, 72–76.
7. Goetz,T. and von der Lieth,C.W. (2005) PubFinder: a tool for improving
retrieval rate of relevant PubMed abstracts. Nucleic Acids Res.,
33, W774–W778.
8. Gu¨ldener,U., Mu¨nsterko¨tter,M., Oesterheld,M., Pagel,P., Ruepp,A.,
Mewes,H.-W. and Stuempflen,V. (2006) MPact: the MIPS protein
interaction resource on yeast. Nucleic Acids Res., 34, D436–D441.
9. Arnold,R., Rattei,T., Tischler,P., Lindner,D., Stuempflen,V. and
Mewes,H.W. SIMAP: The similarity matrix of proteins. Bioinformatics,
21 Suppl. 2, ii42–ii46.
10. Pearson,W.R. (1994) Using the FASTA program to search protein and
DNA sequence databases. Methods Mol. Biol., 24, 307–331.
11. Riley,M.L., Schmidt,T., Wagner,C., Mewes,H.W. and Frishman,D.
(2005) The PEDANT genome database in 2005. Nucleic Acids Res.,
33, D308–D310.
12. Jansen,R., Lan,N., Qian,J. andGerstein,M. (2002) Integration of genomic
datasets to predict protein complexes in yeast. J. Struct. Funct.
Genomics, 2, 71–81.
13. Lu,L.J., Xia,Y., Paccanaro,A., Yu,H. and Gerstein,M. (2005) Assessing
the limits of genomic data integration for predicting protein networks.
Genome Res., 15, 945–953.
14. Bader,G.D., Betel,D. and Hogue,C.W. (2003) BIND: the
Biomolecular Interaction Network Database. Nucleic Acids Res., 31,
248–250.
D172 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
