GENOME-WIDE DETECTION OF ALTERNATIVE SPLICING IN
EXPRESSED SEQUENCES USING PARTIAL ORDER MULTIPLE
SEQUENCE ALIGNMENT GRAPHS
C. GRASSO, B. MODREK, Y. XING, C. LEE
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
University of California, 611 Charles E. Young Drive East,
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1570, USA
E-mail:     leec@mbi.ucla.edu    
We present a method for high-throughput alternative splicing detection in expressed
sequence data.  This method effectively copes with many of the problems inherent in
making inferences about splicing and alternative splicing on the basis of EST sequences,
which in addition to being fragmentary and full of sequencing errors, may also be chimeric,
mis-oriented, or contaminated with genomic sequence.  Our method, which relies both on
the Partial Order Alignment (POA) program for constructing multiple sequence alignments,
and its Heaviest Bundling function for generating consensus sequences, accounts for the
real complexity of expressed sequence data by building and analyzing a single multiple
sequence alignment containing all of the expressed sequences in a particular cluster aligned
to genomic sequence.  We illustrate application of this method to human UniGene Cluster
Hs.1162, which contains expressed sequences from the human HLA-DMB gene.  We have
used this method to generate databases, published elsewhere, of splices and alternative
splicing relationships for the human, mouse and rat genomes.  We present statistics from
these calculations, as well as the CPU time for running our method on expressed sequence
clusters of varying size, to verify that it truly scales to complete genomes.
1 Introduction
Alternative splicing describes the process by which multiple exons can be spliced
together to produce different mRNA isoforms, encoding structurally and
functionally distinct protein products.1,2  Recent studies have indicated that the
mechanism of alternative splicing not only plays a large role in expanding the
repertoire of gene function during the lifetime of an organism, but also facilitates
the evolution of novel functions in alternatively spliced exons, which are less
subject to the effects of natural selection.3  Alternative splicing appears increasingly
to make an important contribution to the complexity of the higher eukaryotes, by
multiplying the number of gene products possible from the baseline number of
genes.  This issue has received much attention since the human genome (once
estimated to contain up to 120,000 genes4) was reported to contain only ~32,000
genes.5,6  Large-scale expressed sequence tag (EST) and mRNA sequencing has
made possible multiple bioinformatics studies of alternative splicing.5,7-11  In
contrast with previous expectations that alternative splicing plays a relatively minor
role in functional regulation (affecting perhaps 5 – 15% of genes), these EST-based
studies have reported that alternative splicing is ubiquitous, observed in 40 – 60%
of human genes.
While these results have aroused increasing interest in alternative splicing, there
are many unanswered questions for the next phase of research.  First of all, these
studies were very different in their detailed methodology and results.  For example,
these methods divide into two very different camps.  Some methods directly
compare expressed sequences (ESTs and mRNA) to each other to identify divergent
forms (insertions and deletions), which are interpreted as alternative splicing.8,12
Other methods compare the expressed sequences individually to the genomic
sequence to identify divergent patterns of exon inclusion.7,10  These two approaches,
which we will refer to as “EST Comparison” and “Genomic Mapping”, cause very
different patterns of false positive and false negative errors, and neither approach is
by itself ideal.  Second, EST-based alternative splice detection faces many
fundamental technical challenges, concerning the experimental data, bioinformatics
methods, and biological interpretation.13  Thus, it is now essential to assess the key
technical factors that determine the reliability of such alternative splicing analyses.14
In this paper we present a detailed examination of the technical problems we have
encountered in undertaking high-throughput analyses of alternative splicing over the
last four years, and the specific solutions we have developed for these problems, in
seeking to minimize both false positive and false negative errors.
2 Methods
2.1 Overview
In theory, detection of alternative splicing is straightforward: comparison of
expressed sequences from a given gene can identify insertions and deletions that
indicate alternative exon usage.  In practice, however, this apparently simple task is
complicated by serious technical problems that can produce artifacts resembling
alternative splicing.  The subtlety of these challenges is well illustrated by the
question of whether to use EST Comparison vs. Genomic Mapping.  As we will
show in our analysis below, EST Comparison is vulnerable to a wide variety of
problems (paralog mixing and genomic contamination, to name a few) that cause
false positive errors (alternative splice predictions that are not reliable).  However,
this does not necessarily mean that Genomic Mapping is preferable.  As we will
show, Genomic Mapping not only raises many problems of computational load but
also of accuracy, including significant false negatives.  Thus, we have concluded
that neither method is adequate by itself, and our approach combines both methods
in an unusual hybrid approach.
A flow chart detailing our alternative splicing analysis is shown in Figure 1.
Our analysis takes as input a single UniGene EST cluster15 that contains both
mRNA and EST sequences from a particular organism along with the organism’s
complete genome sequence.  Our analysis produces as output a mapping of the
cluster onto genomic sequence, a multiple sequence alignment of the set of
expressed sequences aligned both to each other and to the genomic sequence, a set
of detected splices stored as pairs of indices in the genomic sequence, and a set of
alternative splicing relationship stored as pairs of indices of splice sites.   
Figure 1.  Flow-chart depicting our alternative splicing detection method.
Nodes are labeled with the input/output of each step in the method.  Edges are labeled with the process
undertaken at each step in the method.
2.2 Mapping the cluster of expressed sequences to genomic sequence
Extensive analysis of EST alignments has demonstrated that they are a valuable
source of polymorphism identification, including SNPs and alternative splicing.7,16
However, we have found that such analysis is very vulnerable to artifacts in both
the experimental methods and the bioinformatics interpretation.17  Since alternative
splicing is identified in these alignments as large insertions and deletions, any
artifact that gives rise to such differences in ESTs will cause false positives that can
be difficult to screen out.13  We have identified a number of such causes of artifacts.
First, genomic contamination (EST library clones derived from genomic DNA
rather than mRNA) and incomplete mRNA processing (clones derived from mRNA
molecules whose splicing has not been completed) will produce the appearance of
large insertions, due to retention of some intron sequences.  Second, paralog
contamination (mixing of ESTs derived from different, paralogous genes as a single
EST cluster) can also produce the artifactual appearance of alternative splicing,
which actually reflects differences between paralogous genes.  Third, the EST data
Full Genome Sequence
Expressed Sequence Cluster
Best Consensus Sequence
Genomic Sequence
POA
POA
BLAST
PO-MSA of Expressed Sequences Aligned
to Genomic Sequence
Splices
Alternative Splicing Relationships
Splice Detection
Alternative Splicing Inference
Heaviest Bundling
PO-MSA of
Expressed Sequences
Mapping
expressed
sequence cluster
to genomic
sequence
Detecting splices
and alternative
splicing in
alignment of
expressed
sequences to
genomic sequence
are frequently massive and complex.  For example, a UniGene cluster for a single
gene can contain up to 5000 ESTs, far too large for most multiple sequence
alignment programs to compare.
Genomic mapping provides an obvious solution to many of these problems, by
permitting easy recognition of genomic contamination / intron retention, and
verification of which gene a given EST is from.7,10,13  When the complete genome
sequence is available, it enables one to check definitively for the presence of
possible paralogs, and to require that each EST match perfectly to its target gene
(allowing for sequencing error) as a condition for inclusion in our calculation.11  
On the other hand, attempting to map EST sequences directly to the entire
genome itself poses serious problems.  Because ESTs are short single-pass
fragments and full of sequencing errors, BLASTing them individually against the
genome sequence is both computationally expensive (e.g. for the human genome, 4
million ESTs vs. 3 billion bases of genomic sequence) and error prone, leading to a
high false negative rate for splicing and alternative splicing detection.  Matching a
short, error-filled EST fragment against short genomic exons (150 nt on average,
but can be as short as 10 nt) separated by large introns (from 1 kb up to >20kb) is
very challenging, and both standard search programs (such as BLAST18) and
multiple sequence alignment programs (such as CLUSTAL19) cannot guarantee
reliable results.
To solve these problems, our method constructs a multiple sequence alignment
(MSA) for the cluster of ESTs, extracts one or more “consensus” sequences that
represent the aligned ESTs, and maps these consensus sequences to the genome
using BLAST.  The BLAST mapping step is straightforward, and has been
described in detail.11  However, the MSA and consensus construction steps pose
significant new challenges.  First, the large number of expressed sequences that
must be aligned (up to 5000 ESTs in a single UniGene cluster) exceed the time and
memory limitations of most MSA software.12  To solve this problem, we use
Partial Order Alignment (POA), whose time and memory requirements grow
linearly with the number and length of EST sequences to be aligned.20  POA can
align 5,000 EST sequences in approximately 4 h on an inexpensive Pentium II PC.
More importantly, POA generates the EST alignment as a graph structure that is
able to represent both regions of match and regions of divergence: in regions where
an EST matches other ESTs, it follows their path in the alignment graph; in
regions where it diverges, it produces a new branch in the alignment graph.  The
alignment graph can accurately represent any level of complexity in the input
sequence data: while a simple dataset of EST fragments of a single mRNA isoform
would produce a single, linear path, a set containing a mix of ESTs from
paralogous genes, genomic contaminants, or chimeric sequences would result in a
branched alignment structure that reflects this complexity.  
Moreover, this approach provides a natural, robust way for dealing with this
complexity so that it does not cause artifacts in alternative splice detection.
Specifically, we generate consensus sequence(s) by analyzing the Partial Order
Multiple Sequence Alignment (PO-MSA) using the paralog separation algorithm of
the Heaviest Bundling function of the POA program.17  This method finds multiple
consensus paths through the PO-MSA graph, and then associates with each
consensus path all of the expressed sequences which follow that path (with an
allowance for sequencing error).17  By separating ESTs that show signs of
substantial divergence from the majority, POA’s consensus generation is insulated
from artifacts due to paralog mixing, genomic contamination, etc.
Ordinarily, Genomic Mapping confronts the twin difficulties of poor
sensitivity and enormous inefficiency due to the high levels of sequencing error and
redundancy in ESTs.  Mapping individual ESTs is both harder (due to their short
size and poor sequence quality) and very time consuming.  We resolve both these
issues by using the consensus sequences obtained from Partial Order Alignment.
This both converts the EST data to reliable, assembled consensus sequence (greatly
increasing sensitivity and robustness), and drastically reduces the number of search
steps that must be performed.  For large EST clusters (>100 ESTs) we have found
this reduces the number of BLAST searches by 20 to 100-fold.  In order to map the
UniGene cluster to genomic sequence, we select the consensus sequence to which
the majority of the expressed sequences have been bundled, since it most closely
approximates a full-length mRNA transcript.  The remaining consensus sequences,
to which have been bundled the paralogous ESTs, chimeric ESTs, and mis-oriented
ESTs that are not 90% identical to the majority consensus sequence, summarize the
experimental and bioinformatics artifacts in the data.  
To assess the value of using POA and Heaviest Bundling to cope with the
complexity of the UniGene expressed sequence data, we have constructed the PO-
MSAs of 80,000 Human UniGene clusters using POA, and run the Heaviest
Bundling function to extract the minimum number of linear consensus sequences
required to describe the aligned EST sequences to at least 90% identity.  The
number of consensus sequences generated by Heaviest Bundling is a useful measure
of the degree of complexity of the data.  For all Human UniGene clusters
containing at least 10 ESTs, we counted the number of consensus sequences
generated by Heaviest Bundling.  Remarkably, a single consensus sequence was
generated for only 16% of the Human UniGene clusters; two or three consensus
sequences were generated for 41% of the clusters; four to ten consensus sequences
were generated for 43% of the clusters.  These data suggest that the large insertions
and deletions in multiple sequence alignments of expressed sequence clusters,
which result from experimental and bioinformatics errors, are not a minor
phenomenon in the UniGene data, but are instead the norm.  Their prevalence in the
UniGene data necessitates the application of POA and Heaviest Bundling to the
problem of mapping a UniGene cluster to genomic sequence.
Figure 2.  POA facilitates accurate alignment of EST fragments to genomic sequence.
In this figure, all alignments are represented as PO-MSAs, regardless of the manner in which they
were constructed.  The nodes in the PO-MSA are represented as squares and directed edges are
shown only at branch points; nodes containing genomic sequence are white with grey nodes indicating
exons, while nodes containing the EST sequence are always colored red. In A, the EST fragment
cannot pay the gap penalty in order to align its last six nucleotides to exon 3, instead the six nucleotides
are not aligned to genomic sequence at all (*) and so they do not provide evidence for the splicing of
intron 2.  In B, the EST fragment aligns to the PO-MSA containing multiple ESTs and mRNAs aligned
to genomic sequence along the edge connecting exons 2 and 3.  In this case, aligning the six
nucleotides to exon 3 (**) does not require the payment of a large gap penalty and so the EST provides
evidence for the splicing of intron 2.
2.3 Aligning expressed sequences to genomic sequence and to each other
Once a genomic location for an EST cluster has been identified, the method must
next compare each EST to the genomic sequence to identify alternative exon usage.
Once again, this apparently simple task is undercut by many technical difficulties.
Whereas gene mapping only requires finding the right genomic region, reliable
splice detection requires an exact, robust alignment of each EST to the genomic
sequence.  This is much harder to ensure.  Whereas EST Comparison based
methods rely on multiple sequence alignment, Genomic Mapping based methods
POA
A
Pair-wise Alignment
exon 1 exon 2 exon 3
intron 1 intron 2
exon 1 exon 2
*
*
*
exon 3
intron 1 intron 2
EST
EST
B
rely on pairwise alignment, i.e. aligning each individual EST to the genomic
sequence.  While pairwise alignments between full-length mRNA and genomic
sequence are likely to be reliable, pair-wise alignments between EST fragments and
genomic sequence are much more difficult to construct accurately, because ESTs are
short, randomly fragmented, and full of sequencing errors.  Figure 2A shows a pair-
wise sequence alignment between an EST fragment and genomic sequence.   The
six nucleotides at the end of the EST fragment, which should align to the third
exon in the genomic sequence, fail to do so because the score for perfectly matching
them to genomic sequence is insufficient to compensate for the large gap penalty
required to accommodate the large intron between exons 2 and 3.  Instead, these six
residues do not align to genomic sequence at all.  Any attempt to detect splices on
the basis of the resulting pair-wise alignment alone would fail to identify the splice
that removes the second intron, resulting in a false negative.  
Partial Order Alignment provides a systematic solution to this problem.  As
long as the PO-MSA contains at least one EST aligned across the gap, aligning a
new EST can follow this path without any gap penalty.  In this case, even the short
EST fragment will align correctly across the gap from exon 2 to exon 3 (see Figure
2B).  
The key difference here is that POA provides a hybrid method between
conventional EST Comparison and Genomic Mapping: each EST is aligned not
only against the genomic sequence, but also against the set of all previous ESTs at
the same time, to identify the best scoring alignment path.  In practice, we align
full-length mRNA sequences to genomic sequence first, and then align EST
sequences to the growing PO-MSA in order of decreasing length.  This ensures that
the evidence for splices, for which any sequence observation is able to pay the gap
penalty, may be augmented by fragmentary sequence observations.  In this way, our
method is able to not only accurately align all EST fragments to genomic sequence,
but also to combine the evidence for splicing from multiple ESTs.  
This is valuable not only to rescue many EST splice observations that would
normally be lost, but also to detect when several ESTs show a similar divergence
from the genomic sequence (for example, indicating that they may actually be
derived from a paralogous gene).  These ESTs would be aligned to each other as a
distinct path in the alignment, branching away from the genomic sequence.  This
information is then used to filter the set of ESTs that are retained for analyzing
splicing.  The detailed retention criteria have been previously described.11
2.4 Splicing and alternative splicing detection in PO-MSAs
Figure 3B shows the PO-MSA of all of the expressed sequences in human UniGene
cluster Hs.1162 aligned to genomic sequence.   Once the PO-MSA is constructed
detecting splices amounts to finding large deletions in expressed sequences relative
to genomic sequence.  These deletions manifest themselves as directed edges in the
Figure 3.  Splicing and alternative splicing detection in a human expressed sequence cluster.
Figure A shows the PO-MSA of a single expressed sequence aligned to genomic sequence.  The nodes
in the PO-MSA are represented as squares and the directed edges are shown only at branch points;
nodes containing genomic sequence are white, while nodes containing the expressed sequence are red.
Figure B shows the PO-MSA graph, constructed by POA, of the ESTs and mRNAs in UniGene cluster
Hs.1162 aligned to genomic sequence.  In this visualization, rendered by the Partial Order Alignment
Visualizer (POAVIZ),1 6 nodes are red dots, directed edges are dotted blue lines, aligned nodes are
adjacent to each other and genomic sequence is shown as a black line.  Nodes and edges
corresponding to insertions relative to genomic sequence are shown above the genomic sequence, and
A
B
exon 1 exon 2 exon 3 exon 4
intron 1 intron 2 intron 3
Genomic
Splicing of HLA-DMB
( Cluster Hs.1162 )
mRNA  isoform 55845
(2.10 kb)
mRNA  isoform 55846
(1.95 kb)
mRNA  isoform 55847
(2.07 kb)
mRNA  isoform 55848
(1.99 kb)
C
e2e1 e3 e4 e5 e6
D
appear as blue spikes topped with red dots, while the edges corresponding to deletions relative to
genomic sequence are shown below, and appear solely as blue spikes. The number of expressed
sequences aligned to a particular position in the genomic sequence is reflected in the thickness of red
dots along the black line representing the genomic sequence so that the regions of genomic sequence
corresponding to exons appear as red rectangles above the black line.  The edges corresponding to
splices are in bold, while edges corresponding to alternative splices are shown in green.  Figure C
shows the splicing graph constructed from the PO-MSA shown in B.  Nodes correspond to exons, while
edges correspond to splices.  Figure D shows the graphical representation, provided by the ASAP
database,1 4 of the splicing and alternative splicing of the HLA-DMB gene inferred from the expressed
sequences in human UniGene cluster Hs.1162 using our method.  The four mRNA isoforms inferred
from this data are shown as well.
alignment graph between a node containing genomic nucleotide i and a node
containing genomic nucleotide i+x, where x is greater than 10 (Figure 3A).  While
one might be tempted to find these edges by depth first or breadth first search, the
easiest way to find all of the large deletions in the expressed sequences relative to
genomic sequence is to extract from the PO-MSA the set of pair-wise sequence
alignments between each of them and genomic sequence and then analyze them
directly.  In order to verify each splice once it has been detected, we check not only
the number of expressed sequences indicating the existence of the splice, but also
whether the splice has valid intronic splice site sequences (GT / AG).  Next,
verified splices, which are stored as pairs of indices in genomic sequences, are
compared to each other in order to infer alternative splice relationships.  If the
genomic sequence delimited by two of pairs of splices overlap, we identify the pairs
as having an alternative splice relationship (Figure 4).  
                           
Figure 4:  Filtering of alternative splicing by splice pair overlap relationships.
In all four diagrams, genomic sequence is shown as a straight black line, and splices are shown as
dotted black lines.  The 5’ splice sites and 3’ splice sites are labeled for the splice depicted above
genomic sequence.  The ASAP database reports alternative splice relationship types 1 and 2, which
produce alternative 3’ splicing, alternative 5’ splicing, and exon skipping.
Primary Alternative Splice
Relationships
Secondary Alternative Splice
Relationships
5
’
3
’
5
’
5
’
5
’
3
’
3
’
3
’
1 2
3 4
In order to filter out alternative splice relationships that are the result of
genomic contamination, we identify only those alternative splicing relationships
between mutually exclusive splices, i.e. pairs of splices whose 5’ splice sites or 3’
splice sites are the same, as valid. These valid alternative splice relationships are the
basis on which we make inferences about alternative 5’ splicing, alternative 3’
splicing, and exon skipping.  Figure 3B shows the eight splices and eight valid
alternative splicing relationships detected in human UniGene cluster Hs.1162 using
this method.
3 Results
We have applied our method to genome-wide detection of splicing and alternative
splicing in the human, mouse, and rat genomes.  This procedure is fully automated,
can be applied to any genome, and its computation time scales linearly with the
amount of EST data (Figure 5).  
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400
Number of expressed sequences in cluster
C
p
u
 t
im
e
 (
se
c.
)
Figure 5: Total computation time as a function of increasing EST data.
For each number of sequences in the range of 50 to 1200, the cpu time was computed for five
sequence clusters containing roughly the same number of expresses sequences.  The black line plots
the average of these five cpu times versus the number of sequences.  These calculations were
performed in an 1.4 GHz AMD Athlon running Linux.
Our method mapped 17,656 multi-exon genes to exact locations in the human
genome (January 2003 data), 14,556 multi-exon genes in mouse, and 8,342 multi-
exon genes in rat.  In the human data, it detected over 35,000 alternative splicing
relationships, more than doubling the number of predicted gene products versus the
number expected from the estimated 32,000 human genes without alternative
splicing.  We detected a total of 115,518 splices and 35,433 alternative splice
relationships, of these 30,891 were novel and 12,615 were novel and were
supported by multiple expressed sequences. Using the January 2002 mouse
UniGene data we detected 91,225 splices and 12,528 alternative splice
relationships, of these 11,687 were novel and 4,090 were novel and were supported
by multiple expressed sequence observations. Using the January 2002 rat UniGene
data we detected 31,177 and 1,143 alternative splice relationships, of these 11,687
were novel and 4,090 were novel and were supported by multiple expressed
sequence observations.
Table 1: Total alternative splice detection in three genome-wide analyses.
Total Human 1/02 Mouse 1/02 Rat 1/02 Human 1/03
Clusters 96109 85049 61582 111064
Clusters with a consensus sequence 96040 83876 56668 110927
Clusters mapped to genome 68011 54115 39588 64577
Splices detected 133369/ 18173 91225/ 14556 31177/8342 115518/17656
Alternative splice relationships  30793/7991 12528/4895 1143/680 35433/7834
Alternative splice relationships
with multiple evidence 14656/5205 4931/2488 468/274 17157/5307
Novel alternative splice relationships 26504/7393 11687/4691 919/581 30891/7313
Novel alternative splice relationships
with multiple evidence 10367/4094 4090/2178 244/169 12615/4310
N.B. ratios are the number of splices of a particular type divided by the total number of clusters in
which they occur.
4 Discussion and conclusions
We have presented a method for genome-wide detection of splicing and alternative
splicing using expressed sequence data.  We have demonstrated that this method
can be run on a genome-wide scale, both by running it on the full human, mouse
and rat genomes, and by assessing the cpu time required to run it on clusters with
number of sequences ranging from 50 to 1200.  We have also provided evidence
that the partial order alignment algorithms are useful for coping with the true
complexity of expressed sequence data, screening out experimental and
bioinformatics artifacts in EST data that might cause spurious alternative splices.
In addition, we have argued for the value of POA for simultaneously aligning
expressed sequences to each other and to genomic sequence in order to effectively
cope with EST fragmentation, which contributes to the loss of evidence for splicing
and alternative splicing when short ESTs cannot be accurately aligned to genomic
sequence.  
While we have briefly explained the process by which we detect splicing and
alternative splicing in the PO-MSA of all of the expressed sequences in a cluster
aligned to genomic sequence, we have not discussed the benefits of this approach.
One of the major advantages of the PO-MSA representation is that its structure,
which reflects exons, introns, and splices, can be easily abstracted as a splicing
graph21 (see Figure 3C).  We have been able to exploit this feature in order to
design algorithms for inferring full-length mRNAs isoforms either from the PO-
MSA of the expressed sequences directly,17 or from the splicing graph inferred from
the PO-MSA of the expressed sequences aligned to genomic sequence.22  The other
major advantage of the PO-MSA representation is that it stores all of the evidence
for a particular splice or alternative splice in a single data structure.  This could be
useful for calculating statistics measuring the evidence for a particular splice or
alternative splice relationship from multiple EST and mRNA observations.  By
applying such methods, we would be able to associate lod scores with all of the
splices and alternative splicing relationships in our datasets.  These lod scores
would be very useful for molecular biologists as they determine the direction of
their expensive and time consuming experimental work in the area of alternative
splicing.
Acknowledgments
C.G. was supported by a DOE Computational Science Graduate Fellowship; B.M.
by NSF IGERT #DGE-9987641, and C.L. by NIMH / NINDS Grant #MH65166.
References
1. W. Gilbert, "Why genes in pieces?" Nature 271, 501 (1978)
2. T. Maniatis and B. Tanis, "Alternative pre-mRNA splicing and proteome
expansion in metazoans." Nature 418, 236-243. (2002)
3. B. Modrek and C. Lee, "Alternative splicing in the human, mouse and rat
genomes is associated with an increased rate of exon creation / loss."
Nature Genet. 34, 177-180 (2003)
4. F. Liang, et al., "Gene Index analysis of the human genome estimates
approximately 120,000 genes." Nature Genet. 25, 239-240 (2000)
5. I. H. G. S. Consortium., "Initial sequencing and analysis of the human
genome." Nature 409, 860-921 (2001)
6. D. Brett, et al., "Alternative splicing and genome complexity." Nature
Genet. 30, 29-30 (2002)
7. A. A. Mironov, J. W. Fickett and M. S. Gelfand, "Frequent alternative
splicing of human genes." Genome Res. 9, 1288-1293 (1999)
8. D. Brett, et al., "EST comparison indicates 38% of human mRNAs
contain possible alternative splice forms." FEBS Letters 474, 83-86 (2000)
9. L. Croft, et al., "ISIS, the intron information system, reveals the high
frequency of alternative splicing in the human genome." Nature Genet. 24,
340-1 (2000)
10. Z. Kan, E. C. Rouchka, W. R. Gish and D. J. States, "Gene structure
prediction and alternative splicing analysis using genomically aligned
ESTs." Genome Res. 11, 889-900 (2001)
11. B. Modrek, A. Resch, C. Grasso and C. Lee, "Genome-wide analysis of
alternative splicing using human expressed sequence data." Nucleic Acids
Res. 29, 2850-9 (2001)
12. J. Burke, H. Wang, W. Hide and D. B. Davison, "Alternative gene form
discovery and candidate gene selection from gene indexing projects."
Genome Res. 8, 276-290 (1998)
13. B. Modrek and C. Lee, "A genomic view of alternative splicing." Nature
Genet. 30, 13-9 (2002)
14. Z. Kan, D. States and W. Gish, "Selecting for Functional Alternative
Splices in ESTs" Genome Res. 12, 1837-45 (2002)
15. G. Schuler, "Pieces of the puzzle: expressed sequence tags and the catalog
of human genes." J. Mol. Med. 75, 694-698 (1997)
16. K. Irizarry, et al., "Genome-wide analysis of single-nucleotide
polymorphisms in human expressed sequences." Nature Genet. 26, 233-
236 (2000)
17. C. Lee, "Generating consensus sequences from partial order multiple
sequence alignment graphs." Bioinformatics 19, 999-1008 (2003)
18. S. F. Altschul, et al., "Basic local alignment search tool." J. Mol. Biol.
215, 403-410 (1990)
19. J. D. Thompson, D. G. Higgins and T. J. Gibson, "CLUSTAL W:
improving the sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment
through sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight
matrix choice." Nucleic Acids Res. 22, 4673-80 (1994)
20. C. Lee, C. Grasso and M. Sharlow, "Multiple sequence alignment using
partial order graphs." Bioinformatics 18, 452-464 (2002)
21. S. Heber, et al., "Splicing graphs and EST assembly problem."
Bioinformatics 18 Suppl. 1, S181-8 (2002)
22. Y. Xing, A. Resch and C. Lee, "The Multiassembly Problem:
reconstructing multiple transcript isoforms from EST fragment mixtures,"
submitted.     
