MicroInspector: a web tool for detection of miRNA
binding sites in an RNA sequence
Ventsislav Rusinov1,2, Vesselin Baev1,2, Ivan Nikiforov Minkov2 and Martin Tabler1,*
1Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and Technology—Hellas, PO Box 1527,
GR -71110 Heraklion /Crete, Greece and 2 Depar tment of Pla nt Phys iology and Mole cular Biology, Universit y of Plo vdiv
24, Tsar Assen St, 4000 Plovdiv, Bulgaria
Received February 3, 2005; Accepted February 23, 2005
ABSTRACT
Regulationofpost-transcriptionalgeneexpressionby
microRNAs (miRNA)hasso farbeenvalidated foronly
a few mRNA targets. Based on the large number of
miRNA genes and the possibility that one miRNA
might influence gene expression of several targets
simultaneously, the quantity of ribo-regulated genes
is expected to be much higher. Here, we describe the
web tool MicroInspector that will analyse a user-
defined RNA sequence, which is typically an mRNA
or a part of an mRNA, for the occurrence of binding
sites for known and registeredmiRNAs. The program
allows variation of temperature, the setting of energy
values as well as the selection of different miRNA
databases to identifymiRNA-bindingsitesof different
strength.MicroInspector could spot the correct sites
for miRNA-interaction in known target mRNAs. Using
other mRNAs, for which such an interaction has not
yet been described, we discovered frequently poten-
tial miRNA binding sites of similar quality, which can
now be analysed experimentally. TheMicroInspector
program is easy to use and does not require specific
computer skills. The service can be accessed via
the MicroInspector web server at http://www.imbb.
forth.gr/microinspector.
INTRODUCTION
Micro RNAs (miRNA) are a class of genome-encoded small,
single-stranded RNAs of 20 nt that are negative regulators of
gene expression. Discovered three years ago (1–3), miRNAs
have attracted a lot of attention and a large number of recent
reviews summarize the biogenesis, phylogenetic relation and
function of miRNAs, which can be found in animals and plants
(4–11). MiRNAs operate by base-pairing interactions with an
mRNA target. However, perfect sequence complementarity to
an miRNA is observed only for some plant mRNAs (12), but in
the majority of residual cases, including the first identified
miRNA target pairs (13), the base-pairing interaction between
the mRNA target and the riboregulator is imperfect. There
seems to be a preference for a strong interaction at the 50
side of the miRNA (14) and a symmetrical interaction is pre-
ferred (15), and most likely, the RNA–RNA interaction
requires assistance of protein factors. Collectively, >1500
miRNAs have been identified so far for plants, nematodes,
insects and mammals. This large number of recognized
miRNAs contrasts with only a few dozen of target RNAs,
for which a regulatory miRNA binding has been experiment-
ally verified. Some miRNAs are expected to form regulatory
networks controlling several mRNA targets. Lai (16) has
found that some short sequence elements (boxes) that had
been previously recognized as negative modulators of trans-
lational gene expression are actually binding sites for certain
classes of miRNAs. For example, the K box is negatively
regulating gene expression in several gene families, which
are involved in early developmental processes in Drosophila
melanogaster and at least four miRNAs (miR2, miR6, miR11
and miR13) are at their 50 end complementary to the K box.
However, not every miRNA of the K-box family will bind to
each K box containing mRNA, suggesting that at least some
subsets of miRNAs are composed of at least two modular
elements, which we had termed ‘first name’ and ‘family’
motif (17). Several attempts have been made to identify
miRNA targets by bioinformatics (18–22). In Arabidopsis
thaliana, this approach was quite successful, since plant
miRNAs seem to base-pair with higher stringency (23,24).
For animal miRNAs and especially for mammalian miRNAs,
this computational strategy will only identify those mRNA
targets that have a high degree of sequence complementarity.
However, some of the genetically verified miRNA/mRNA
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +30 2810 394365; Fax: +30 2810 394408; Email: tabler@imbb.forth.gr
The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors
ª The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
W696–W700 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gki364
interactions (13,25) are not particularly strong in terms of
RNA–RNA interaction. On the other hand, if one allows
weak interactions, the number of false positive hits will
raise in computational screens. Brennecke and Cohen (26)
have addressed these difficulties by incorporation of
phylogenetic parameters into the computer algorithm, which
improves target identification.
Here, we describe a different computational approach
to identify miRNA/mRNA interactions. Whereas most pro-
grams available start with a specific miRNA and attempt
the identification of as many mRNA targets as possible, we
ask a different and more modest question by analysing
whether, in a given mRNA sequence a binding site can be
found for any miRNA that originates from this organism and
that is available in the database. The MicroInspector program
will generate a list of possible target sites, sorted by free
energy values. Adaptation of temperature and free energy
settings, followed by visual inspection of secondary structures
allows a detailed analysis. This approach allows more detailed
examination of an mRNA sequence, identifying also weaker
interactions, which can then be subjected to experimental tests.
Several mRNAs that contain validated miRNA binding sites
were subjected to analysis by the MicroInspector software,
and all these interactions could be identified. However, in
many other cases, we identified so far non-described inter-
actions with lower energy values than those of the validated
targets, suggesting that many more miRNAs/mRNA inter-
actions are likely to exist. Their biological relevance requires
subsequent experimental validation.
Usage of the program
MicroInspector is a web-based tool for searching miRNA bind-
ing sites in a target RNA sequence, potentially regulated by such
a small RNA. The interface of the program is given in Figure 1.
The user needs to follow a few simple steps to perform a quest
for potential miRNA binding sites. The first step is ‘entering
the sequence’ to be analysed, which is typically an mRNA (the
program treats DNA sequences as RNA). This can be done in
two ways, either by providing the GenBank or TAIR accession
number or by simply typing or pasting in the sequence (the
program is designed that all gaps, numbers and non-defined
characters will be ignored), which is useful for the analysis
of unknown sequences or for detailed analysis of certain
mRNA domains, e.g. 30-untranslated regions (30-UTRs).
As a next step, the user needs to set a ‘hybridization
temperature’: the default is 37C, but evidently this value is
not relevant for plants and insects, for which we recommend
the values in Figure 2. Further, a value for the ‘free energy’
cut-off needs to be entered (default 20 kcal/mol), which
characterizes the stability of the miRNA/mRNA interaction.
Only results with lower energy than the cut-off value will be
displayed, so that this parameter will influence the number of
hits. The energy value should be varied in accordance with the
temperature according to Figure 2. As an indication, it might
be helpful to add that the free energies of validated miRNA/
mRNA interactions range from 17 kcal/mol (bantam/hid5
at 25C—Drosophila melanogaster) to 41 kcal/mol (CUC/
miR164 at 25C—Arabidopsis thaliana).
Finally, the user needs to select an ‘miRNA database’,
matching the biological origin of the target sequence. These
local miRNA databases (in multifasta format) are based on
entries of ’the miRNA registry’ (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/
Software/Rfam/mirna/index.shtml). Unless automatic retriev-
ing of new miRNA entries will be possible, we will update
the databases manually in regular intervals.
Figure 1. The MicroInspector interface. The user has to enter three categories
of input parameters for scanning a target RNA for miRNA binding sites. There
is a help pop-up window with brief explanations for each of the data fields.
W697 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
Principle of the program
Initial scanning and filtering. The user-defined target sequence
is analysed for every miRNA sequence of the chosen data-
base in a consecutive manner. The target sequence is scanned
simultaneously and independently with two windows of 6 nt.
The first 6-nt window represents nucleotides 1–6 (from the 50
of the miRNA), and the second window nucleotides 2–7. They
are slid through the target sequence (by steps of 1 nt) and the
program performs analysis of complementarity. It is known
that pairing to the 50 portion of the miRNA, particularly
nucleotides 2–7, appears to be most important for target recog-
nition by vertebrate miRNAs. The most 50-terminal miRNA
nucleotide may or may not participate in binding.
A complementarity pre-filter seeks for each of the two 6-nt
windows for domains having 5 Watson–Crick base pairs or 4
Watson–Crick base pairs with at least one additional G:U pair.
If neither of the two windows fulfil this requirement, the data
are ignored and the 6-nt windows are moved by 1 nt towards
the 50 end of the mRNA. When the sequence analysis identifies
at least one 6-nt window as described above, the program will
initiate a detailed analysis of this site. It extracts a 32-nt
sequence of the mRNA terminating at the nucleotide that
Figure 2. Recommended settings for hybridization temperatures (C) and
corresponding free energy cut-off values in kcal/mol for different species.
Figure 3. Example of a data output of aMicroInspector analysis seeking for miRNA binding sites in the 30-UTR sequence of theCaenorhabditis elegans gene lin-41.
Please note that the verified interaction of miRNA let-7 is identified at position 726. In addition, the program identifies other interactions, including the interaction
withmiR-38 (top result on table), which is stronger than the interaction with let-7. The significance of each identified interaction can be analysed by activating the link
that will display the secondary structure of the specific interaction as demonstrated in Figure 4; for further details see text.
W698 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
matches the 50 end of the miRNA, i.e. the 50-terminal nucle-
otide of the first 6-nt window. Subsequently, the miRNA
sequence and the 32-nt potential target sequence domain
are subjected to a pair-wise hybridization folding algorithm.
Dynamic hybridization and folding algorithm. MicroInspector
uses a dynamic algorithm for the primary window alignment
that is based on the complementarity of nucleotides—it allows
Watson–Crick and G:U wobble basepairs. For calculation of
thermodynamic properties of a predicted duplex in the algo-
rithm, we integrated some folding routines from the Vienna
RNA secondary structure programming library (RNAlib) from
the Vienna RNA 1.5 version package (27,28) (see http://
www.tbi.univie.ac.at/~ivo/RNA/RNAlib.html), which itself
makes use of the RNA energy parameters of the Turner labor-
atory (29) (http://rna.chem.rochester.edu/).
This folding analysis will reveal the free energy, as well as
the secondary structure of this RNA–RNA interaction. We
chose a limit of 32 nt, because most miRNA–mRNA interac-
tions will cover a smaller region than this. Therefore, only few
significant hits are likely to be missed, in cases where longer
binding domains are present. Hits below the selected threshold
value for the free energy will be saved and subjected to a post-
filter analysis.
Post-filter—2D analysis. The second filter of the program can
discard binding sites that do not fit known features of miRNA–
mRNA duplexes. This filter inspects the RNA–RNA structure
after folding, and eliminates any hit characterized by two
unpaired nucleotides on either the 50 or the 30 side of the
miRNA sequence. The filter will also exclude structures
with low folding energy values that are the result of self-
complementarity in one of the two RNA strands. For example,
this applies when the target domain forms an intramolecular
hairpin. Further, entries will be eliminated if too large interior
or bulge loops are predicted, or if large loops are located too
close to the end of the secondary structure (>10 unpaired
nucleotides). Central interior loops will be tolerated even if
the loop size is large.
Output of the program
To illustrate the output given by MicroInspector, we present as
an example an analysis of the miRNA binding sites for the 30-
UTR sequence of the Caenorhabditis elegans gene lin-41,
which is known to interact with miRNA let7 (Entry name
3CEL000914 30-UTR in Caenorhabditis elegans LIN41A
(lin41A) mRNA, complete cds, from LION SRS database).
The main results of this MicroInspector query are repres-
ented as a table (see example in Figure 3). The first column of
the table lists the ‘position’ of the 50 end of the binding-site in
the target RNA. The second column indicates the ‘target RNA
name’ (accession number) which can be used as a link to
access the sequence entry of the GenBank database. This
column will be empty if the sequence has been entered by
typing or pasting in. The third column indicates the ‘target
sequence’ (capital letters) of the domain potentially interacting
with the miRNA, followed by the ‘miRNA name’ (according
to ‘the miRNA registry’) and the ‘miRNA sequence’ (lower-
case letters) of the matching miRNA in columns four and five.
Both sequences are given 50 to 30.
In the ‘free energy’ column the Gibbs free energy (DG) of
the duplex structure is indicated in kcal/mol. Entries are sorted
by free energy (lowest values on top). However, the DG value
is not the only characteristic feature of a good binding site.
For example, a longer miRNA, or a miRNA that is rich in GC,
is more likely to yield predicted low energy binding sites.
Also the symmetry of binding is an important factor, as is
the stability of the base-pairing at the 50 end of the miRNA.
These restrictions require a detailed manual inspection of a
particular binding site. For this reason, the rightmost column
contains a link to the graphics (PostScript format) displaying
the secondary structure of the actual RNA–RNA interaction as
exemplified in Figure 4. Inspection of the individual structures
revealed that the binding site of miR-38 (top of the list in
Figure 3) might not be functional despite its low free energy
(Figure 4A), while the interaction with miR-249 (number 6 on
the list of Figure 3) results a in symmetrical RNA–RNA inter-
action (Figure 4B) that is likely to be biologically relevant.
The MicroInspector program also offers the download of
the results as a single file for off-line analysis. A link to the
result file is located at the bottom of the table—‘Results in
.CSV format’. The file format ‘Comma separated value’ can be
imported into Excel tables. The result file contains additional
helpful information such as the date of analysis, the filename
of the secondary structure graph and a schematic representa-
tion of the secondary structure of the duplex as shown in
Figure 4C.
At the very bottom of the result page, the positions of the
binding sites of the miRNAs with respect to the mRNA target
are shown as an overview. Every potential interaction lists the
name of the miRNA and the binding strength (DG value). If
binding sites overlap, the potential interactions will be sorted
so that those with the lowest free energy are on top.
Figure 4. Representation of pair-wise interaction between miRNA and mRNA
target. Examples of secondary structure graphics that can be displayed when the
link of the right column in the result table (see Figure 3) is activated. (A) This
specific example displays the predicted interaction of miR-38 with lin-41 (top
result in table of Figure 3), which shows that the interaction of the miRNA and
the target mRNA is restricted to the 50 side of the miRNA; at the 30 side the
interaction is rather weak. Despite the low DG value, this interaction might not
be functional. (B) The interaction of miR-249 with lin-41 is symmetrical and
more likely to be relevant. (C) The same interaction as in (B) in a schematic
representation; this simplified illustration of an RNA–RNA interaction is used
in the downloadable results file ‘Results in .CSV format’ (see Figure 3).
W699 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
Implementation (computer data)
The program is implemented as a Perl CGI-script, taking
advantage of the modular design, allowing the use of special-
ized packages such as BioPerl (modules for developers of Perl-
based software for life science research). The program was
tested on a PC with an Intel Pentium IV processor 2.8 GHz and
1 GB RAM memory. The operation system is Fedora Core 2.0
by Red Hat Linux. The versions used are 5.8.5 for Perl (www.
perl.com) and version 1.4 for BioPerl (www.bioperl.org). The
access to the multi-fasta format sequence files and to the online
databases is accomplished by the BioPerl modules. The results
and all additional pieces of information are saved in a mySQL
database for each session. The tables and files with the sec-
ondary structures will remain available for 3 days after the
researcher’s query. Every target analysis is loaded in an indi-
vidual table in the corresponding mySQL database.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Viktor Ivanov (University of Plovdiv) for the graphic
design of the site. V.R. and V.B. have been supported by the
European Union (EU) via Marie Curie training fellowships
(contract HPMT-CT-2000-00175) and are currently supported
in the same program under contract EST-7295-FAMED.
Further, this work was supported in parts by grants to I.M. by
the projects G3-02 and K1202/02 of the Bulgarian National
Science Council and to M.T. by the General Secretariat for
Research and Technology of the Hellenic Ministry of
Development via the Bulgarian-Greek cooperation program
(PN18/3-1-2003) and by the European Union FP6-2003-
LIFESCIHEALTH-I program, within project FOSRAK (con-
tract LSH-CT-2004-005120). The Open Access publication
charges for this article were waived by Oxford University Press.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Lagos-Quintana,M., Rauhut,R., Lendeckel,W. and Tuschl,T. (2001)
Identification of novel genes coding for small expressed RNAs.
Science, 294, 853–858.
2. Lau,N.C., Lim,L.P., Weinstein,E.G. and Bartel,D.P. (2001) An abundant
class of tiny RNAs with probable regulatory roles in Caenorhabditis
elegans. Science, 294, 858–862.
3. Lee,R.C. and Ambros,V. (2001) An extensive class of small RNAs in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Science, 294, 862–864.
4. Ambros,V. (2001) microRNAs: tiny regulators with great potential.
Cell, 107, 823–826.
5. Ambros,V. (2003) MicroRNA pathways in flies and worms:
growth, death, fat, stress, and timing. Cell, 113, 673–676.
6. Ambros,V. (2004) The functions of animal microRNAs. Nature,
431, 350–355.
7. He,L. and Hannon,G.J. (2004) MicroRNAs: small RNAs with a big role in
gene regulation. Nature Rev. Genet., 5, 522–531.
8. Nelson,P., Kiriakidou,M., Sharma,A., Maniataki,E. and Mourelatos,Z.
(2003) The microRNA world: small is mighty. Trends Biochem. Sci.,
28, 534–540.
9. Murchison,E.P. and Hannon,G.J. (2004) miRNAs on the move: miRNA
biogenesis and the RNAi machinery. Curr. Opin. Cell. Biol., 16,
223–229.
10. He,Z. and Sontheimer,E.J. (2004) ‘siRNAs and miRNAs’: a meeting
report on RNA silencing. RNA, 10, 1165–1173.
11. Lai,E.C. (2003) microRNAs: runts of the genome assert themselves.
Curr. Biol., 13, R925–R936.
12. Reinhart,B.J., Weinstein,E.G., Rhoades,M.W., Bartel,B. and Bartel,D.P.
(2002) MicroRNAs in plants. Genes Dev., 16, 1616–1626.
13. Lee,R.C., Feinbaum,R.L. and Ambros,V. (1993) The C. elegans
heterochronic gene lin-4 encodes small RNAs with antisense
complementarity to lin-14. Cell, 75, 843–854.
14. Doench,J.G. and Sharp,P.A. (2004) Specificity of microRNA target
selection in translational repression. Genes Dev., 18, 504–511.
15. Kiriakidou,M., Nelson,P.T., Kouranov,A., Fitziev,P., Bouyioukos,C.,
Mourelatos,Z. and Hatzigeorgiou,A. (2004) A combined
computational-experimental approach predicts human microRNA
targets. Genes Dev., 18, 1165–1178.
16. Lai,E.C. (2002) Micro RNAs are complementary to 30 UTR sequence
motifs that mediate negative post-transcriptional regulation. Nature
Genet., 30, 363–364.
17. Boutla,A., Delidakis,C. and Tabler,M. (2003) Developmental defects by
antisense-mediated inactivation of micro-RNAs 2 and 13 in Drosophila
and the identification of putative target genes. Nucleic Acids Res.,
31, 4973–4980.
18. Adai,A., Johnson,C., Mlotshwa,S., Archer-Evans,S., Manocha,V.,
Vance,V. and Sundaresan,V. (2005) Computational prediction of
miRNAs in Arabidopsis thaliana. Genome Res., 15, 78–91.
19. Lai,E.C., Tomancak,P., Williams,R.W. and Rubin,G.M. (2003)
Computational identification of Drosophila microRNA genes. Genome
Biol., 4, R42.
20. Lim,L.P., Lau,N.C., Weinstein,E.G., Abdelhakim,A., Yekta,S.,
Rhoades,M.W., Burge,C.B. and Bartel,D.P. (2003) The microRNAs of
Caenorhabditis elegans. Genes Dev., 17, 991–1008.
21. Enright,A.J., John,B., Gaul,U., Tuschl,T., Sander,C. and Marks,D.S.
(2003) MicroRNA targets in Drosophila. Genome Biol., 5, R1.
22. John,B., Enright,A.J., Aravin,A., Tuschl,T., Sander,C. and Marks,D.S.
(2004) Human MicroRNA Targets. PLoS Biol., 2, e363.
23. Bartel,D.P. and Chen,C.Z. (2004) Micromanagers of gene expression:
the potentially widespread influence of metazoan microRNAs.
Nature Rev. Genet., 5, 396–400.
24. Carrington,J.C. and Ambros,V. (2003) Role of microRNAs in plant and
animal development. Science, 301, 336–338.
25. Brennecke,J., Hipfner,D.R., Stark,A., Russell,R.B. and Cohen,S.M.
(2003) bantam encodes a developmentally regulated microRNA that
controls cell proliferation and regulates the proapoptotic gene hid in
Drosophila. Cell, 113, 25–36.
26. Brennecke,J. and Cohen,S.M. (2003) Towards a complete description
of the microRNA complement of animal genomes. Genome Biol.,
4, 228.
27. Hofacker,I.L., Fontana,W., Stadler,P.F., Bonhoeffer,S., Tacker,M. and
Schuster,P. (1994) Fast folding and comparison of RNA secondary
structures. Monatshefte f. Chemie, 125, 167–188.
28. Hofacker,I.L. (2003) Vienna RNA secondary structure server.
Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 3429–3431.
29. Serra,M.J. and Turner,D.H. (1995) Predicting thermodynamic properties
of RNA. Methods Enzymol., 259, 242–261.
W700 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
