The Gene Ontology Annotation (GOA) Database:
sharing knowledge in Uniprot with Gene Ontology
Evelyn Camon*, Michele Magrane, Daniel Barrell, Vivian Lee, Emily Dimmer,
John Maslen, David Binns, Nicola Harte, Rodrigo Lopez and Rolf Apweiler
European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI), Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK
Received August 15, 2003; Accepted August 22, 2003
ABSTRACT
The Gene Ontology Annotation (GOA) database
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA) aims to provide high-
quality electronic and manual annotations to the
UniProt Knowledgebase (Swiss-Prot, TrEMBL and
PIR-PSD) using the standardized vocabulary of the
Gene Ontology (GO). As a supplementary archive of
GO annotation, GOA promotes a high level of integra-
tion of the knowledge represented in UniProt with
other databases. This is achieved by converting
UniProt annotation into a recognized computational
format. GOA provides annotated entries for nearly 60
000 species (GOA-SPTr) and is the largest and most
comprehensive open-source contributor of annota-
tions to the GO Consortium annotation effort. By inte-
grating GO annotations from other model organism
groups, GOA consolidates specialized knowledge
and expertise to ensure the data remain a key
reference for up-to-date biological information.
Furthermore, the GOA database fully endorses the
Human Proteomics Initiative by prioritizing the anno-
tation of proteins likely to bene®t human health and
disease. In addition to a non-redundant set of annota-
tions to the human proteome (GOA-Human) and
monthly releases of its GO annotation for all species
(GOA-SPTr), a series of GO mapping ®les and speci®c
cross-references in other databases are also regularly
distributed. GOA can be queried through a simple
user-friendly web interface or downloaded in a parsa-
ble format via the EBI and GO FTP websites. The GOA
data set can be used to enhance the annotation of par-
ticular model organism or gene expression data sets,
although increasingly it has been used to evaluate GO
predictions generated from text mining or protein
interaction experiments. In 2004, the GOA team will
build on its success and will continue to supplement
the functional annotation of UniProt and work
towards enhancing the ability of scientists to access
all available biological information. Researchers
wishing to query or contribute to the GOA project are
encouraged to email: goa@ebi.ac.uk.
INTRODUCTION
The UniProt Knowledgebase (1) [which includes Swiss-Prot
(2), TrEMBL (2) and PIR-PSD (3)] is the world's most highly
annotated protein sequence database, having archived and
annotated more than a million proteins through a combination
of manual and electronic techniques. Over the next few years,
it is estimated that this ®gure will increase to over 4 million
proteins, the majority of which will lack biochemical and
functional characterization. To prepare for this increase, those
involved in bioinformatics have responded by developing new
protocols for the capture, sharing and analysis of the
functional annotation of the various data sets held. One way
in which to maximize the annotation of these data while
safeguarding quality, is to draw on the expertise of in-house
and specialist community resources.
Successful integration is reliant on each database using the
same language to characterize proteins and to distribute data in
parsable formats. In this regard, one of the most important and
well-used ontologies within the bioinformatics community is
the Gene Ontology (GO) (4). GO is a dynamic controlled
vocabulary of over 16 000 terms used to describe molecular
function, process and location of action of a protein in a
generic cell. The success of GO is based largely on its open
source approach and the involvement throughout its develop-
ment of various biological communities rich in expertise. Now
7 years on, the hype around GO has not lessened. The GO
Consortium continues to develop strategies to improve the GO
data set by staying abreast of future opportunities for
integration with other useful open biological ontologies
(OBOs) (5).
In support of standardized nomenclature, the UniProt group
became a member of the GO Consortium annotation effort in
2001. It initiated the Gene Ontology Annotation (GOA)
project (6,7) to provide assignments of GO terms to all well
characterized proteins and in particular to that of the human
proteome.
The initial aims and objectives of the GOA project have
already been achieved. GOA has organized, shared and
integrated protein knowledge using the GO structured
vocabulary. This was facilitated with the help of UniProt
curation, which led to the successful mapping to GO from
existing references, resources and publications. Initially, GOA
focused on producing GO annotations and improving update
cycles. More recently, GOA has successfully supplemented
the GOA-SPTr data set with annotations from GO Consortium
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +44 1223 494465; Fax: +44 1223 494468; Email: goa@ebi.ac.uk
D262±D266 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkh021
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 32, Database issue ã Oxford University Press 2004; all rights reserved
initiators, Mouse Genome Database (MGD) (8), FlyBase (9)
and Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD) (10). In 2004,
the GOA group will report on the manual evaluation of
electronically extracted GO terms from literature as part of the
BioCreative competition. It is also hoped that the information
in GOA will accelerate the discovery of proteins of pharma-
ceutical interest.
GO ANNOTATION PROCESS
High-quality GO annotations (GOA) are generated through a
combination of electronic and manual techniques, the latter of
which employs a team of skilled biologists.
ELECTRONIC GO ANNOTATION
The large-scale assignment of GO terms to UniProt entries has
been made possible by successfully converting a proportion of
the pre-existing knowledge held within the ¯at ®les into GO
terms (7). For example, UniProt description lines (DE) may
contain Enzyme Commission (EC) numbers. Using an exist-
ing mapping of EC numbers to the GO molecular function
ontology (ec2go) and a mapping of protein accession numbers
to EC numbers, GOA can produce a UniProt to GO
association. In a similar fashion the GOA group maintains a
Swiss-Prot keyword to GO mapping (spkw2go). This mapping
®le is routinely used to generate a large number of annotations
to GO process, function and component ontologies (see
contents of current release on the GOA home page).
Bi-directional database cross-references also help to inte-
grate GO annotations. For example, the majority of UniProt
entries will cross-reference an InterPro identi®cation number
and vice versa. InterPro is a key database maintained at the
EBI (11,12). It provides an integrated documentation resource
for proteins, families and domains. A single InterPro entry
provides comprehensive annotation describing a set of related
proteins, some of which may have identical functions, be
involved in the same processes and act in the same locations.
During the curation of each InterPro entry, high-level GO
terms are manually curated, based on a review of the literature
available on the related proteins. This annotation is used to
generate an InterPro2go mapping and also serves as a
biological summary in the InterPro entry. So far, the
application of the InterPro2go mapping in the electronic
assignment of GO terms to gene products has produced the
most coverage in the GOA data set (see contents of current
release on the GOA home page). Both spkw2go and
InterPro2go mappings are maintained in-house and distributed
on the GO and EBI FTP sites on a regular basis. To support
interoperability, InterPro2go has been used to generate GO
mappings to its member databases (see Table 1) and these also
are available for download.
The GO assignments are released monthly, in accordance
with a GO Consortium agreed format, within a `gene
association ®le'. As the mapping ®les used by GOA are
manually curated, GOA is con®dent that its electronic
annotation is of a high standard. Despite this, it is important
that users have the ability to distinguish electronic from
manually veri®ed GO annotation. For this reason, the certainty
of each GOA association is supported by annotating to one
of 10 Consortium agreed evidence codes. Electronically
generated associations are labelled as `inferred from electronic
annotation' or IEA. Proteins assigned this code are `likely' to
be involved in a particular GO activity.
MANUAL GO ANNOTATION
The large-scale assignment of GO terms to UniProt proteins
using electronic methods is a fast and ef®cient way of
associating high-level terms to a large number of proteins.
However, to provide more reliable and speci®c annotation, the
GOA project also makes use of manual curation using
information extracted from published scienti®c literature (7).
This process is slower than the use of electronic techniques but
provides more accurate information as all annotation is
validated by a team of skilled biologists. GOA recommends
that users wishing to analyse GO annotation understand how
GO is arranged and how GO assignments are made.
Guidelines for GO annotation have been detailed before (10)
and are published on the GO home page (http://www.
geneontology.org/). Each assigned term is associated with a
GO experimental evidence code (see GO home page for
details of evidence codes) and a PubMed ID, which allows
users to track the exact literature source and type of
experiment used to support the annotation.
Priority is given in the GOA project to the annotation of
data from the human proteome. This complements the efforts
of the other consortium members as no other member freely
provides human-speci®c data. The GOA project also assigns
GO terms to proteins from a wide range of other species. There
are almost 60 000 different species represented in the UniProt
databases. Approximately 500 of these have already had GO
terms manually assigned and this number continues to
increase daily. New terms are requested as required to
adequately describe the many species in UniProt, thus
enhancing the GO ontologies and extending their scope.
UTILITY OF GO ANNOTATION
Manual GO annotation generates high-quality reliable inform-
ation that is more accurate than electronic annotation. It also
allows comparisons to be made with new annotation
approaches and is an important tool for validation of these
methods. However, manual annotation is time consuming and
dependent on skilled biologists capable of extracting key
information from the published literature.
In view of this, greater emphasis has been placed by the
bioinformatics community on the development of new auto-
matic annotation techniques, such as automated information
extraction and the conversion of this knowledge into the GO
vocabulary (9,17±20). This has resulted in a variety of GO
prediction servers with varying abilities to interpret accurately
the subtleties of the scienti®c natural language as well as GO
structure, mappings and annotation styles (see GO Tools list
on GO home page). To assess these information extraction
techniques and allow users to apply the methods judiciously,
the BioLINK group (http://www.pdg.cnb.uam.es/BioLINK/)
organized the BioCreative (Critical Assessment of
Information Extraction systems in Biology) competition. In
collaboration with BioLINK, GOA provided one of the gold
standard training and test sets of GO annotation. UniProt
curators also took part in manual veri®cation of GO terms
Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue D263
mined from the literature, which were corroborated by
evidence from the text. In spring 2004, the results of the
competition will be announced and it is anticipated that those
techniques with the potential to assist GOA in the accurate
prediction of deep-level GO terms will be highlighted and may
supercede current electronic strategies.
The core objective of GOA is to provide high-quality GO
annotation to supplement and improve the interoperability and
querying of external and in-house knowledgebases.
Increasingly, it is being used to predict the function and
biological roles of new gene products, and to reclassify and
model relationships between known proteins (19,20). For
example, genes coding for gene products that are often
involved in the same biological process have a likelihood of
being regulated in a coordinated manner. For these reasons,
public repositories of microarray data such as ArrayExpress
(21) actively encourage users to provide GO annotation in the
array design, to facilitate clustering of data according to the
GO ontologies and to allow cross-platform data comparisons.
GO annotation provides a link between biological knowledge
and gene expression pro®les. When combined with statistical
analysis, the GOA data set is a useful resource for building
pathways and can help facilitate microarray probe design to
create more focused arrays (e.g. neurofunction arrays) (22,23).
It is hoped that this use of GOA will assist researchers in
identifying quickly new proteins of pharmaceutical interest
based on their functional similarities. In addition to microarray
data analysis tools, GOA is also incorporated into evolutionary
studies, particularly when correlating structure±function rela-
tionships (24). These examples help to demonstrate the
Table 1. Summary of sites for downloading or browsing the GOA data set
Resource Description
Web-based tools
QuickGO A fast web-based EBI browser with access to core GO data and up-to-date electronic and manual UniProt GO annotations.
Example GO term view: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ego/DisplayGoTerm?id=GO:0006915.
Example GOA view: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ego/GSearch?query=P51587&mode=protein.
SRS This Sequence Retrieval System (SRS) can be used to search GO annotation directly in the GOA database or in the UniProt
Knowledgebase (Swiss-Prot, TrEMBL, PIR-PSD). Users can also search the GO Consortium repository and, via database
links, perform complicated queries or link Blast outputs to GO annotations (http://srs.ebi.ac.uk).
Proteome Analysis pages GO annotations have been produced for classi®cation of proteins belonging to each complete proteome. A slimmed down
version of GO (GO-slim), representing high-level GO terms, summarizes the biological attributes of a proteome (http://
www.ebi.ac.uk/proteome). Users can compare proteomes with GO-slim, or simply ®nd out what proportion of a proteome is
involved in e.g. `transport'. Annotations to GO-slim can also be downloaded.
InterPro GO annotations made by InterPro curators are visible directly in InterPro entries or can be downloaded.
Example entry: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/DisplayIproEntry?ac=IPR000402.
AmiGO This GO Consortium browser provides access to core GO data and released GOA data (http://www.godatabase.org/cgi-bin/
go.cgi).
Ensembl Ensembl is a comprehensive source of stable annotation with con®rmed gene predictions that have been integrated from
external data sources. Ensembl annotates known genes and predicts new ones, with functional annotation from many
resources including GOA. Using the Ensembl GO view, users can ®nd the location of human genes mapped to a particular
GO term. Example entry: http://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/geneview?gene=ENSG00000139618.
Genome KnowledgeBase The Genome KnowledgeBase (GK) collaboration between the EBI and Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, uses and
contributes to the GOA project by curating GO terms to proteins involved in key pathways and reactions in human biology.
[http://www.genomeknowledge.org/].
Alternative Splicing Database GOA facilitates querying of the Alternative Splicing Database. The query page that links to the GO browser is at http://
www.ebi.ac.uk/asd-srv/altextron/altsplice_hum/servlet/AltExtron.
LocusLink In 2003, LocusLink replaced the human GO annotation supplied by the former Proteome group [now Incyte HumanPSD
(13)] with that being provided by GOA-Human. (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/).
Downloads
GOA association ®le This is a tab-delimited ®le of associations between gene products and GO terms which can be downloaded to supplement
annotation of specialized data sets or validate automated ways of deriving information about gene function. Two GOA
association ®les are currently produced: the GOA-Human ®le contains GO annotations for all proteins in the non-redundant
human proteome set; the GOA-SPTr ®le contains GO annotations for all proteins in UniProt Knowledgebase. Both ®les can
be accessed from the EBI FTP server (ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/GO/goa).
GOA Xref ®le This is a ®le of cross references (xrefs.goa.gz) that displays the relationship between the entries in the GOA-Human data set
with other databases using the International Protein Index (IPI) (2), as well as the nucleotide sequence databases (14),
HUGO (15), LocusLink (16) and Refseq. This ®le supports the integration of GOA with other data sets. (ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/
pub/databases/GO/goa/HUMAN).
UniProt Knowledgebase GO annotation is visible in UniProt Knowledgebase (Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL, PIR-PSD) ¯at ®les, and these can be
downloaded from: (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/uniprot). Note: In Swiss-Prot entries, only the manually annotated information is
displayed. To view the complete GO annotation for a Swiss-Prot entry, you should download or browse the master copy of
the data in the GOA association ®les. TrEMBL ¯at ®les display electronically derived GO annotation only when manual
annotation is not available.
Annotations to GO-slim To assist the analysis of GO annotation by specialist communities, GOA releases a mapping of its annotation to high-level
GO-slim terms: ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/GO/goa/goslim/.
Manual mappings to GO The manual mappings of InterPro domains and families, Swiss-Prot keywords and EC numbers to GO terms can be directly
downloaded to enhance the functional annotation of mass spectrometry or microarray data. These mappings are shared on
the EBI FTP site: ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/GO/goa/external2go/.
Electronic mappings to GO Using InterPro2go a set of electronic GO mappings have been generated to other InterPro Consortium databases (e.g.
SMART, PRINTS, ProDom, PROSITE and TIGRFAM). To promote GO integration, these are shared on the EBI and GO
FTP sites (ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/GO/goa/external2go/).
D264 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue
potential that exists for the use of GOA in the development
and validation of tools that try to accurately predict GO
annotation.
GOA can also be used to answer speci®c biological
problems. As GO represents a universal set of curated
keywords, many users wish to retrieve all possible annotations
to a high-level GO term in a candidate-based approach.
According to GO philosophy, every child term inherits the
meaning of all of their parent terms. As such, every annotation
to a child term should be true for every parent of that child; this
is called the `true path rule'. If a user wanted to analyse all
proteins involved in the process of transcription they would
have to retrieve all proteins annotated to the GO term for
`transcription' (GO:0006350) and the children of these GO
terms. Retrieving the annotation to the children and parent GO
term is possible via SRS (25) but requires prior knowledge of
this powerful retrieval system.
Another way of performing the query is to use the protein
assignments to a set of GO-slim terms. Essentially, GO-slim is
a list of high-level GO terms that cover the main aspects of
each of the three GO ontologies. As each community has
different needs, a variety of GO-slim ®les have been archived
on the GO home page by Consortium members (ftp://ftp.
geneontology.org/pub/go/GO_slims/). GOA has created its
own GO-slim (goslim_goa.2002) to summarize the GO
annotation of each completed proteome on the Proteome
Analysis pages (26, Table 1). As an additional service, this
mapping of GO annotation to both GOA (goslim_goa.2002)
and a generic set of GO-slim terms (generic.0208) is available
for download on the EBI FTP site (Table 1). From there, users
can download all possible annotations to the GO slim term for
transcription `GO:0006350'. Users wishing to use a different
set of GO-slim terms are advised to use the map2slim.pl script
archived on the Berkley Drosophila Genome Project (BDGP)
home page (http://www.fruit¯y.org/developers/src/go.dev/
apps/query-utils/). This script uses the GO MySQL database
and requires prior knowledge of Perl API.
DATABASE ACCESS
There are various ways of accessing and searching GOA
project data (7). In addition to several web-based browsers,
GOA ®les and mappings can be downloaded (Table 1). GOA
is also cross-referenced in numerous databases including the
UniProt Knowledgebase, Ensembl (27), LocusLink (16),
EMBL/DDBJ/GenBank databases (14) and the Nuclear
Protein Database (28).
FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
The GOA group will work towards extending its annotation
coverage of the UniProt Knowledgebase and further promote
database interoperability and utility of GO in research. The
group is also actively recruiting new curators within the
UniProt Consortium in support of the manual annotation of
the dataset and the integration of GO assignments made by
other specialised disease or GO Consortium databases. It is
envisaged that GOA will contribute to the functional curation
of the interaction and alternative splicing databases (IntAct,
ASD). GOA will also facilitate the annotation of GO with
other open biological ontologies (5; http://obo.sourceforge.
net/).
To further develop electronic annotation techniques, GOA
will apply new GO mappings [e.g. a manual mapping of GO
terms to microbial families in HAMAP (29)] and stay abreast
of new text mining and information extraction technologies.
More complicated GO queries will be facilitated by upgrades
to in-house retrieval systems.
HOW TO CONTRIBUTE TO THE GOA PROJECT
GO annotations are an extensive and valuable resource that the
team is pleased to make freely available. The success and
accuracy of GOA relies on the support from biological
communities who use and share GO annotation and on our
commitment to keep electronic and manual data sets up to
date. GOA actively encourages all users to improve this
resource, by communicating via email (goa@ebi.ac.uk) any
GO annotations that require updating. In this scenario, please
provide the accession number of the entry, along with the
source and date of annotation retrieval. As GOA integrates GO
annotation from other Consortium members, users can verify
the original database source of manual annotation by viewing
the attribution column of the association ®le. It is worth noting
that GOA cannot be synchronized with all databases that
display its annotation. Please check for current GOA version
numbers on the home page.
GOA especially encourages specialist groups also interes-
ted in fast-tracking the annotation of the human proteome, to
initiate collaborations with us, that we might cross-reference
and share annotations and freely provide to our scientists as
complete a resource as possible.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We especially thank all colleagues worldwide who have
contributed to the information content of the GOA data set and
to the development of annotation and retrieval tools. We
would also like to acknowledge Philippe Rocca-Serra,
Susanna-Assunta Sansone (ArrayExpress) and Michael
McWhinney for their editorial contributions to this
manuscript. The GOA project is grateful for the support of
Grants QRLT-2001-00015 and QLRI-2000-00981 of the
European Commission and a supplementary NIH grant,
1R01HGO2273-01.
REFERENCES
1. Butler,D. (2002) NIH pledges cash for global protein database. Nature,
419, 101.
2. Boeckmann,B., Bairoch,A., Apweiler,R., Blatter,M.C., Estreicher,A.,
Gasteiger,E., Martin,M.J., Michoud,K., O'Donovan,C., Phan,I. et al.
(2003) The SWISS-PROT protein knowledgebase and its supplement
TrEMBL in 2003. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 365±370.
3. Wu,C.H., Huang,H., Yeh,L.S. and Barker,W.C. (2003) Protein family
classi®cation and functional annotation. Comput. Biol. Chem., 27, 37±47.
4. The Gene Ontology Consortium. (2000) Gene ontology tool for the
uni®cation of biology. Nat. Genet., 25, 25±29.
5. Harris,M.A. and Parkinson,H. (2003) Conference Report: Standards and
ontologies for functional genomics: towards uni®ed ontologies for
biology and biomedicine. Comp. Funct. Genomics, 4, 116±120.
6. Camon,E., Barrell,D., Brooksbank,C., Magrane,M. and Apweiler,R.
(2003) The Gene Ontology Annotation (GOA) projectÐapplication of
Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue D265
GO in SWISS-PROT, TrEMBL and InterPro. Comp. Funct. Genomics, 4,
71±74.
7. Camon,E., Magrane,M., Barrell,D., Binns,D., Fleischmann,W.,
Kersey,P., Mulder,N., Oinn,T., Maslen,J., Cox,A. et al. (2003) The Gene
Ontology Annotation (GOA) project: implementation of GO in SWISS-
PROT, TrEMBL and InterPro. Genome Res., 13, 662±672.
8. Hill,D.P., Blake,J.A., Richardson,J.E. and Ringwald,M. (2002) Extension
and integration of the gene ontology (GO): combining GO vocabularies
with external vocabularies. Genome Res., 12, 1982±1991.
9. King,O.D., Foulger,R.E., Dwight,S.S., White,J.V. and Roth,F.P. (2003)
Predicting gene function from patterns of annotation. Genome Res., 13,
896±904.
10. Dwight,S.S., Harris,M.A., Dolinski,K., Ball,C.A., Binkley,G.,
Christie,K.R., Fisk,D.G., Issel-Tarver,L., Schroeder,M., Sherlock,G. et al.
(2002) Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD) provides secondary
gene annotation using the Gene Ontology (GO). Nucleic Acids Res., 30,
69±72.
11. Mulder,N.J., Apweiler,R., Attwood,T.K., Bairoch,A., Barrell,D.,
Bateman,A., Binns,D., Biswas,M., Bradley,P., Bork,P. et al. (2003) The
InterPro Database, 2003 brings increased coverage and new features.
Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 315±318.
12. Biswas,M., O'Rourke,J.F., Camon,E., Fraser,G., Kanapin,A.,
Karavidopoulou,Y., Kersey,P., Kriventseva,E., Mittard,V., Mulder,N.
et al. (2002) Applications of InterPro in protein annotation and genome
analysis. Brief. Bioinform., 3, 285±295.
13. Hodges,P.E., Carrico,P.M., Hogan,J.D., O'Neill,K.E., Owen J.J.,
Mangan,M., Davis,B.P., Brooks,J.E. and Garrels,J.I. (2002) Annotating
the human proteome: the Human Proteome Survey Database
(HumanPSD) and an in-depth target database for G protein-coupled
receptors (GPCR-PD) from Incyte Genomics. Nucleic Acids Res., 30,
137±141.
14. Stoesser,G., Baker,W., van den Broek,A., Garcia-Pastor,M., Kanz,C.,
Kulikova,T., Leinonen,R., Lin,Q., Lombard,V., Lopez,R. et al. (2003)
The EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database: major new developments.
Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 17±22.
15. Povey,S., Lovering,R., Bruford,E., Wright,M., Lush,M. and Wain,H.
(2001) The HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee (HGNC). Hum.
Genet., 109, 678±80.
16. Pruitt,K.D. and Maglott,D.R. (2001) RefSeq and LocusLink: NCBI gene-
centered resources. Nucleic Acids Res., 29, 137±140.
17. Stevens,R., Goble,C.A. and Bechhofer,S. (2000) Ontology-based
knowledge representation for bioinformatics. Brief. Bioinform., 1,
398±414.
18. Xie,H., Wasserman,A., Levine,Z., Novik,A., Grebinskiy,V., Shoshan,A.
and Mintz,L. (2002) Large-scale protein annotation through gene
ontology. Genome Res., 12, 785±794.
19. Schug,J., Diskin,S., Mazzarelli,J., Brunk,B.P. and Stoeckert,C.J.,Jr
(2002) Predicting gene ontology functions from ProDom and CDD
protein domains. Genome Res., 12, 648±655.
20. Lagreid,A., Hvidsten,T.R., Midelfart,H., Komorowski,J. and
Sandvik,A.K. (2003) Predicting gene ontology biological process from
temporal gene expression patterns. Genome Res., 13, 965±979.
21. Brazma,A., Parkinson,H., Sarkans,U., Shojatalab,M., Vilo,J.,
Abeygunawardena,N., Holloway,E., Kapushesky,M., Kemmeren,P.,
Lara,G.G. et al. (2003) ArrayExpressÐa public repository for microarray
gene expression data at the EBI. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 68±71.
22. Zhong,S., Li,C. and Wong,W.H. (2003) ChipInfo: software for extracting
gene annotation and gene ontology information for microarray analysis.
Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 3483±3486.
23. Liu,G., Loraine,A.E., Shigeta,R., Cline,M., Cheng,J., Valmeekam,V.,
Sun,S., Kulp,D. and Siani-Rose,M.A. (2003) NetAffx: Affymetrix
probesets and annotations. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 82±86.
24. Shakhnovich,B.E., Dokholyan,N.V., DeLisi,C. and Shakhnovich,E.I.
(2003) Functional ®ngerprints of folds: evidence for correlated structure±
function evolution. J. Mol. Biol., 326, 1±9.
25. Zdobnov,E.M., Lopez,R., Apweiler,R. and Etzold,T. (2002) The EBI
SRS server-new features. Bioinformatics, 8, 1149±1150.
26. Pruess,M., Fleischmann,W., Kanapin,A., Karavidopoulou,Y., Kersey,P.,
Kriventseva,E., Mittard,V., Mulder,N., Phan,I., Servant,F. et al. (2003)
The Proteome Analysis database: a tool for the in silico analysis of whole
proteomes. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 414±417.
27. Clamp,M., Andrews,D., Barker,D., Bevan,P., Cameron,G., Chen,Y.,
Clark,L., Cox,T., Cuff,J., Curwen,V. et al. (2002) Ensembl 2002:
accommodating comparative genomics. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 38±54.
28. Dellaire,G., Farrall,R. and Bickmore,W.A. (2003) The Nuclear Protein
Database (NPD): sub-nuclear localisation and functional annotation of
the nuclear proteome. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 328±330.
29. Gattiker,A., Michoud,K., Rivoire,C., Auchincloss,A.H., Coudert,E.,
Lima,T., Kersey,P., Pagni,M., Sigrist,C.J., Lachaize,C. et al. (2003)
Automated annotation of microbial proteomes in SWISS-PROT.
Comput. Biol. Chem., 1, 49±58.
D266 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue
