A proposal for new marking scheme with its performance evaluation 
for IP Traceback 
 
S. MALLIGA and DR. A. TAMILARASI 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Kongu Engineering College 
Perundurai, Erode 
Tamilnadu - 638 052 
INDIA 
 mallisenthil@yahoo.com 
 
 
Abstract: -  Detecting and defeating Denial of Service (DoS) attacks is one of the hardest security problems on 
IP networks. Furthermore, spoofing of IP packets makes it difficult to combat against and fix such attacks. 
Packet marking is one of the methods to mitigate the DoS attack that helps traceback to the true origin of the 
packets.  A hybrid packet marking algorithm, along with traceback mechanism to find the true origin of the 
attack traffic is presented in this study. The router marks the packets with inbound interface identifier of the 
router, but the novelty lies on the way it marks the packets. The stamping based on modulo technique and 
reverse modulo for the purpose reconstruction of attack path to traceback to the real source of the packets are 
proposed. The experimental measurements on the presented algorithm ensure that it requires less amount of 
time to mark and reconstruct the attack graph. It is also able to trace back to single packet, nevertheless it 
requires logging at very few routers and thus incurring insignificant storage overhead on the routers. The 
simulation study and the qualitative comparison with different traceback schemes are also presented to show 
the performance of the proposed system.  
 
 
Key-Words: - DoS attacks, Logging, Modulo, Packet marking, Reverse modulo, Spoofing 
 
1  Introduction 
DoS and Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) 
attacks have posed major security threats to the 
Internet. To define, a DoS is a malicious attempt to 
render a node or network incapable of servicing the 
legitimate requests. DDoS is the case in which one 
or more attackers coordinate the sending of 
enormous packets aiming at clogging the victim and 
the network. DDoS attacks come from various 
sources with different types of attacks. These attacks 
attempt to consume the finite resources like 
memory, computational power etc. in the network 
and also at the victim [1]. They would also result in 
heavy congestion on the network links thereby 
disrupting the communication among the users. 
Moreover, these attacks would exploit the inherent 
weaknesses in the IP protocol. One such is spoofing, 
which is, impersonating one’s IP address. Spoofing 
further complicates the detection of the DoS / DDoS 
attacks. More importantly, innocent host systems are 
involved for launching such attacks.  
For instance, the DoS attacks have disrupted the 
Internet services and incurred heavy financial losses 
on the popular sites like Yahoo, CNN, Amazon etc. 
[2]. Such attacks are difficult to detect, prevent and 
traceback, but easy to implement. Thus the 
devastating effects of the problem have led to the 
development of many anti-DoS solutions.  
The countermeasures that address the DoS 
attacks are deployed at different points on the 
Internet namely at the source-end, intermediate-
network and victim-end. An ideal place to detect 
and filter the flooding attacks is at the network 
where they have been generated (i.e.) as close to the 
source of attacks as possible. The source-end 
defenses act as filters for the attacks and have 
advantages over the other two [3]. They include 
congestion avoidance over the network, small 
collateral damage, feasible deployment etc. The 
source-end defensive systems maintain the statistics 
of the outgoing traffic and use them to analyze and 
conclude about the ongoing attacks.  But, because of 
the highly distributed nature of the attacks, detection 
near the source is cumbersome. Attackers may try to 
launch the attacks that resemble legitimate requests, 
thus there is no suspicious alert about the attack 
traffic can be generated. 
WSEAS TRANSACTIONS on COMPUTER RESEARCH S. Malliga and A. Tamilarasi
ISSN: 1991-8755 259 Issue 4, Volume 3, April 2008
The anti-DoS solutions that are deployed at the 
intermediate systems are useful for IP traceback 
which is the name given to the problem of reliably 
determining the origin of a packet. But, due to the 
stateless nature of the Internet, it is difficult to find 
the source of the spoofed packets. Existing 
approaches to handle this problem fall into logging 
and packet marking and they are tailored towards 
the detection of the flooding attacks by traceback. 
Logging involves storing the packets on the 
routers which they come across and using data 
mining principles to find the path the packets 
traversed. This method can even trace back the 
attack long after it has been over. Since the process 
of logging incurs significant storage overhead on 
routers, a mechanism that stores packet digests 
rather than the packets themselves has been 
addressed by Snoren et. al. [4]. Although the hash 
based technique requires 0.5% of the total link 
capacity in digest table storage, the storage 
requirement at the routers, in general, would be too 
high. 
One among the IP traceback approaches is 
packet marking, which lets the packet mark with 
path information during the forwarding of packets. 
The victim then, using the marked information, 
constructs the attack graph. The marking may be 
probabilistic or deterministic.  
In Deterministic Packet Marking (DPM), a router 
marks every packet that passes through it and these 
packets are used to find the true source of the attack 
traffic. An example for DPM is presented in [5] and 
it uses the packet ID and flag fields for markings. 
When a packet enters into the network, it is marked 
by the interface closest to the source on the edge 
ingress router. Since single packet would not be 
sufficient to pass the IP address of the router, two 
packets are used to pass the IP address by splitting it 
into two parts of 16 bits each. The flag field tells 
which part of the IP address is carried into the 
packet. At the victim, a table that matches the source 
addresses into the ingress addresses is maintained. If 
there is no entry for the source address, then the 
victim would create an entry for the address and add 
the address of the ingress router into the table. This 
table would be used by the victim to reconstruct the 
attack graph. 
Various approaches for Probabilistic Packet 
Marking (PPM) have been reported in the recent 
years [6] [7] [8] [9]. In PPM schemes, packets to be 
marked are selected using some fixed probability. 
The addresses of the routers are embedded into the 
selected packets. When the victim gets modest 
number of packets, it can reconstruct the attack 
graph. These schemes mainly aim at the detection of 
large scale DoS / DDoS attacks. In PPM schemes, 
the path reconstruction is based on multiple packet 
markings, but there is no guarantee that single 
packet would have enough marking for identifying 
the attackers. In addition, an attacker may also inject 
packets with erroneous information by spoofing the 
packets. Then such packets would cause confusion 
at the victim during path reconstruction. By nature, 
PPM solutions need large number of packets to 
converge on the attack path. Thus, a solution 
requiring more packets tends to be probabilistic in 
nature. 
Besides the packet marking and logging, 
mechanisms such as link testing [10] and ICMP 
traceback [11] have also been proposed for IP 
traceback. The idea behind link testing is to start 
from the victim to determine the attack from 
upstream links and subsequently find the link that 
carries the attack traffic. This scheme requires the 
attack remain active while tracing back and is not 
suitable for post-mortem analysis. In ICMP 
traceback, every router, with low probability, sends 
special ICMP traceback messages that contain the 
information about the neighbor routers along the 
path towards the destination. During the attack, 
these messages are used by the victim for attack 
path construction.   
Victim-end deployment of any defensive system 
protects the victim from the attacks and reduces the 
impact of such ongoing attacks by responding to 
them immediately. Many Network Intrusion 
Detection (NID) systems have been advocated for 
such deployment. These systems work on-line and 
detect real time intrusion attacks. Such intrusion 
detection systems use a set of features or models to 
analyze the incessant stream and discover the attack 
scenarios. A classification scheme for NIDs is 
presented in [12]. An example for such system is 
addressed in [13]. Most of the defensive systems are 
installed at the victim since it has been suffering 
from the attacks. But, such attacks can be detected 
only at bursting stage. By that time, the resources 
would have been consumed and hence the victim 
may not be able to protect itself from overwhelming 
packets. 
In this study, a packet marking algorithm, which 
follows hybrid marking scheme to solve IP 
traceback problem is presented. As the packets 
travel through the network, they are marked with 
router information using modulo technique. Upon 
traceback request, reverse modulo is used to 
reconstruct the path traversed by the packets. In 
particular, this approach reconstructs the attack path 
with one packet and incurs very less overhead on the 
network and router. Hardly this method requires 
WSEAS TRANSACTIONS on COMPUTER RESEARCH S. Malliga and A. Tamilarasi
ISSN: 1991-8755 260 Issue 4, Volume 3, April 2008
logging at routers, so the storage overhead on the 
routers is also significantly reduced. We extend the 
proposal, which we made in [14], to show the 
effectiveness of the same and also consider a new 
method to begin marking in order to achieve 
effectual results. 
The paper is organized as follows: section 2 
discusses about the need and the motivation behind 
IP traceback approaches. The details of the marking 
and attack path reconstruction procedures of the 
proposed system are given in section 3. The 
interpretation of experimental findings and 
performance of the proposed system along with 
qualitative comparison on different criteria with 
different promising packet marking systems are 
presented in section 4. The practical issues on the 
implementation of the system are discussed in 
section 5. A survey on the related works on packet 
marking is presented in section 6. The concluding 
remarks and directions for future work are drawn in 
section 7.  
 
 
2   Need, assumptions and motivations 
behind IP traceback problem 
Falsification of source address, called spoofing, 
makes it hard to find the true origin of a packet thus 
leading the DoS or one-way attacks1 to go 
undetected. IP traceback is an ability to identify the 
sources of such attacks and institute preventive and 
protective measures.  
The DoS attacks flood a network with the 
objective of degrading or refusing the legitimate 
users from accessing the resources or services on 
specific system. DDoS can cause more damages on 
the victim by employing a group of hosts, called 
zombies. To disguise the true locations, the attackers 
tend to spoof the packets, thus complicating the 
detection process. 
The first proposal for IP traceback using packet 
marking was put forth by Savage et. al. and later  
augmented  by  others. The family of traceback 
schemes was motivated by one or more of the 
following assumptions [6] [9] [15]. These basic 
assumptions are made prior to the design of IP 
traceback system to establish practical guidelines. 
 
 
 
 
 
1One-way attacks – it is a kind of attacks where it is not 
necessary to receive responses from the victim to 
continue the attacks. 
2.1 Assumptions 
The assumptions for the traceback schemes are as 
follows. 
 
 
2.1.1 About attackers 
¾ Attackers may  generate any packets 
¾ Co-ordination among multiple attackers to 
generate DoS / DDoS attacks 
¾ Attackers may overwhelm the network 
traffic, thus the victim 
¾ Attackers may send numerous packets 
¾ Attackers may also launch the attacks that  
consist of single packet 
 
 
2.1.2 About packets 
¾ Path of the traffic is occasionally changed 
¾ Packets may be re-ordered or lost 
¾ Packets should not be made grow for the     
purpose of traceback 
 
 
2.1.3 About routers 
¾ Routers are resource constrained 
¾ Routers are not widely compromised 
¾   Routers would not generally generate forged         
 packets 
¾ Knowledge of map of upstream routers for  
       reconstruction of attack path 
 
 
2.2 Design goals 
The security threats posed by the flooding attacks 
necessitate traceback schemes with the design goals 
presented in [8]. We present below the desirable 
characteristics of an anti-DoS system. 
 
¾ Making available the information about the 
routers that are nearer to the attack source 
¾ Identifying false information injected by the 
attackers  
¾ Locating the source of attacking traffic 
rather than the first hop router 
¾ Less number of packets to reconstruct the 
attack graph 
¾ Low computational and storage overhead on 
the routers (i.e.) the routers should not 
demand extensive resources 
¾ Less time to mark and reconstruct the graph 
of attack path 
¾ Less cost and deployment time 
WSEAS TRANSACTIONS on COMPUTER RESEARCH S. Malliga and A. Tamilarasi
ISSN: 1991-8755 261 Issue 4, Volume 3, April 2008
¾ The network complexity should be kept as 
minimum as possible (i.e.) the packet size 
should not increase 
¾ Must be a deployable solution 
In the recent years, many counter measures for 
DoS attacks have been advocated that possess some 
of the above design goals and lack one or other. For 
instance, previous PPM systems require a 
considerable number of packets to find the attack 
path, at least in the order of 10’s. There are schemes 
that require more number of bits to be marked in the 
IP packet. In contrast to this, there are logging 
schemes that require huge volume of memory for 
buffering the packets. Hence we need a scheme that 
provides almost all of the above design goals and we 
attempt to do so. 
 
 
3   Design philosophy of MRT  
(Modulo / Reverse modulo Technique) 
The objective of the proposed model is to keep track 
of the routers that contribute for marking the packets 
using a new marking scheme. Here, not every router 
is involved in marking. The marking is a hybrid 
scheme which implies that it may be probabilistic 
and/or deterministic (i.e.) the marking of the 
remaining routers through which the packets pass 
depends on the edge router of the source network. If 
the edge router decides to mark, then each of the 
upstream routers would contribute to the marking or 
otherwise not. The procedures for marking and 
reconstruction are presented below. 
 
 
3.1 Marking procedure 
This section describes about the marking procedures 
of edge and core routers. 
 
 
3.1.1  At edge routers 
An edge router, also called as access router, is a 
device that routes the data between one or more 
local area networks and a back bone network 
whether a campus or wide area network like 
Internet. As per proposal, the edge router of a 
network maintains a lookup table, called MACtoID 
table, which has physical addresses of the hosts 
attached to the network and equivalent numeric code 
for each of the physical addresses. When an edge 
router decides to mark an incoming packet, it 
fetches the code to be marked that corresponds to 
physical address of the host from the lookup table 
and encodes it into the packet.  
For marking, the router requires 1 bit for 
indicating whether it marks or not, 1 bit in case of 
logging and few bits for marking code. The 
markings can be stamped on IP options field but it is 
computational intensive to append any data to a 
packet while forwarding which increases the size of 
the packet and thus ignoring the design goals. 
Hence, as in most of the marking schemes, we 
overload the 16 bits ID and 16 bits flags and 
fragment offset fields to carry the marking 
information. This may cause inconvenience for 
fragmented packets. But the researches on the 
Internet study show that only less than 0.25% of the 
packets are fragmented [16]. Fig. 1 shows the 
encoding into the packets by the edge router. 
  
Marked 
field 
(1 bit) 
Log field 
(1 bit) 
Code from MACtoID 
table 
(30 bits) 
 
Fig. 1.  Marking by edge router 
 
The algorithm for marking at edge router 
For every packet,  
(i)      Let x be a random number between 0 and 1. 
(ii)      If x ≥ p, where p is marking probability 
(a) Use physical address of the sender 
 to find the code to be marked from 
 MACtoID table. 
(b) Set marked field. 
(c) Stamp the code into marking field. 
 (iii)      Forward the packet to the next router. 
 
 
3.1.2 At core routers 
A core router is the router that transmits the data 
between other routers. A core router marks if only 
the packet has been already marked by the edge 
router. Otherwise it would simply forward the 
packets. The marking by the core routers is different 
from that of the edge router. These routers use 
modulo technique for marking. Every core router 
maintains a small table called MACtoInterface that 
contains the physical addresses of all of its hardware 
input or inbound interfaces and link numbers 
assigned to each of these interfaces. Here we would 
like to note that the number of hardware interfaces 
to a router also refers to the degree of that router. 
Hence we use interface and degree interchangeably. 
When a core router decides to mark, it consults the 
table to find the link number assigned to the inbound 
interface. To do so, it fetches the destination 
physical address from the packet and uses the 
WSEAS TRANSACTIONS on COMPUTER RESEARCH S. Malliga and A. Tamilarasi
ISSN: 1991-8755 262 Issue 4, Volume 3, April 2008
address to find the link number assigned to the 
interface corresponding to it. The router then uses 
modulo method for recording the mark as, 
  
New marking information = current marking 
information * number of interfaces on the router 
+ the link number                             Æ (1) 
 
The new marking information is recorded into 
the packet by overwriting the existing information. 
Fig. 2 shows encoding of marking information by 
the core routers. 
 
1 
(1 bit) 
0/1 
(1 bit) 
current marking information  
* number of interfaces on the 
router + the link number  
(30 bits) 
 
Fig. 2.  Marking by core router 
 
Due to the multiplication factor in the marking 
procedure, occasionally the marking field in the 
packet may be insufficient for the marking by a 
router. In such case, the marking field would have to 
be reinitialized to 0. But, before reinitialization, the 
router takes the digest of the packet and stores the 
digest along with old marking and log field into a 
log table. This is done to avoid the loss of markings 
made by upstream routers. A router that performs 
logging would set log field to help traceback 
process.  
 
The algorithm for marking at every core router 
For every packet, 
If marked field is set 
(i) Use MACtoInterface table and find the link 
number for the inbound interface on 
which the packet arrived. 
(ii)  Calculate the new marking information as 
in (1). 
(iii)  If the marking field is sufficient to hold the 
calculated value, then stamp it in the 
marking field. 
 Otherwise, 
(a) Take the digest of the packet. 
(b) Log the triple (digest, old marking 
information, log field) into the log table. 
(c) Clear the marking field. Calculate 
and set the marking field as in (1) and 
set the log field also. 
(iv)  Forward the packet to the next router. 
3.2 Attack graph construction 
Here we assume that there exist NID mechanisms 
like [17] at the victim to detect the DoS / DDoS 
attacks. Once the victim understands that it is under 
attack, it issues traceback request containing the 
marking information of the packet to be traced to the 
nearest upstream router that delivered the packet. 
The upstream router uses the reverse modulo to find 
the inbound interface of the traceback requested 
packet using the marking information found in the 
traceback request and then using the hardware 
address table at the inbound interface, the router 
finds the previous upstream router connected to that 
interface. Then the upstream router becomes the 
current router and traceback procedure is repeatedly 
performed till the edge router of the sending host is 
reached. When this is done, the victim would have 
found the routers crossed by the attack packet and 
would send a request to the edge router to find the 
physical address of the node that originated the 
attack packet. The procedures for the edge and core 
routers are presented below. 
 
 
3.2.1 At core routers 
Starting at the nearest router to which the victim is 
attached to, 
If the marking field is set, then the router has 
involved in marking 
While(true)  { 
(i) If the marking information in the traceback 
request lesser than the number of degree of the 
router and log field is 1, then 
 (a) Set the inbound interface as the value of 
 the marking information. 
  (b) Take the digest of the packet and 
 compare with log table  to find  marking 
 by the previous router, set it in the 
 marking field and also copy the log field. 
 (ii)  Else 
(a) Calculate the inbound interface that 
delivered the packet using the marking 
information in the traceback request as, 
inbound interface = mod (marking 
information, number of interfaces of the 
router) 
 (b)  Calculate the marking information sent 
 by the upstream router as, 
 old marking information = current marking / 
                  number of degree of the router 
(iii) Set the upstream router connected to the 
inbound interface as the current router and 
continue the process. 
} 
WSEAS TRANSACTIONS on COMPUTER RESEARCH S. Malliga and A. Tamilarasi
ISSN: 1991-8755 263 Issue 4, Volume 3, April 2008
3.2.2  At edge router 
(i)  Use the marking information in the traceback 
request as index into MACtoID table. 
(ii)  Find the physical address that corresponds to 
the index. 
(iii) Conclude the host associated with physical 
address is the compromised host and might have 
involved in attack. 
. 
 
4   Test results and performance 
evaluation 
4.1 Simulation environment  
We used network simulation package ‘Network 
Simulator (NS2)’ to simulate hundreds of nodes, 
conducted experiments by simulating DoS attacks 
along with the legitimate traffic and evaluated the 
performance of the proposed system. For the 
generation of the traffic, we used the simulation 
environment similar to the one described in [26]. 
The results of the simulation are compared against 
the results of different traceback approaches and 
presented below. 
We have chosen the following parameters for 
evaluation of various traceback approaches from 
[20]. These include 
 i.. Convergence time (i.e.) the number of packets 
needed to reconstruct the full attack path and 
estimated time taken by the routers to do so. 
ii. The estimated time for marking by every router 
(i.e.) the computational overhead in a router due to 
marking 
iii. Storage overhead in a router due to logging 
iv. Robustness of the traceback mechanism 
v. Average size of the marking information 
The first two parameters determine the fastness 
in response to the attack and reducing its strength. 
The third parameter represents the amount memory 
required at the routers as result of logging while 
marking. The last two parameters depict the false 
positive rate and sufficiency of the marking field on 
average case of the proposed model. 
For the qualitative analysis, we use the following 
notations.  
 
(CT)sys  - convergence time for the given system 
      ‘sys’ 
p      -  probability of marking 
d   -  length of the attack path  
EMS    -  Edge Marking Scheme 
AMS     -  Advanced Marking Scheme 
DLLT    -  Distributed Link List Traceback 
PPPM    -  Pipelined Probabilistic Packet Marking 
MDADF  -  Marking-based Detection And Filtering 
Huff    -  Huffman Code for marking 
 
 
4.2 Convergence time analysis 
Convergence time is the time taken to reconstruct 
the attack graph. Given the packets marked by PPM, 
it is important to know the number of packets 
needed and time taken to find the IP addresses of all 
the routers along the attack path. The purpose of 
reconstruction is to determine the address of the host 
involved in attack or at least the address of the edge 
router nearest to the attacking host. It is necessary to 
verify that the path reconstructed is correct and 
complete. But it has been found in [20], that none of 
the PPM approaches provide a mechanism to verify 
the completeness of the reconstructed path. To 
verify, a large number of packets need to be 
collected. We compared the convergence time 
required by various traceback approaches and 
presented below. 
The Edge Marking scheme by Savage et.al. [9] 
uses the edges sampled in the marked packets to 
construct the path of attack. Here the probability of 
receiving marked packets from the furthest routers is 
smaller than the routers nearer to the victim and 
hence the time to receive the samples from the 
furthest router is given by 1/p(1-p)d-1 for a router 
which is ‘d’ hops away. The factor ln(d) accounts 
for the small probability for the marked packets 
from furthest router than the nearer ones. Thus the 
number of packets needed to reconstruct the attack 
path of length ‘d’ is given by, 
 
  (CT)EMS < ln(d)      
     p(1-p)d-1 
  
For example, if p=2/10 and d=15, then the victim 
would require 85 packets approximately for attack 
path reconstruction. 
For the DLLT and PPPM in [8], u is a parameter 
that helps in choosing the success probability of 
routers (i.e.) p(x-d) ≥ u, where x is a random 
variable that represents the number of routers out of 
‘d’ that succeeded in marking. 
                       
  (CT)DLLT ≥ log10(1-u1/d)      
        log10(1-p) 
 
(CT)PPPM  ≥     log10(1-u1/d)
                                log10(1-p(1-p)d-1) 
 
WSEAS TRANSACTIONS on COMPUTER RESEARCH S. Malliga and A. Tamilarasi
ISSN: 1991-8755 264 Issue 4, Volume 3, April 2008
For the schemes in [7] [17], the convergence 
time is 
                        (CT)MDADF  =  (CT)Huff   = 1 
 
Since the above two schemes are of DPM in 
nature, they require one packet to traceback to the 
true source of the attack. 
The convergence time need for the proposed 
system is 
                        (CT)MRT   = 1 
 
This shows that, when compared with PPM 
approaches, the proposed system has less time to 
converge. But the systems presented in [7] [17] too 
have less convergence time of 1. But the estimated 
time needed for marking and reconstruction 
procedure is small in our system. We ran different 
approaches and measured the time needed for 
reconstruction procedure in all cases. The simulation 
results are tabulated below in table 1. 
 
Table 1. Average estimated time for reconstruction. 
  
Traceback schemes Convergence 
Time 
Average estimated 
time for the  
reconstruction 
procedure (ms) 
AMS2 <=4*103 84.2  
DLLT in the order 
of 10s 
0.379 
PPPM2 in the order 
of 10s 
519.2 
MDADF3 1 5.956  
Huffman Coding 1 0.30 
MRT  
(proposed system ) 
1 0.31 
 
     It is clearly seen from the above table that the 
proposed system has small convergence time and 
needs less time to reconstruct the attack graph. Even 
though the system in [7] requires less amount of 
time to reconstruct the attack path than the proposed 
system, the difference is very marginal. We have 
also shown in the later sections that the proposed 
system performs better in all the other aspects.  
 
 
4.3 Computational overhead on marking 
for marking by the routers along the path towards 
the destination. The complexity involved in marking 
procedure was evaluated by extending the network 
simulation for different traceback approaches. We 
ran the simulation by considering each of the 
different traceback approaches in turn and 
calculated the marking time taken by each of them. 
The result of this simulation is presented in table 2. 
The table shows the time needed for marking of 
every 1000 packets by the edge router and core 
routers and the time taken to cross the routers by the 
marked packets. The table projects the time taken by 
the three routers alone. In case of edge router, the 
time taken to mark a packet in PPM system is even 
though lesser that any other projected systems, it 
does not mark all the packets. But, MRT marks all 
the packets with very slight increase in time. But for 
the core routers, the MRT consumes less amount of 
time while competing with other methods. From, the 
table 2, it is apparent that the average time taken by 
the routers to mark packets is less in the case of our 
system when compared with other traceback 
approaches. 
The graphical representation of the average time 
contributed for marking by the edge and core routers 
is shown in Fig. 3. 
 
Marking Time
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
MRT MADAF Huffman AMS DLLT PPPM
IP Traceback schemes
Ti
m
e 
fo
r m
ar
ki
ng
 (m
ic
ro
se
cs
)
Edge Router Core Router 1 Core Router 2
 
 
Fig. 3. Average time for marking at three routers 
for various traceback schemes 
This parameter  defines  the estimated  time needed 
 
 
2These systems require the victim to keep on gathering 
the packets from different hosts to construct the attack 
graph 
 
 
 
3This system requires echo reply packets from the 
suspected hosts in addition to the average estimated time 
for path reconstruction. 
WSEAS TRANSACTIONS on COMPUTER RESEARCH S. Malliga and A. Tamilarasi
ISSN: 1991-8755 265 Issue 4, Volume 3, April 2008
 
Table 2. Computational overhead of different traceback approaches 
 
For marking 1000 packets Traceback approaches 
Edge 
router
(µs) 
Core 
router 1 
(µs) 
Core 
router 2 
(µs) 
Time taken for 
marking of 1000 
packets by the 
routers 
(µs) 
AMS 5.91 4.96 4.41 15.28 
DLLT 8.35 7.28 9.26 28.93 
PPPM 4.45 4.16 3.33 11.94 
MDADF 11.08 8.44 4.57 24.09 
Huffman Coding 11.71 11.00 8.66 31.37 
MRT (proposed system ) 4.52 3.26 3.23 11.01 
 
 
 
4.4 Storage overhead 
The amount of memory to be dedicated at every 
router is also an important factor that determines 
efficiency of a traceback scheme. We have analyzed 
the memory requirement of the proposed system and 
compared with that of different traceback systems.  
Average case analysis has been conducted to 
determine the requirement of memory at each router 
participating in marking. As it has been shown in [7] 
[18] [19] that, on average a packet needs to make 
more or less 32 hops and average path length is 
around 16. And also the average degree of router is 
slightly higher than three. When we implemented 
our system, we have found that only very few 
routers, hardly one to two, need to log the packets, 
that too for higher degree of routers. This is needed 
when the IP field is insufficient to hold the marking 
information. 
If there are ‘n’ packets generated by a host, and 
‘d’ routers along the path,  then only ‘k’ out of ‘d’ 
routers are involved in logging. Thus the storage 
requirement for ‘n’ packets is given by ‘nqbk’ with 
the probability of marking ‘q’, which is lesser when 
compared to other systems as shown in table 3. In 
addition, every router maintains MACtoInterface 
table which has only very few entries (i.e.) an entry 
for every neighbor. So, the storage requirement for 
this table is negligible and immaterial. The storage 
requirements for various traceback approaches are 
listed below in table 3. 
The variables in the table 3 represent as follows 
     b –  marking field size 
     f –  digest array size  
 
 
Table 3. Memory requirement for various IP 
traceback approaches 
 
Traceback schemes Memory requirement 
DLLT nq(b+f)d 
PPPM nqpf+57*2a
Huffman Coding nqbd  
(where q is always 1) 
MRT 
 (proposed system ) 
nqbk 
 
p  –  percentage of different destination 
   addresses at a router in a sample of  ‘n’ 
    packets 
a  – size of the IP destination address suffix 
   used to index the buffer of size 2a
 
 
4.5 Robustness 
A traceback system is said to be robust if it yields 
low false positives. False positive rate can be 
reflected by the number of false nodes in the attack 
graph generated that is, identifying the legitimate 
nodes as attack nodes. To show the accuracy of the 
construction of attack graph, we measured the 
number of false positives along the reconstructed 
attack graph and compared with two logging based 
schemes advocated in [4] [21]. The upper bound of 
the average number of false nodes (Fp) in the 
reconstructed attack path in hash based approach [4] 
is given as, 
 Fp=ndP/(1-dP) where n is number of hops in 
the attack path, d is the average degree of routers 
and P is the false positive rate. 
The Fp for the hybrid approach in [21] is as, 
WSEAS TRANSACTIONS on COMPUTER RESEARCH S. Malliga and A. Tamilarasi
ISSN: 1991-8755 266 Issue 4, Volume 3, April 2008
 Fp =  (n/2)(2dP/(1-2dP)) where n/2 indicates 
that the hybrid scheme requires logging by alternate 
routers. 
For the proposed system MRT, the Fp is given as, 
 Fp = kdP/(1-dP) where k is the number of 
routers involved in logging and k << n/2. 
To illustrate that Fp is small when compared to 
other two systems, we provide an example. If P is 
1%, n is 16 and d is 4, then the system presented in 
[21] results in false positive rate of 0.69 and the 
hash based approach yields a false positive rate of 
0.67. But the proposed system required logging by 
only one router along the path and hence yields the 
false positive rate of 0.042 only. 
 
 
4.6 Average length of marking field 
Depending on the degree of routers, the length of 
the marking information varies (i.e.) as there is 
increase in degree, so is the size of the marking 
information. In the table 4, we present the average 
length of the marking code for few degrees of 
routers after marking by themselves. 
 
Table 4. Average length of marking codes for few 
average degrees of routers 
 
Average 
degree 
Average length of 
marking field (in bits) 
2 1.00 
3 1.33 
4 1.5 
5 1.8 
6 2 
 
We compared the average length of the code 
required by the proposed model with the length 
required by the system in [7], since this scheme also 
requires marking by routers. The result of 
comparison is presented in the Fig. 4. 
As has been mentioned in [7], the average length 
of the marking code with average degree 3 and hop 
distance of 16 is 24.95 with equal distribution of 
packets on all interfaces of routers. But in our 
model, we found that it is 23.3, as shown in Fig. 5, 
which shows that MRT requires lesser bits than the 
Huffman way of coding.  In the Fig. 5, we also show 
the increase in average length of the marking field 
for two different degrees of routers with hop 
distance of 16. 
Average length of marking code
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
2 3 4 5 6
Average degees of routers
Le
ng
th
 o
f t
he
 m
ar
ki
ng
 c
od
e
MRT Huffman Marking
 
Fig. 4. Average length of marking field for Huffman 
marking Vs MRT 
 
Increase in marking field
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16Hops
Si
ze
 o
f m
ar
ki
ng
 fi
el
d
degree 3 degree 4
 
Fig. 5. Increase in length of marking field 
 
In the Fig. 5 with average degree 3 and average 
path length of 16, the average size of the marking 
information is 23.3, which does not require logging 
at all. The Fig. 5 also shows that even for the 
average degree 4, the system does not need logging. 
The table 5 summarizes the comparison of the 
proposed system with different DPM and PPM 
schemes that are especially designed for IP 
traceback. The evaluation results are based on the 
simulation on network simulator. The merits and 
demerits of different schemes are also presented in 
the table 6. 
 
 
 
 
WSEAS TRANSACTIONS on COMPUTER RESEARCH S. Malliga and A. Tamilarasi
ISSN: 1991-8755 267 Issue 4, Volume 3, April 2008
 
Table 5. Qualitative comparison of the proposed system with other traceback systems 
Logging Traceback 
Approach 
No. of 
packets 
needed for 
tracing 
Complexity Robustness Marking 
Prob. At network At victim 
Knowledge 
of map of 
routers 
Granularity 
of 
traceback 
MRT 
(proposed 
system ) 
1 O(1) High 1 
 
Low  
 
Low Not  
needed 
Attacking 
Host 
CEMS in the order 
of 1000s 
(4*103) 
O(l*n8) Low 0 to 1 None Very High Not 
 needed 
Nearest 
Router 
AMS < 4*103           O(l*n) Medium 0 to 1 None Very High Needed Nearest 
Router 
DLLT in the order 
10s  
O(l*n) High 0 to 1 Moderate Moderate Not  
needed 
Nearest 
Router 
PPPM in the order 
10s 
O(l*n) High 0 to 1 Moderate Moderate Not 
needed 
Nearest 
Router 
Huffman 1 O(1) Moderate 1 Low, but 
higher than 
MRT 
Low Not 
 
 
 needed 
Nearest 
Router 
MDADF 1 O(1) High 1 
 
None Very High Not needed Nearest 
Router 
Table 6. Merits and demerits of different approaches 
 
Traceback 
Approaches 
Pros Cons 
MRT 
(proposed 
system ) 
¾ Single packet traceback ¾ Irresistant to MAC spoofing 
¾ Less storage and computational overhead of 
routers 
¾ Support for DDoS 
¾ Robustness 
¾ Spoofed traffic can be dropped at source end 
after traceback request 
CEMS ¾ High scalability 
¾ Low network processing overhead 
¾ Difficult for DDoS support 
AMS ¾ Robust ¾ Design is limited to 32 hops 
¾ Low network and router overhead ¾ Knowledge of map of  upstream routers 
DLLT ¾ Keeps the size of the packet from growing 
while preserving marking information 
¾ Reduced number of packets for traceback 
¾ Long term storage of packet digest at 
intermediate routers  
¾ As path length increases, number of packets 
needed for traceback also increases 
PPPM ¾ Reduced number of packets for traceback ¾ High processing overhead 
¾ Requires 57 bits for marking 
¾ Logging at every router 
¾ As path length increases, number of packets 
needed for traceback also increases 
Huffman ¾ Less computation overhead for traceback 
¾ Support for DDoS attacks 
¾ Overhead on routers due to marking 
MDADF ¾ Single packet traceback ¾ Computational and storage overhead at 
victim ¾ Support for DDoS attacks 
¾ Less overhead on routers ¾ Echo messages generate traffic on network 
WSEAS TRANSACTIONS on COMPUTER RESEARCH S. Malliga and A. Tamilarasi
ISSN: 1991-8755 268 Issue 4, Volume 3, April 2008
5 Observation and discussion on the 
issues of implementation 
In this section, we discuss the practical issues that 
determine the success of the proposed system. 
 
 
5.1 The need for logging 
One of the design goals of any IP traceback system 
is to reduce the amount of storage needed at the 
intermediate routers. The system presented here is 
so carefully designed that it requires logging at only 
very few routers. Logging is needed only if the 
marking field is not sufficient to hold the marking. 
As it has been shown earlier, the proposed system 
faces this challenge occasionally and requires 
logging only at one or two routers. Thus storage 
overhead incurred by the proposed system is 
comparably lesser than other systems. 
 
 
5.2 Packet marking 
The other issue is the way the marking is begun with 
the physical address of the host that sent the packet. 
Since the physical address of the host is used by the 
edge router to find the host involved in spoofing 
during the path reconstruction, one may argue that it 
is possible to determine the spoofed packets at the 
time they leave the network via the edge router by 
consulting the ARP protocol. But this requires 
checking of every packet leaving the source network 
for having the correct IP and physical addresses and 
consumes quiet large amount of time. But, the 
traceback is initiated only for the requested packets. 
Hence the edge router does the process of lookup 
only on request to find the IP where the packet is 
originated. As it has been discussed already in 
section 4.3, the packet marking procedure along the 
path requires less amount of time while compared 
with other marking schemes.  
 
 
5.3 Memory requirements at core routers 
Every router needs to maintain a table called 
MACtoInterface, that contains physical addresses of 
every interface of the routers and a link number 
assigned to each of them. As discussed in the study 
[19], since the average degree of every router is just 
more than three, the size of the table is negligible. In 
the case of the link failure or addition of new links, 
that is, when the interfaces of the router change, the 
table also needs to be updated to reflect the changes 
appropriately. By assigning minimal link numbers to 
the links that shows more traffic, the packet logging 
can even be reduced to nil. 
5.4 Other issues 
As it has been mentioned already, NS2 has been 
used for simulation of both attack and legitimate 
traffic. The performance of the proposed system can 
be better tested by using test data synthesizer 
suggested in [25]. The data synthesizer provides 
simulated DDoS flooding attacks to evaluate the 
performance of any anti DoS system. We have not 
tested our system using data synthesizer and planned 
to take up for further research. 
 
 
6  A case study on related work 
To mitigate the flooding attacks, it is important to 
identify the common features of these attacks to 
distinguish them from normaltraffic. But such 
identification would be difficult since these attacks 
vary significantly. In [23], guidance for such 
classification is presented. Many attacking tools are 
being employed for performing DoS attacks and 
these include TFN, TFK2k, Trinoo [24]. These tools 
employ a master to control daemons on the 
compromised systems to launch the attacks.  
One of the inherent weaknesses of the IP 
protocol is that the source address of the packet can 
be spoofed in malicious attempts. There is no 
provision to detect the origin of such spoofed 
packets. Various solutions have been addressed to 
thwart the spoofed flooding attacks. One possible 
way to deal with DoS attacks is to traceback the 
attackers and prevent them from doing so. To find 
the path followed by the attack traffic, the traceback 
approaches rely on the routers and find the attack 
source. One of the traceback techniques is packet 
marking. In packet marking, a router either 
deterministically or probabilistically marks its 
identification information during the packet 
forwarding. 
The main idea of PPM is to mark the packets 
probabilistically as they traverse through the routers. 
This is done with the belief that after having 
received ample number of packets, the path can be 
reconstructed using the marking information present 
in the packets. Many PPM schemes have been 
tailored to address traceback problem. The scheme 
proposed in [9], namely Compressed Edge Fragment 
Sampling, marks the XOR of the two IP addresses 
that make up an edge. The resulting XOR is 
fragmented in eight parts. Each fragment is marked 
in a packet. The packet also carries offset of the 
fragment. The victim uses these fragments to 
reconstruct the attack path. This scheme requires 
orders of thousands of packets to reconstruct the 
attack path. The scheme proposed by Song et. al. [6] 
WSEAS TRANSACTIONS on COMPUTER RESEARCH S. Malliga and A. Tamilarasi
ISSN: 1991-8755 269 Issue 4, Volume 3, April 2008
marks the XOR of hash value of the edges. The 
distance between the marking router and the victim 
is also carried in the packets. Using these details, the 
attack path is found. This method relies on the 
knowledge of map of upstream routers. 
G.Manimaran et. al. proposed two novel schemes 
that employ marking and logging namely 
Distributed Linked List Traceback (DLLT) and 
Probabilistic Pipelined Packet Marking (PPPM) [8]. 
DLLT is based on a store, mark and forward 
approach. It employs both packet marking and 
storage schemes. When a router gets a packet, it 
would mark the packet with some fixed probability. 
If the packet has been already marked, the router 
would store the marking information in the packet 
before remarking. DLLT maintains a digest array 
and marking information table at every router. The 
fraction of the traffic is logged at each router and 
needs significant amount of memory. DLLT also 
requires long term storage at each router. Few 
hybrid mechanisms involving both packet marking 
and logging have been addressed. One such is 
presented in [21]. 
 In PPPM, the marking information that belongs 
to certain packet is transferred by propagating it 
from one router to another using subsequent packets 
traversing to the same destination. A PPPM enabled 
router requires 57 bits for transferring marking 
information, which may practically be unfeasible. 
In the proposal by Y.Chen et. al. [17], a DPM 
has been addressed which is based on a firewall 
running at the victim and filters the attack traffic. 
This scheme requires no logging at core routers, but 
consumes high volume of storage at the victim. 
Otherwise it creates heavy traffic on the network. 
The success of scheme depends on the filter table at 
the victim, which contains the source IP addresses 
and consistent markings for these addresses. If 
markings in the packets do not match with the 
markings in the table, then the packets are assumed 
to be spoofed and hence dropped. To drop the attack 
traffic before reaching the victim, pushback 
technique is implemented. This necessitates logging 
at the core routers.  
In summary, existing solutions are found to be 
good, but they too have drawbacks as discussed 
earlier. Hence we attempt to propose a more 
comprehensive solution that overcomes the 
drawbacks, even if not all, at least most of them. In 
this paper, a new marking algorithm, which is 
deterministic and/or probabilistic, is proposed. We 
borrowed the idea of assigning unique number to 
each of the interfaces of a router from [22] and used 
this information for marking rather than the IP 
addresses. The proposed scheme requires less time 
to mark the packets and reconstruct the attack graph. 
The system possesses the convergence time of 1. 
When compared with other packet logging methods, 
the system needs hardly logging to be performed at 
very few routers.  While considering the practical 
difficulty in implementing, it may cause additional 
burden on router in terms of marking. But this is 
unavoidable for any marking scheme. However, it 
has been shown that the proposed system requires 
less time to mark than most of the other packet 
marking approaches. 
 
 
7   Concluding remarks and scope for 
future work 
DoS attacks create imminent threat to the legitimate 
users on IP networks. IP Traceback is a mechanism 
that has evolved as an effective solution to combat 
against these flooding attacks. Although many IP 
traceback approaches exist, they suffer from one or 
more of the problems as discussed earlier. In this 
study, we proposed a marking scheme, based on 
modulo technique, which lets the router mark the 
interface codes rather than IP addresses itself. The 
objective of all PPM schemes is to track back to the 
attacking origin, but these schemes can reveal the 
edge router attached to the attacking source. But our 
scheme has extended to the limit of tracking the 
attacking host also. Although egress filters deny the 
spoofing of IP addresses beyond the network, they 
would fail if the attacker resides in the source 
network. A disgruntled user may reside and launch 
the spoofing attacks from the source network. But 
our system is capable of handling the malicious 
attempt made from the network and fixing it too. 
The presented approach stores the entire path 
traversed in a single packet and thus leads to less 
convergence time to find the attack path at the 
victim. The method also incurs less computation and 
storage overhead on the core routers which involved 
in marking. Thus the scheme possesses many of the 
designed goals presented in section 2. But the 
proposed scheme is by no means immaculate. Still 
there are new directions to proceed further. One of 
the issues to be considered is the need for efficient 
data structures to keep track of packets at the 
logging routers. Since the marking begins with the 
physical address at the edge routers and if the 
attacker is aware of this, they may tend to spoof the 
MAC also. Under such situation, the scheme might 
fail. Hence it is necessary to keep the system 
running on MAC spoofing also. The proposed 
system can also be integrated with source end 
defensive systems, wherein the spoofed traffic from 
WSEAS TRANSACTIONS on COMPUTER RESEARCH S. Malliga and A. Tamilarasi
ISSN: 1991-8755 270 Issue 4, Volume 3, April 2008
the network is dropped at the edge router itself. Any 
spoofed traffic that escaped from these defenses 
would be marked and traced back. If such trace 
traffic is found to be spoofed, further such traffic 
can be dropped at the source-end. The other issue 
for further study is the behavior of the proposed 
system in case of Distributed Reflection DoS. 
However, we believe that our system would be one 
more step towards the designing a network which is 
resistant to DoS / DDoS attacks. 
 
References: 
[1] CERT Coordination Center, Denial of Service        
attacks, http://www.cert.org/tech-tips/denial-of        
service.html.  
[2]  S. Tanachaiwiwiat and K. Hwang, Differential       
packet filtering against DDoS flood attacks,  in the 
proc. of ACM  conference on Computer and        
Communications   Security (CCS),  Washington        
DC, 2003. 
[3]  Prateek Mittal, Defense against DDoS attacks, 
Seminar Reoprt, IIT, Guwahati, 2005. 
[4]  A.C. Snoren,  C. Partridge,  L.A. Sanchez,  C.E.  
Jones, F. Tchakountio,  B. Schwartz,  S.T. Kent        
and W.T. Strayer, Single-packet IP Traceback,  
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, Vol. 10, 
No 6, 2002, pp. 721-734 
[5]  A.  Belenky  and N. Ansari,  IP traceback  with       
Deterministic Packet Marking, IEEE       
Communications  Letter, Vol. 7, 2003, pp. 162–164. 
[6]  D.X. Song    and    A. Perrig, Advanced  and      
Authenticated marking scheme for IP traceback,       
in the proc. of 20th Annual  Conference of IEEE       
Communications and computer Societies       
(INFOCOM 2001),  2001, pp.878- 886. 
[7]  K.H.Choi  and  H.K.Dai, A  Marking Scheme 
using Huffman Codes for IP Traceback, in proc.      
of 7th International Symposium on Parallel      
Architectures, Algorithms and Networks  
(SPAN’04). 
[8]  B.Al-Duwari   and   M.Govindarasu, Novel 
hybrid schemes employing packet marking and       
logging for IP traceback, IEEE Transactions on       
Parallel and Distributed Systems,  Vol. 17,  No. 5, 
2006, pp. 403-418. 
[9]  S. Savage, D. Wetherall, A. Karlin, and T.       
Anderson,  Practical network for IP  Traceback,      
IEEE /   ACM  Transactions  on Networking,  Vol. 
9,   No. 3,  2001, pp.  226-237. 
[10]  H.Burch and B.Cheswick, Tracing anonymous  
packets  to  their  approximate source , in the proc. 
of 14th Systems Administration Conference,New 
Orleand,  USA, 2000, pp. 313- 322. 
[11]  S. M. Bellovin, Internet Draft, 2001. 
[12]  Iosif-Viorel Onut and Ali A. Ghorbani, A 
Feature Classification Scheme For Network 
Intrusion Detection, International Journal of 
Network Security, Vol. 5, No. 1,  2007, pp. 1-15. 
[13]Gianni Tedesco and Uwe Aickelin, Data 
Reduction in Intrusion Alert Correlation, WSEAS 
Transactions on Computers, Issue 1, Vol. 5, 2006, 
pp. 186-193 [12]  S.Malliga and A. Tamilarasi, A 
defensive mechanism to defend against DoS/DDoS 
attacks by IP Traceback with DPM, in the proc. of  
ICCMA, 2007,  pp. 115-119. 
[15]  D.Dean,  M.Franklin, and  A. Stubblefield,        
An  algebraic approach to   IP  traceback,   in  the 
proc. of Network and Distributed System         
Security  Symposium  (NDSS’ 01),  2001. 
[16]  I. Stocia and H. Zhang, Providing guaranteed         
services without peer flow management, in the         
proc. of SIGCOMM’99, 1999, pp. 81-94. 
[17]  Y.  Chen,   S. Das,   P.Dhar,  A.E. Saddik   and 
A. Nayak, Detecting   and   preventing   IP-        
Spoofed distributed DoS attacks, International         
Journal  of Network Security,  Vol. 7,  No.1,  2008, 
pp. 70-81. 
[18]  W.Theikmann  and   K.Rothermet, Dynamic  
distance maps of the Internet, in  the  proc. of  19th 
Annual Conference of IEEE Communications and 
Computer Societies  (INFOCOM2000), 2000, pp. 
275-285.  
[19]  C.R. Palmer, G. Siganos, M.Faloutsos, 
C.Faloutsos, and P.B.Gibbons, The          
connectivity and fault-tolerance of the Internet        
topology, in the 2001 workshop on Network-       
related Data Management; in cooperation with        
ACM Special Interest Group on Management of        
Data / Priniciples of Database Systems, 2001. 
[20]  V. Kuznetsov, A. Simkin, H. Sandstrom, An          
evaluation    of    different       IP       traceback          
approaches, in proc. of Fourth International          
Conference on Information and          
Communications  Security, 2002, pp. 37-48. 
[21]  C.Gong and K.Sarac, IP traceback based on      
packet marking  and  logging,  in  the proc. of        
ICC, 2005, pp. 1043-1047. 
[22]  R. Chen, J.-M. Park, and R. Marchany, RIM:       
Router interface marking for IP  traceback,        
IEEE Global  Telecommunications  Conference        
(GLOBECOM '06), 2006, pp 1-5. [23]  Marvin 
Oliver Schneider and Jacques Calmet, A Logical 
Fibering Approach to Denial of Service Prevention, 
WSEAS Transactions on Systems, Issue 3, Vol. 6, 
2007, pp. 570-576. 
WSEAS TRANSACTIONS on COMPUTER RESEARCH S. Malliga and A. Tamilarasi
ISSN: 1991-8755 271 Issue 4, Volume 3, April 2008
[24] A. Kulkarni and S. Bush, Detecting DDoS 
using Kolmogorov Complexity Metrics, Journal of 
Network and Systems Management, Vol 14, No. 1, 
2006. 
[25] Ming Li and Wei Zhao, A principle of a data 
synthesizer for performance test of anti-DDoS flood   
attacks, in the proc. of the 7th WSEAS Int. Conf. on 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Applied Computer and Applied Computational 
Science (ACACOS '08), 2008,  pp. 254-258. 
[26] Ming Li, Jun Li, and Wei Zhao, Simulation 
Study of Flood Attacking of DDoS,  in the proc. of 
IEEE 3rd International Conference on Internet 
Computing in Science and Engineering, IEEE CS 
Press, 2008, pp. 28-29. 
WSEAS TRANSACTIONS on COMPUTER RESEARCH S. Malliga and A. Tamilarasi
ISSN: 1991-8755 272 Issue 4, Volume 3, April 2008
