The UCSC Archaeal Genome Browser
Kevin L. Schneider, Katherine S. Pollard, Robert Baertsch, Andy Pohl and Todd M. Lowe*
Biomolecular Engineering, University of California, Santa Cruz, 1156 High Street, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA
Received August 12, 2005; Revised and Accepted October 27, 2005
ABSTRACT
As more archaeal genomes are sequenced, effective
research and analysis tools are needed to integrate
the diverse information available for any given locus.
The feature-rich UCSC Genome Browser, created
originally to annotate the human genome, can be
applied to any sequenced organism.We have created
a UCSC Archaeal Genome Browser, available at
http://archaea.ucsc.edu/, currently with 26 archaeal
genomes. It displays G/C content, gene and operon
annotation from multiple sources, sequence motifs
(promoters and Shine-Dalgarno), microarray data,
multi-genome alignments and protein conservation
across phylogenetic and habitat categories. We
encourage submission of new experimental and
bioinformatic analysis from contributors. The pur-
pose of this tool is to aid biological discovery and
facilitate greater collaboration within the archaeal
research community.
INTRODUCTION
As more genomic sequences become available, analysis and
interpretation of existing annotation becomes increasingly dif-
ficult without useful tools (1). This large quantity of data
provides a challenge regarding what information should be
provided at the top level so that the data can inform but not
overwhelm. The extendibility of the UCSC Genome Browser
allows easy integration of new organisms into a system that
has a well-developed database and user interface, in the form
of a graphical web page (2). BLAT, an alignment tool
designed to quickly find sequences of 95% and greater simi-
larity (3), allows quick look-up of sequences of interest. The
UCSC Genome Browser was first implemented for the rela-
tively large human genome, containing 24 linear chromo-
somes and dozens of annotation ‘tracks’ (2,4). Because the
genome and annotation datasets are comparatively small for
all prokaryotic species, loading new archaeal genomes into the
browser requires only modest computational resources. To
date, the Archaeal Genome Browser contains all 24 complete
archaeal genomes, plus two draft assemblies (Table 1). Four
bacterial genomes are also provided for comparative purposes.
The genomes of these species, along with a variety of anno-
tation tracks from our own group and other public datasets,
provide a simple, interactive genome information resource for
which the UCSC Genome Browser is renowned.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Archaeal browser tracks
The data displayed in the Archaeal Genome Browser give the
user the ability to integrate information to make new obser-
vations. Each track presents a different biological perspective
on the organism. A detailed overview of the tracks can be
found on corresponding description pages in the browser.
We briefly describe the 11 currently available tracks here.
The Pyrobaculum aerophilum and Pyrococcus furious brow-
sers have the most complete sets of tracks.
Basic tracks provide the framework for understanding a
genome. These include G/C (guanine/cytosine) content, anno-
tated protein gene predictions (ORFs) from Genbank (5) and
the Institute for Genome Research (TIGR, www.tigr.org), all
possible start/stop codons in all reading frames and current
known or predicted non-coding RNA (ncRNA) genes. Click-
ing on a Genbank ORF opens a page detailing the available
RefSeq annotation for that gene, InterPro (6) and Pfam (7)
domains, COG group (8), GO categories (9), KEGG pathway
information (10) and ModBase (11) structural predictions
when available.
Additional tracks provide data from computational analyses
and experimental genomics studies. The Shine-Dalgarno track
indicates positions with base pairing potential to the 30 end of
16S rRNA, which is required for translation initiation. A com-
panion promoter track indicates similarity to the consensus
transcription factor IIB (BRE)-TATA box, which highlights
possible sites of transcription initiation. The promoter track
can be useful to detect incorrect start codons of annotated
genes or novel genes. There are two operon tracks: published
predictions by Ermolaeva and colleagues (12) at TIGR and a
less stringent set of predictions using a simple distance-rule
method integrated with TIGR-predicted operons. Microarray
tracks display results from experiments within our laboratory.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 831 459 1511; Fax: +1 831 459 4829; Email: lowe@soe.ucsc.edu
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D407–D410
doi:10.1093/nar/gkj134
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 25, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
The MULTIZ conservation track provides visual display of a
full-genome multiple sequence alignment to closely related
species (13). The browser also graphs a conservation score
based on a phylogenetic hidden Markov model (14), useful for
finding candidate ncRNAs, repetitive elements or features that
are not annotated in the genome. A track displaying BLASTZ
(15) hits to other loci within the same genome is useful for
identifying repetitive elements and paralogous genes.
Finally, a protein conservation track displays each ORF’s
alignment score to other species by phylogenetic category
or native environment (i.e. hyperthermophile, halophile,
acidophile). This similarity database was created locally
using BLASTP (16) against NCBI’s non-redundant protein
database. The information page for each ORF contains a
ranked table of hits—this includes the gene name and anno-
tated function, a link to the full Genbank entry and a link to
the corresponding genome locus in the browser of the other
organism (if available). The latter provides a level of
‘genome-interoperability’ not available in single-species gen-
ome browser tools. An additional link allows one to re-run the
BLASTP search against the most current protein database at
NCBI. Together, these data help improve or update functional
prediction of poorly characterized genes.
Archaeal browser features
Every organism’s browser includes a BLAT server (3) for
performing sequence similarity searches. Given a DNA or
protein sequence, BLAT returns a list of links to all genome
positions that share 95% or greater identity with the input
sequence. A browser position search utility takes one or
more terms (but not sequence) as input and returns all match-
ing genome positions. Together, BLAT and the browser posi-
tion search utility allow one to quickly search a genome by
sequence, keyword or locus.
The table browser is a powerful tool for retrieving raw
data and performing intersections and unions between data
in different tracks (4). For example, with a few mouse clicks,
one can obtain a list of all GenBank coding genes that
overlap known non-coding RNAs or all places where Gen-
Bank and TIGR ORF annotations disagree. A correlation fea-
ture computes and plots the correlation coefficient between
any two tracks at a user-specified genome location and base
resolution.
The browser also provides a ‘Custom Track’ tool, which
allows one to easily and privately upload datasets for display
along side the publicly available tracks described earlier.
Detailed help pages explain how to use the browser and format
data for custom tracks.
RESULTS
Archaeal browser data mining
The Archaeal Genome Browser is a powerful research tool that
has facilitated new discoveries in our laboratory. For example,
Table 1. Species available in the Archaeal Genome Browser at time of publication
Archaeal species Hyperthermophile Halophile Acidophile Methanogen Other extreme
Pyrobaculum aerophilum X
Aeropyrum pernix X
Sulfolobus acidocaldarius X
Sulfolobus solfataricus X
Sulfolobus tokodaii X
Nanoarchaeum equitans X
Thermococcus kodakaraensis X
Pyrococcus abyssi X
Pyrococcus furiosus X
Pyrococcus horikoshii X
Methanopyrus kandleri X
Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus X
Methanocaldococcus jannaschii X
Methanococcus maripaludis X
Ferroplasma acidarmanus X
Picrophilus torridus X X
Thermoplasma acidophilum X
Thermoplasma volcanium X
Archaeoglobus fulgidus X
Halobacterium sp. X
Haloarcula marismortui X
Natronomonas pharaonis X Alkaliphile
Methanococcoides burtonii X Psychrotroph
Methanosarcina barkeri X
Methanosarcina mazei X
Methanosarcina acetivorans X
Bacterial species
Aquifex aeolicus X
Thermotoga maritima X
Escherichia coli K12
Vibrio cholerae
All 24 fully sequenced archaeal genomes are included. In addition, two draft archaeal genomes (M.burtonii, F.acidarmanus) and four bacterial genomes are also
displayed. Each species is characterized by features of its optimal growth environment.
D408 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 25, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
it has allowed us to integrate sequence annotations with whole
genome microarray data for two species to date, P.aerophilum
and P.furiosus. Visualizing expression patterns along with
gene conservation and sequence motifs has been particularly
useful for these species where 60–80% of protein coding genes
do not have a well-annotated function. By comparison,
the Escherichia coli K12 genome has <24% genes with no
function (17) and Saccharomyces cerevisiae has <37% [http://
www.yeastgenome.org/ (18)]. Furthermore, in these and
other archaea, the start codons of many ORFs are likely to
be incorrect because of frequent use of UUG and GUG as
alternatives to AUG. We find many ‘intergenic’ regions of
the genome to be transcribed, but with no annotation clues
in GenBank entries. Figure 1 illustrates an intergenic region
for which the browser track data strongly suggests the pres-
ence of a novel gene or untranslated region (UTR). While a
single piece of information (e.g. microarray data) alone would
be only suggestive, the combination of evidence across mul-
tiple tracks helps to build confidence in new observations.
Promising hypotheses such as these can then be followed
up by further computational analysis or traditional experi-
mental testing.
DISCUSSION
Future developments
The Archaeal Genome Browser is run off the same source code
and mySQL database as the UCSC Genome Browser, which
allows for easy code, data and feature updating. When new
computational or functional analyses become available for an
organism with an existing genome browser, the database can
be quickly be updated to create a new track of genome anno-
tation. Development of browsers for additional sequenced
archaeal species is planned. We strongly encourage members
of the archaeal research community to contribute genome-
wide datasets to the browser project.
CONCLUSIONS
The Archaeal Genome Browser is a simple, graphic navigation
tool and annotation database designed to help researchers per-
form effective research and analysis, while being relatively
easy to improve in content and function.
Figure 1. The intergenic region denoted Pfu.i140, located between P.furious ORFs PF0216 and PF0217, shows high conservation among closely related species
(‘Conservation’ track), high ‘G/C Percent’ values (indicative of RNA structure in hyperthermophiles), and a different expression pattern from the neighboring
ORFs (green: suppressed relative to baseline, red: induced relative to baseline in a heat shock time course). The ‘Promoter +’ track with green peaks indicates a
TATA box that is88 bp upstream of PF0217, not the38 position that is typical for this species. Together, these pieces of evidence suggest that transcription starts
50 bp upstream of the predicted coding region, which implies one of three possibilities: (i) this is a non-coding RNA gene that is co-transcribed with PF0217 but
later processed away from the transcript; (ii) this is a regulatory UTR of PF0217 with secondary structure; or (iii) the start codon is incorrectly annotated for
PF0217.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D409
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 25, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Jim Kent and the Genome Bioinformatics Group of
UC Santa Cruz, in particular Hiram Clawson, for providing the
UCSC Genome Browser and assisting us in developing the
Archaeal Genome Browser. Lowe laboratory members
Patricia Chan, Michael Pearson and Matt Weirauch helped
develop annotation tracks. Thanks also to Pernille Nielsen of
the Krogh laboratory for contributing the EasyGene gene pre-
diction track. Funding to pay the Open Access publication
charges for this article was provided by an Alfred P. Sloan
Research Fellowship (T.M.L.).
Conflict of interest statement. Andy Pohl receives royalties for
the sale of the original UCSC genome browser (on which the
Archaeal Genome Browser is based) to commercial entities.
No authors receive royalties for sale of the Archaeal genome
browser.
REFERENCES
1. Karolchik,D., Baertsch,R., Diekhans,M., Furey,T.S., Hinrichs,A.,
Lu,Y.T., Roskin,K.M., Schwartz,M., Sugnet,C.W., Thomas,D.J.
et al. (2003) The UCSC Genome Browser Database. Nucleic
Acids Res., 31, 51–54.
2. Kent,W.J., Sugnet,C.W., Furey,T.S., Roskin,K.M., Pringle,T.H.,
Zahler,A.M. and Haussler,D. (2002) The human genome browser
at UCSC. Genome Res., 12, 996–1006.
3. Kent,W.J. (2002) BLAT—the BLAST-like alignment tool. Genome
Res., 12, 656–664.
4. Karolchik,D., Hinrichs,A.S., Furey,T.S., Roskin,K.M., Sugnet,C.W.,
Haussler,D. and Kent,W.J. (2004) The UCSC Table Browser data
retrieval tool. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D493–D496.
5. Benson,D.A., Karsch-Mizrachi,I., Lipman,D.J., Ostell,J. and
Wheeler,D.L. (2005)GenBank:update.NucleicAcidsRes.,33,D34–D38.
6. Mulder,N.J., Apweiler,R., Attwood,T.K., Bairoch,A., Bateman,A.,
Binns,D.,Bradley,P., Bork,P.,Bucher,P.,Cerutti,L. et al. (2005) InterPro,
progress and status in 2005. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D201–D205.
7. Bateman,A., Coin,L., Durbin,R., Finn,R.D., Hollich,V.,
Griffiths-Jones,S., Khanna,A., Marshall,M., Moxon,S.,
Sonnhammer,E.L.L. et al. (2004) The Pfam protein families
database. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D138–D141.
8. Tatusov,R.L., Koonin,E.V. and Lipman,D.J. (1997) A genomic
perspective on protein families. Science, 278, 631–637.
9. The Gene Ontology Consortium. (2000), Gene Ontology: tool for
the unification of biology. Nat. Genetics, 25, 25–29.
10. Kanehisa,M. andGoto,S. (2000)KEGG: kyoto encyclopedia of genes and
genomes. Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 27–30.
11. Pieper,U., Eswar,N., Braberg,H., Madhusudhan,M.S., Davis,F.,
Stuart,A.C., Mirkovic,N., Rossi,A., Marti-Renom,M.A., Fiser,A.
et al. (2004) MODBASE, a database of annotated comparative protein
structure models, and associated resources. Nucleic Acids Res.,
32, D217–D222.
12. Ermolaeva,M.D., White,O. and Salzberg,S.L. (2001) Prediction of
operons in microbial genomes. Nucleic Acids Res., 29,
1216–1221.
13. Blanchette,M., Kent,W.J., Riemer,C., Elnitski,L., Smit,A.F.,
Roskin,K.M.,Baertsch,R.,Rosenbloom,K.,Clawson,H.,Green,E.D.etal.
(2004) Aligning multiple genomic sequences with the threaded
blockset aligner. Genome Res., 14, 708–715.
14. Siepel,A. and Haussler,D. (2004) Combining phylogenetic and hidden
Markov models in biosequence analysis. J. Comput. Biol., 11, 413–428.
15. Schwartz,S., Kent,W.J., Smit,A., Zhang,Z., Baertsch,R., Hardison,R.,
Haussler,D. and Miller,W. (2003) Human-mouse alignments
with BLASTZ. Genome Res., 13, 103–107.
16. Altschul,S., Madden,T., Schaffer,A., Zhang,J., Zhang,Z., Miller,W. and
Lipman,D. (1997) Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of
protein database search algorithms. Nucleic Acids Res., 25,
3389–3402.
17. Keseler,I.M., Collado-Vides,J., Gama-Castro,S., Ingraham,J., Paley,S.,
Paulsen,I.T., Peralta-Gil,M. and Karp.,P.D. (2005) EcoCyc: A
comprehensive database resource for Escherichia coli. Nucleic
Acids Res., 33, D334–D337.
18. Christie,K.R., Weng,S., Balakrishnan,R., Costanzo,M.C., Dolinski,K.,
Dwight,S.S., Engel,S.R., Feierbach,B., Fisk,D.G., Hirschman,J.E. et al.
(2004) Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD) provides tools to
identify and analyze sequences from Saccharomyces cerevisiae and
related sequences from other organisms. Nucleic Acids Res., 32,
D311–D314.
D410 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 25, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
