Vertical boil propagation from a submerged estuarine sill
C. Chris Chickadel,1 Alexander R. Horner-Devine,2
Stefan A. Talke,2 and Andrew T. Jessup1
Received 13 January 2009; revised 1 April 2009; accepted 17 April 2009; published 20 May 2009.
[1] Surface disruptions by boils during strong tidal flows
over a rocky sill were observed in thermal infrared imagery
collected at the Snohomish River estuary in Washington
State. Locations of boil disruptions and boil diameters at the
surface were quantified and are used to test an idealized
model of vertical boil propagation. The model is developed
as a two-dimensional approximation of a three-dimensional
vortex loop, and boil vorticity is derived from the flow shear
over the sill. Predictions of boil disruption locations were
determined from the modeled vertical velocity, the sill depth,
and the over-sill velocity. Predictions by the vertical velocity
model agree well with measured locations (rms difference
3.0 m) and improve by using measured velocity and shear
(rms difference 1.8 m). In comparison, a boil-surfacing
model derived from laboratory turbulent mixed-layer wakes
agrees with the measurements only when stratification is
insignificant. Citation: Chickadel, C. C., A. R. Horner-Devine,
S. A. Talke, and A. T. Jessup (2009), Vertical boil propagation from
a submerged estuarine sill, Geophys. Res. Lett., 36, L10601,
doi:10.1029/2009GL037278.
1. Introduction
[2] Bedforms, abrupt bathymetry gradients, and obstruc-
tions are common to rivers and estuaries and serve as
generation points for meter-scale coherent structures often
called ‘‘boils’’. Boils are a key mechanism for transport and
redistribution of momentum, temperature, nutrients, and
sediment. Characterization of their kinematics is important
for understanding and modeling of estuarine physical,
chemical, biological, and geomorphologic processes
[Matthes, 1947].
[3] The generation of boils in laboratory experiments is
described as the interaction of span-wise vorticity resulting
from flow separation over bottom topography or hydrody-
namic instability, which is deformed into hairpin-shaped
loops of spanwise vorticity [Mu¨ller and Gyr, 1986]. Loops
with downstream bends will vertically self-advect and erupt
at the surface [Nezu and Nakagawa, 1993; Mu¨ller and
Gyr, 1986]. Detailed field investigations [Venditti and
Bauer, 2005] and models of laboratory flow over dunes
[Best, 2005a] reveal flow separation at dune crests where
Kelvin-Helmoltz instabilities are generated in a mixed-layer
wake. In these experiments, boil-type features appear to be
generated at the downstream point of flow reattachment at
the bed. Best [2005b] suggests that observations of surface
boils in rivers are consistent with the interaction of a hairpin
vortex with the water surface. Large-eddy simulation (LES)
numerical models used to examine the structure of the
turbulent wake from a dune [Yue et al., 2005, 2006] and
direct numerical simulations [Tsai, 1998] showed hairpin-
shaped vortical motions were generated within the shear
layer, consistent with laboratory models. Yue et al. [2005,
2006] and Tsai [1998] extended their models of vorticity to
the free surface and found that the vortices create localized
upwelling regions as they impinge on the water surface.
[4] The lack of detailed in situ measurements of boils
makes it difficult to verify laboratory observations and
numerical models of boil generation and development. How-
ever, descriptive field observations of the surface signature of
boils give some insight into boil kinematics [Coleman, 1969;
Jackson, 1976;Kostaschuk and Church, 1993;Babakaiff and
Hickin, 1996; Best, 2005b]. The boil eruption sequence at the
surface begins as a vigorous incipient upwelling with signif-
icant surface deflection. The upwelling patch spreads to a
diameter of meters and become less energetic, persisting for
tens of seconds. Little vertical vorticity is associated with the
main boil eruption patch, though secondary vortices are often
seen on the outer edges. Thus laboratory, numerical, and
visual observations support a hairpin vortex loop model of
boil kinematics.
[5] The difficulty of quantifying boils in the field moti-
vates our use of remote sensing of surface boil parameters to
test the hairpin vortex loop model. In July 2006 an experi-
ment to characterize coherent turbulent structures in tidally
dominated river flow (the COHerent STructures in Rivers
and Estuaries eXperiment, or COHSTREX) was conducted
in the Snohomish River estuary in Washington State. Cali-
brated thermal (longwave infrared) remotely sensed imagery
and in situ instruments were used to observe flow over a 4 m
high submerged rocky sill. Because the Snohomish River is a
salt wedge estuary [MacDonald and Horner-Devine, 2008],
large vertical and horizontal temperature gradients were
present due to intrusion of cold saltwater beneath the river
water. Infrared remote sensing provided synoptic spatial and
temporal sampling of the flow field and revealed significant
activity of meter-sized boils generated during periods of
strong tidal flow over the sill (Figure 1a). These boils
appeared to be transporting colder underlying seawater to
the surface, making them visible in thermal imagery. The
spatial and temporal patterns of boils observed with infrared
imagery, and the fixed location and geometry of the sub-
merged sill, make this a unique data set to investigate boil
kinematics. Here, we use the infrared imagery from an ebb
tide to determine boil size and the eruption point of boils
downstream of the sill. Vertical boil velocity is inferred from
the flow depth and horizontal advection speed. These data are
GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH LETTERS, VOL. 36, L10601, doi:10.1029/2009GL037278, 2009
Click
Here
for
Full
Article
1Applied Physics Laboratory, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington, USA.
2Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, USA.
Copyright 2009 by the American Geophysical Union.
0094-8276/09/2009GL037278$05.00
L10601 1 of 6
used to test a model of boil upwelling velocity based on the
vertical propagation of a vortex dipole.
2. Vertical Boil Velocity Model
[6] We propose a theoretical boil vertical propagation
model based on the assumption that the boils observed in
COHSTREX were surface eruptions of hairpin vortices.
Without evidence to the contrary, we assume that the boil
vorticity loops originate at the abrupt bathymetry change at
the crest of the submerged rocky sill. Boils generated there
are carried horizontally with the river flow and upwards by
self-advection due to the vortex loop self-interaction.
[7] The vertical velocity of a boil, wb, due to a three-
dimensional vorticity loop is simplified as the self-advection of
an irrotational vortex dipole in the vertical plane [Batchelor,
1967],
wb ¼ Gb
2pd
; ð1Þ
where Gb is the boil circulation and d is the distance
between vortex pair centers. As shown later, the lateral scale
of the boils observed on the surface is similar to the depth of
the shear layer, so we approximate d and the vortex diameter
as the observable surface boil diameter. Circulation for each
vortex in the pair is the product of the vorticity, w, and the
vortex cross-section, dA,
Gb ¼
Z
wdA  wp d
2
 2
: ð2Þ
As is discussed in section 3, the sill extends over 2/3 of the
water column during the observation period. Thus, the
vorticity generated by shear at the sill crest is expected to be
significantly greater than vorticity carried into this region
from the bottom boundary layer upstream of the sill. We
assume, therefore, that w is generated at the sill crest, i.e., w
@u
@z, where u is the streamwise velocity, z is the vertical
coordinate, and vertical velocity is assumed negligible. We
further simplify and express the shear in terms of bulk
parameters, w  U
h
, where U is the surface velocity over the
sill and h is the depth of water over the sill crest. Hence, the
predicted distance downstream from the sill to the eruption
point at the surface, L1, is to first order
L1 ¼ Uh
wb
; ð3Þ
assuming wb is constant and the boil travels downstream at
constant velocity U. Combining equation (1) through
Figure 1. (a) An example rectified thermal image of tidal flow over the submerged sill showing cool (darker) boil
eruptions downstream of the sill crest. Intertidal depth contours in meters (solid lines), subtidal contours (dashed lines), and
instrument locations are shown. Thermal video was sub-sampled from the seven parallel arrays (horizontal lines)
downstream of the shallowest part of the sill, where boils activity was greatest. (b) An example timestack plot of IR
imagery from the array at y = 10 m shows cool boils autonomously identified (white outlines, see section 3).
L10601 CHICKADEL ET AL.: ESTUARINE BOIL PROPAGATION L10601
2 of 6
equation (3) results in a simple expression for the down-
stream boil eruption point,
L1 ¼ 8h
2
d
; ð4Þ
which depends only on boil diameter and the sill depth, as U
has been eliminated due to kinematics defined in terms of
streamwise velocity. Following a similar derivation, but
substituting the measured U into equation (3) and the
measured vertical gradient in streamwise velocity Uz for w in
equation (2), L can also be estimated as
L2 ¼ 2hU
dUz
: ð5Þ
3. Infrared Boil Characterization
and Model Testing
[8] Thermal image data from an ebb tide during
COHSTREX on 14 July 2006 was analyzed for boil charac-
teristics, including spanwise boil diameter and horizontal
distance downstream of the sill. Imagery of surface flow was
collected at a rate of 2 Hz from a calibrated thermal infrared
camera elevated on an extendable hydraulic lift35 m above
the river surface. The lift was floated on a barge positioned in
a shallow bypass away from the main channel flow, thus
allowing for detailed imagery while effectively limiting
influence on the observed flow over the sill. The imagery
was corrected for radial lens distortion and rectified to real-
world coordinates as plan-view images at the measured tide
level [Holland et al., 1997]. Image geometry was solved for
on a frame-by-frame basis to remove the camera sway due to
barge motion. Tidal-flow depth and vertical density stratifi-
cation were characterized from conductivity, temperature and
depth (CTD) measurements from bottom and surface moor-
ings located just upstream of the study site as noted in
Figure 1a. Velocity profiles downstream of the sill were
collected from a bottom-mounted acoustic doppler current
profiler (ADCP) located adjacent to the sill crest. During the
analysis period the depth over the sill decreased from 1.5m to
1 m and the surface streamwise flow was 0.5 m s1.
[9] Boils were identified in an automated procedure
operating on a reduced image data set to simplify analysis.
Each rectified image frame was sub-sampled in seven arrays
parallel to the sill axis (Figure 1a). The arrays are aligned
roughly perpendicular to the dominant ebb flow direction
and positioned over the east section of the sill. This location
was visually determined to be in the path of the most apparent
boil activity and is associated with the shallowest part of the
sill.
[10] Cold boils advecting past each array were identified
against the warmer surrounding surface water by a simple
thresholding technique in the thermal time series (Figure 1b).
First, the spatial and temporal mean from the data from each
array are removed. Next, apparent temperature fluctuations
due to short surface waves, roughness, and image noise are
reduced to less than 1% of their spectral variance by Fourier
domain low-pass filtering of frequencies greater than 0.5 Hz
and wavenumbers greater than 1.5 m1. Cold boils are then
identified as contiguous patches of water at least 0.25C
cooler than the surrounding water. The candidate boils must
also pass the criteria that: 1) they persist at least one second
(two frames) in the image data, 2) be at least 10 cm wide (the
approximate resolution of two pixels), and 3) have a com-
bined space-time area less than 250m s to be counted as boils.
The third criterion ensures removal of any large features
associated with very low-frequency apparent temperature
variations. Boils identified at each array are characterized
by their maximum spanwise (y-direction) diameter and
eruption time.
[11] Boil upwelling rate (boils min1) was tabulated in
consecutive six-minute bins at each array as a representative
spatial-temporal boil distribution (Figure 2a). At t  0 min
boils are first detected at the downstream edge of the array.
As the boil field develops during decreasing flow depth
over the sill the leading edge of the eruption point moves
closer to the sill crest until t  60 min. Boils can still be
faintly seen in the thermal imagery data for t > 60 min, but
they are not as reliably identified by the automated tech-
nique due to the loss of vertical temperature stratification as
the cold underlying salt wedge moves out of the region. We
focus on 0 < t < 60 to test our boil advection model.
[12] The downstream gradient of the boil upwelling rate at
each time step was calculated from the discrete x-direction
(streamwise) difference in the boil upwelling rate and is used
to find L, the location of the leading edge of upwelling. We
define L to be the peak of a Gaussian curve fit to the gradient
(Figure 2b) since we expect the leading edge of the boil
activity to correspond to the maximum in the gradient. A
representative boil diameter (Figure 2c) was calculated as the
mean diameter of initial boil eruptions occurring within the
region of the leading edge (i.e., from L s and L + s, where
s is standard deviation of the fit) to avoid the bias of
expanding persistent boils downstream. As h decreased over
the ebb, the mean boil diameter in the leading edge increased
from about 1 m to 2 m. Substituting these observations into
equation (4), the modeled eruption point L1 closely follows
observations (Figure 3a), with an rms difference between L
and L1 of 3.0 m. The robustness of estimate L1 is tested by
using L2 of equation (5), with U defined by the near-surface
ADCP velocity, and Uz calculated from the average shear in
depth-bins located higher than the sill crest. This reduces the
rms difference to 1.8 m, though an F-test [Bethea et al., 1995]
finds L2 is not significantly different from L1 to a 95%
confidence level.
4. Discussion
[13] A number of assumptions were made to simplify the
kinematic boil model. Use of linearly varying velocity profile
is supported by qualitative observations of the ADCP veloc-
ity profile. Use of a representative advection velocity U
appears to be adequate, since equation (5) did not statis-
tically improve predictions of boil eruption distance over
equation (4). However, both assumptions may be violated by
flow over less obstructing features (e.g., dunes) where the
relationship between the shear layer velocities and near
surface velocity is not linear [Mu¨ller and Gyr, 1986]. In this
case, use of equation (4) may result in an over-prediction of L.
[14] Representing a 3D vortex loop by a 2D model will
necessarily neglect details of the boil development and
propagation. Our model assumes instantaneous generation
L10601 CHICKADEL ET AL.: ESTUARINE BOIL PROPAGATION L10601
3 of 6
of full sized boils at the sill crest instead of a smooth growth
of the vortex loop as it ascends, implying that the model
likely over-predicts vertical boil velocity and under-predict
L. Moreover, the orientation of the hairpin vortex loop may
have angled in the alongstream plane [e.g., Tsai, 1998], so
that the vortex pair model would have an alongstream
velocity component. This would also lead to systematic over-
or under-prediction in L, depending on the tilt. However, a
systematic bias in L is not supported by the results. Using the
average observed surface boil diameter as a proxy for d is also
a crucial assumption. Substituting fixed boil diameters d =
0.8 m or d = 1.7 m, the endpoints of the observed range
(Figure 2c), into equation (4) results in rms differences with
the observations of 6.3 m and 4.0 m, respectively. By
inspection, equation (4) with d = 1.25 m resulted in the
smallest rms difference (2.0 m).
[15] We further validate our vortex-dipole model by
comparing with predictions suggested by laboratory mea-
surements of Mu¨ller and Gyr [1986], who captured dye
imaged profiles of coherent structures including hairpin
vortices that develop in mixing layers, such as the one behind
the sill. Their observation of linear growth in the mixed layer
wake suggests a simple geometric model for the boil eruption
point,
L3 ¼ ha ; ð6Þ
where a is the angle of mixing layer growth and L3 is
the extrapolated intersection of the mixing layer with the
surface. Values of a determined from Mu¨ller and Gyr
[1986] range from 0.13 to 0.21 (slopes of 7.5 to 12).
Predictions based on L3 approximate the observed erup-
tion locations in the latter half of the focus period, when
the flow over the sill is shallowest (Figure 3b), but under-
predict the observed downstream locations earlier in the
ebb when flow is deeper.
[16] The mismatch of predicted and measured boil erup-
tion distance by equation (6) early in the ebb may be due to
two primary factors. First, linear growth of the mixing layer
only extends for a limited distance downstream, roughly
2.5H, where H  4 m is the height of the sill [Deck and
Thorigny, 2007; Cherry et al., 1984]. Downstream of this
point, there is a flattening in the mixing zone due to
Figure 2. (a) Time-space distribution of observed boil rate downstream of the sill. (b) The maximum of the downstream
gradient of the boil activity (shaded) was taken to be the location of the upstream leading edge of boil eruption over time
(solid circles, where vertical bars indicate ±s). (c) Time history of the mean boil diameter measured within the leading edge
of boil upwelling region identified in Figure 2b.
L10601 CHICKADEL ET AL.: ESTUARINE BOIL PROPAGATION L10601
4 of 6
recirculation. Second, under the stably stratified conditions,
evident by the bottom to surface density difference Dr
(Figure 3b), equation (6) is likely to be a lower bound for
the surface intersection distance of the mixing layer. Accu-
rate predictions for the downstream expansion of a stratified
mixing layer are not as well constrained as for the unstrat-
ified case.
[17] The comparisons from the dipole and mixing layer
models suggest the following interpretation. Early in the ebb,
when the flow is strongly stratified, mixing layer models such
as that of Mu¨ller and Gyr [1986] significantly over-predict
the expansion of the mixing layer, predicting that it will
surface well upstream of the observed region of boil activity.
During this period, however, energetic boils are generated
within the mixing layer that surfaces at a downstream
location predicted by the dipole model. Although there is
no explicit representation of density stratification in the
dipole model, it appears to be robust to stratification. In the
development of the dipolemodel the diameter of the observed
surface boil is used to describe the scale of the vortex
generated in the shear layer. It appears, therefore, that the
effect of stratification is accounted for in the model via the
observed boil size; suppression of the scale of vortical
structures in the mixing layer during the stratified portion
of the ebb results in a smaller observed boil size (Figure 2c).
Over the course of the ebb, density stratification decreases
and boil diameter increases, despite the fact that the water
depth over the sill also decreases. During theweakly stratified
period later in the ebb, estimates of boil surfacing distance
from the dipole and mixing layer models converge, and both
predict the location of boil activity reasonably well.
5. Conclusions
[18] Thermal infrared imaging of tidal river flow captured
surface eruptions of meter-sized boils generated at a sub-
merged rocky sill. Parameters of the time-varying boil field,
including mean boil diameter, boil upwelling rate, and
downstream eruption location were quantified from the
thermal imagery. The boils are conceptualized as loops of
spanwise vorticity (hairpin vortices) generated within the
mixing-layer at the sill crest. The resulting boils are hypoth-
Figure 3. (a) Location of boil eruption point observed (L, solid circles and vertical bars, from Figure 2c) and predicted
using a vortex-dipole model with linear shear approximation (L1, squares), measured velocity shear (L2, triangles), and ranges
of mixed-layer predictions fromMu¨ller and Gyr [1986] (L3, solid and dashed gray lines). (b) Time series of sill depth h (bold),
vertical density difference Dr, (thin), cross-sill surface velocity U (dotted) and velocity shear Uz (dashed).
L10601 CHICKADEL ET AL.: ESTUARINE BOIL PROPAGATION L10601
5 of 6
esized to self-propagate to the surface via vortex-pair inter-
action, modeled as a two-dimensional vortex-dipole. The
idealized vortex-dipole model is used to predict the down-
stream surface eruption location, which in turn depends only
on the boil diameter and sill depth. The boil eruption location
was accurately predicted in the thermal imagery (rms differ-
ence 3.0 m) using measured boil diameter and water depth. A
test using measured velocity and shear from a collocated
ADCP only slightly improved the predictions (rms difference
1.8 m) verifying the model to be insensitive to the assumption
of linear velocity shear over the sill. Predictions of the boil
eruption location based on laboratory measurements of the
surface intersection of an internal mixed-layer agree best with
observed eruption point when vertical density stratification is
low (rms difference 3.7 m – 6.5 m). Density stratification is
not explicitly included in the vortex-dipole model, but has no
effect on the accuracy of its prediction of boil eruption
location.
[19] Acknowledgments. We would like to those who helped with data
collection for COHSTREX 2006, especially P. J. Rusello, B. Hayworth,
T. Litchendorf, and F. Karig. This research was funded by the Office of
Naval Research.
References
Babakaiff, C. S., and E. J. Hickin (1996), Coherent flow structures in
Squamish river estuary, British Columbia, Canada, in Coherent Flow
Structures in Open Channels, edited by P. J. Ashworth et al., pp. 321–
342, John Wiley, Chichester, U. K.
Batchelor, G. K. (1967), An Introduction to Fluid Dynamics, Cambridge
Univ. Press, Cambridge, U. K.
Best, J. (2005a), The fluid dynamics of river dunes: A review and some
future research directions, J. Geophys. Res., 110, F04S02, doi:10.1029/
2004JF000218.
Best, J. (2005b), Kinematics, topology and significance of dune-related
macroturbulence: Some observations from the laboratory and field, Spec.
Publ. Int. Assoc. Sedimentol., 35, 41–60.
Bethea, R., B. Duran, and T. Boullion (1995), Statistical Methods for
Engineers and Scientists, Marcel Dekker, New York.
Cherry, N. J., R. Hillier, and M. E. M. P. Latour (1984), Unsteady measure-
ments in a separated and reattaching flow, J. Fluid Mech., 144, 13–46.
Coleman, J. M. (1969), Brahmaputra River: Channel processes and sedi-
mentation, Sediment. Geol., 3, 129–239.
Deck, S., and P. Thorigny (2007), Unsteadiness of an axisymmetric
separating- reattaching flow: Numerical investigation, Phys. Fluids,
19, 065103, doi:10.1063/1.2734996.
Holland, K. T., R. A. Holman, T. C. Lippmann, J. Stanley, and N. Plant
(1997), Practical use of video imagery in nearshore oceanographic field
studies, IEEE J. Oceanic Eng., 22, 81–92.
Jackson, R. G. (1976), Sedimentological and fluid-dynamic implications of
the turbulent bursting phenomenon in geophysical flows, J. Fluid Mech.,
77, 531–560.
Kostaschuk, R. A., and M. A. Church (1993), Macroturbulence generated
by dunes: Fraser River, Canada, Sediment. Geol., 85, 25–37.
MacDonald, D. G., and A. R. Horner-Devine (2008), Temporal and spatial
variability of vertical salt flux in a highly stratified estuary, J. Geophys.
Res., 113, C09022, doi:10.1029/2007JC004620.
Matthes, G. M. (1947), Macroturbulence in natural stream flow, Eos Trans.
AGU, 28, 255–265.
Mu¨ller, A., and A. Gyr (1986), On the vortex formation in the mixing layer
behind dunes, J. Hydraul. Res., 24, 359–375.
Nezu, I., and H. Nakagawa (1993), Turbulence in Open-Channel Flows,
281 pp., Balkema, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Tsai, W.-T. (1998), A numerical study of the evolution and structure of a
turbulent shear layer under a free surface, J. Fluid Mech., 354, 239–276.
Venditti, J. G., and B. O. Bauer (2005), Turbulent flow over a dune: Green
River, Colorado, Earth Surf. Processes Landforms, 30, 289–304.
Yue, W., C.-L. Lin, and V. C. Patel (2005), Coherent structures in open-
channel flows over a fixed dune, J. Fluids Eng., 127, 858–864.
Yue, W., C.-L. Lin, and V. C. Patel (2006), Large-eddy simulation of
turbulent flow over a fixed two-dimensional dune, J. Hydraul. Eng.,
132, 643–651.

C. C. Chickadel and A. T. Jessup, Applied Physics Laboratory,
University of Washington, 1013 NE 40th Street, Box 355640, Seattle,
WA 98105, USA. (chickadel@apl.washington.edu)
A. R. Horner-Devine and S. A. Talke, Civil and Environmental
Engineering, University of Washington, 201 More Hall, Box 352700,
Seattle, WA 98105, USA.
L10601 CHICKADEL ET AL.: ESTUARINE BOIL PROPAGATION L10601
6 of 6
