Characterization of cis- and trans-acting elements
in the imprinted human SNURF-SNRPN locus
Sara Rodriguez-Jato1, Robert D. Nicholls4, Daniel J. Driscoll2,3 and Thomas P. Yang1,2,3,*
1Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 2Department of Pediatrics, 3Center for Mammalian Genetics,
University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA and 4Center for Neurobiology and
Behavior, Department of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
Received April 21, 2005; Revised July 27, 2005; Accepted August 5, 2005
ABSTRACT
The imprinted SNRPN locus is a complex transcrip-
tional unit that encodes the SNURF and SmN polypep-
tides as well as multiple non-coding RNAs. SNRPN
is located within the Prader-Willi and Angelman
syndrome (PWS/AS) region that contains multiple
imprinted genes, which are coordinately regulated
by a bipartite imprinting center (IC). The SNRPN 50
region co-localizes with the PWS-IC and contains
two DNase I hypersensitive sites, DHS1 at the SNRPN
promoter, and DHS2 within intron1, exclusivelyon the
paternally inherited chromosome. We have examined
DHS1 and DHS2 to identify cis- and trans-acting regu-
latory elements within the endogenous SNRPN 50
region. Analysis of DHS1 by in vivo footprinting and
chromatin immunoprecipitation identified allele-
specific interaction with multiple regulatory proteins,
including NRF-1, which regulates genes involved in
mitochondrialandmetabolicfunctions.DHS2actedas
an enhancer of the SNRPN promoter and contained a
highly conserved region that showed allele-specific
interaction with unphosphorylated RNA polymerase
II, YY1, Sp1 and NRF-1, further suggesting a key role
for NRF-1 in regulation of the SNRPN locus. We pro-
pose that one or more of the regulatory elements iden-
tified in this study may also contribute to PWS-IC
function.
INTRODUCTION
SNURF-SNRPN (hereafter termed SNRPN) is a bicistronic
imprinted gene on human chromosome 15 that encodes two
polypeptides, the SmN splicing factor involved in RNA
processing (1), and the SNURF (SNRPN upstream reading
frame) polypeptide of unknown function (2). SNRPN also
encodes a long (460 kb) alternatively spliced RNA tran-
script that contains several families of snoRNAs (3) and
extends downstream to partially overlap the UBE3A gene
in the anti-sense orientation. The SNRPN promoter is asso-
ciated with a CpG island that is hypermethylated on the
maternally inherited allele and hypomethylated on the patern-
ally inherited allele (4). Two alternative upstream promoters
and alternatively spliced non-coding exons expressed at low
levels add to the complexity of the locus (5). The gene is
transcribed exclusively from the paternally inherited chromo-
some and shows highest levels of expression in the brain and
heart (2). Furthermore, SNRPN is located within an imprinted
gene cluster in chromosome 15 q11–q13 that is associated
with the Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) and Angelman
syndrome (AS).
PWS and AS are two clinically distinct neurogenetic dis-
orders linked to a single imprinted domain on chromosome
15 containing at least eight genes distributed across 2 Mb
[reviewed in (6)]; the similarly imprinted syntenic region
in the mouse is located on chromosome 7C (6). PWS arises
from loss of function of genes in this region that are
expressed exclusively from the paternal chromosome, while
AS arises from loss of expression or mutation of the mater-
nally expressed UBE3A gene. Multiple genetic mechanisms
lead to the allele-specific loss of gene expression in AS and
PWS, including deletions of the entire imprinted region,
uniparental disomy (UPD), and microdeletions that encom-
pass the 50 region of the SNRPN gene and/or a region
upstream of SNRPN. High-resolution mapping of these
microdeletions has led to the delineation of a bipartite
imprinting control region or imprinting center (IC). All of
the microdeletions associated with PWS share a 4.3 kb
deleted region termed the PWS smallest region of deletion
overlap (PWS-SRO), which includes the SNRPN promoter
region, first exon, and part of the first intron (7). Similarly,
the microdeletions associated with AS share a 0.8 kb AS-
SRO located 35 kb upstream from exon 1 of SNRPN (8).
Thus, the IC is composed of two distinct functional com-
ponents, the PWS-IC (including but not necessarily limited
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 352 392 6472; Fax: +1 352 392 2953; Email: tpyang@ufl.edu
 The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
4740–4753 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 15
doi:10.1093/nar/gki786
 Published online August 22, 2005
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
to the PWS-SRO) that appears to be required for mainte-
nance of the paternal epigenotype in somatic cells (9,10),
and the AS-IC (including the AS-SRO), which appears to
be required for establishment of the maternal epigenotype
during oogenesis (11). Currently, the mechanisms of PWS-IC
and AS-IC function in establishing and/or maintaining
imprinted gene expression across the domain are not well
understood.
The co-localization of the PWS-SRO with the SNRPN
promoter suggests that transcription factor binding to the
promoter and subsequent transcriptional activation of the
SNRPN locus may be integral to PWS-IC function (12). Sev-
eral studies have identified cis-acting elements in the SNRPN
promoter region that affect promoter function in transient
expression assays and regulate expression or imprinting of
mouse transgenes. However, the corresponding trans-acting
factors have not been identified and no specific transcription
factors have yet been shown to bind to the endogenous SNRPN
locus. SNRPN promoter function was first reported to be con-
tained within an interval between positions 207 and +53 by
using transient expression assays of reporter constructs that
included an exogenous SV40 enhancer (13). Employing the
same strategy (and the SV40 enhancer), the minimal SNRPN
promoter was subsequently shown to be located between
nucleotides 71 and +51, a region that contains a 7 bp element
(SBE) between nucleotides 57 and 51 and an element
around position +17 that act as positive regulators of transcrip-
tion (14). In addition, a repressor sequence was mapped down-
stream of the minimal promoter in the 30 region of exon 1 (14).
The SBE coincides with one of the six sequences that are
phylogenetically conserved between the 50 flanking region
of the human and mouse SNRPN genes (7). The SBE has
also been identified as a functional promoter element in the
mouse Snrpn gene (15). Subsequent analysis of the mouse
Snrpn promoter in a transgene construct containing the
human AS-SRO and the minimal mouse Snrpn promoter
expressing a reporter gene identified several additional
DNA sequences that appear to be involved in imprinted
expression of the transgene (16). These included two de novo
methylation signals (DNS), an allele discrimination signal
(ADS) and two separate signals responsible for the mainte-
nance of the paternal imprint (MPI1 and MPI2). The mecha-
nisms and the associated trans-acting factors that mediate the
function of these cis-acting elements remain unknown.
Despite the fact that transgenic mice containing constructs
with the human AS-SRO and the human (17) or the mouse
(18) SNRPN promoters assume the correct imprinted state of
the transgene, deletion of the endogenous mouse Snrpn pro-
moter has no apparent effect on PWS-IC function (19), sug-
gesting that sequences outside of the promoter may be
sufficient to maintain the function of the PWS-IC in the
mouse (16).
In the current study, we have used multiple strategies to
identify cis-acting elements within the endogenous human
SNRPN 50 region and to determine the corresponding trans-
acting regulatory factors that interact in an allele-specific man-
ner with the promoter. We also have identified and analyzed
cis-acting and allele-specific trans-acting elements associated
with an enhancer located within the first intron of SNRPN just
downstream of the PWS-SRO. The potential role of these
regulatory elements in PWS-IC function is discussed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
EBV-transformed lymphoblasts derived from PWS and AS
patients were grown in RPMI medium supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin–
streptomycin. Human SK-N-SH neuroblastoma cells were
obtained from the American Type Culture Collection and
grown in E-MEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1%
penicillin–streptomycin. Cells were grown at 37C in 5% CO2.
DNase I treatment of permeabilized cells for mapping of
hypersensitive sites and Southern blotting
Cell permeabilization and DNase I treatment was performed as
described previously (20). Genomic DNA from DNase I
treated cells was digested with BamHI and size-fractionated
in a 0.8% agarose gel, transferred and hybridized as described
previously (20). The 2.26 kb hybridization probe was isolated
from plasmid pPH-B8 (21) by digestion with BamHI and
EcoRI and labeled by random priming.
Vector design
Constructs for transient expression assays were generated
from the pGL3-Basic vector (Promega). Details on vector
construction are provided in Supplemental Material.
Transient transfection and luciferase reporter assays
SK-N-SH cells were transfected with firefly luciferase expres-
sion constructs using SuperFect (Qiagen) according to the
manufacturer’s specifications (see Supplementary Material).
Cells were co-transfected with pRL-TK (Promega) which con-
tains the Renilla luciferase gene. Cells were lysed 24 h post-
transfection and firefly and Renilla luciferase activities were
measured (Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System, Pro-
mega) in a Sirius Luminometer V2.2. (Berthold Detection
Systems). Firefly luciferase activity was normalized to Renilla
luciferase activity. For each construct, the average and stan-
dard error of the mean [standard deviation/square root (n),
where n is the number of independent experiments] were
calculated.
Site-directed mutagenesis
Sequence-specific mutations in reporter constructs were per-
formed using the QuikChange XL Site-Directed Mutagene-
sis Kit (Stratagene) following the manufacturer’s instructions.
Mutated sequences were designed to include a new restriction
site, and mutant clones were identified by restriction digestion
and verified by sequencing. Supplementary Table S1 shows
the wild-type and mutant sequences. Mutant sequences from
constructs (c–g) in Figure 2G were excised with XbaI and
cloned into the XbaI site of construct (c) in Figure 4B to
generate the constructs (d–h) in Figure 4B.
Dimethyl sulfate (DMS) treatment of cells and
naked DNA for in vivo footprinting
DMS treatment of 2 · 107 lymphoblast cells and DMS
treatment of purified DNA were performed as described by
Hornstra and Yang (22).
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 15 4741
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Ligation-mediated PCR (LMPCR)
LMPCR was performed essentially as described previously
(20). The sequence of LMPCR primers and cycling conditions
for the PCR are provided in Supplementary Table S2.
LMPCR DNA sequencing ladders
Ladders were generated from genomic DNA as described
previously (22) and were used to determine the exact position
of each guanine residue in autoradiograms of LMPCR-
amplified DMS-treated samples.
Electrophoresis, transfer and hybridization of
sequencing gels
LMPCR-amplified products were analyzed by size-
fractionation in a DNA sequencing gel, followed by electro-
transfer, hybridization and autoradiography essentially as
described previously (22). Radiolabeled probes were gener-
ated as described in Supplementary Material.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
ChIP was performed essentially as described by Leach et al.
(23) on human lymphoblasts. A total of 107 cells were used in
each immunoprecipitation (IP) reaction with antibodies
against YY1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology sc-1703; 5 mg),
NRF-1 (kindly provided by Richard C. Scarpulla; 4 ml),
Sp1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology sc-59; 10–12.5 mg), CTCF
(Upstate 06-917; 5–20 mg), unphosphorylated RNA poly-
merase II (Covance MMS-126R, 40–60 mg), H3 dimethyl-
K4 (Abcam ab7766-50; 2 mg), acetylated H4 (Upstate 06-
866; 1 ml) and H3 acetyl-K9 (Upstate 06-942; 5 mg). To
account for non-specific binding, each experiment included
a mock IP reaction to which no antibody was added; these
reactions routinely yielded no PCR products. Immunoprecipi-
tated DNA was analyzed by PCR using PCR conditions and
primer sequences shown in Supplementary Table S3. The
linearity of the amplification was verified by diluting the
input DNA (i.e. the fraction of the unbound chromatin in
the mock IP) by 1:2, 1:4 and 1:8. Genomic regions outside
of the PWS-AS domain that are known to be associated with
specific factors were analyzed as a positive control for the IP
reaction with antibodies against those factors (Supplementary
Figure S3A). PCR products were size-fractionated in 5% TBE
(89 mM Tris, pH 8.3, 89 mM boric acid and 2 mM EDTA)
polyacrylamide gels and gel bands were visualized and quan-
tified by SyBr-green staining in a fluorescence scanner (Storm
860, Molecular Dynamics). The fraction bound was calculated
as percentage of input DNA; average and standard error of the
mean across experiments are shown.
RESULTS
The location of DNase I hypersensitive (DH) sites in chro-
matin within and surrounding the SNRPN promoter were
mapped by Southern blot analysis (Figure 1) and confirmed
previous reports by Schweizer et al. (24) and Ohta et al. (7).
Our studies identified two strong hypersensitive sites specific
to the paternal chromosome: DHS1—which is located in the
promoter region of the SNPRN gene and DHS2—which is
located in the first intron roughly 1.5 kb downstream of the
transcription initiation site. DHS2 is located just outside and
downstream of the PWS-SRO (7). Because DH sites are com-
monly associated with cis-acting regulatory elements in
eukaryotic chromatin, and because these DH sites were
mapped within or immediately adjacent to the PWS-SRO,
we used various strategies to identify and characterize both
cis- and trans-acting regulatory elements within DHS1 and
DHS2 of the endogenous SNRPN locus.
In vivo footprint analysis of DHS1
To identify cis-acting regulatory elements associated with
DHS1 within intact cells, we performed DMS in vivo footprint
analysis of the SNRPN promoter region using LMPCR (22).
As shown in Figure 2A, the region analyzed included a series
of potential transcription factor binding sites identified by the
TRANSFAC database, as well as six phylogenetically con-
served sequences within the SNRPN promoter region (7). The
paternal and maternal SNRPN alleles were assayed indepen-
dently using cultured lymphoblasts from AS and PWS
patients, respectively, carrying either UPD or deletion (Del)
of the AS/PWS region. Figure 2A shows the relative position
and region analyzed with each LMPCR primer set on the upper
and lower strands of the endogenous SNRPN promoter region
from position 490 to position +150.
Each region and strand of interest was analyzed in multiple
DNA sequencing gels from at least two separate DMS treat-
ments of cells, and footprints were further confirmed in two
Figure 1. DNase I hypersensitivity of the SNRPN 50 region. Lymphoblasts
derived from PWS and AS patients were treated with increasing concentrations
of DNase I, and DNase I hypersensitive sites were detected by Southern blot
analysis. The diagram at the bottom shows the position of restriction sites,
hypersensitive sub-bands, hybridization probe, and DNase I hypersensitive
sites DHS1 and DHS2. The solid bar indicates the parental restriction fragment
and the dashed lines indicate the subfragments generated by DNase hypersen-
sitivity. The hatched box indicates the position of the probe. B, BamHI;
E, EcoRI.
4742 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 15
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
different cell lines (UPD and Del) for each parental allele.
Although some of the footprints were subtle, all were highly
reproducible (confirmed in 80–100% of the autoradiograms
containing each site). Furthermore, transient expression assays
(see below) confirmed four of the six footprinted sites as bona
fide cis-acting regulatory elements. Weak footprints were
likely to be due to the fact that these in vivo footprinting assays
were performed in lymphoblast cells, which express relatively
Figure 2. Analysis of cis-acting regulatory elements in the SNRPN 50 region. (A) Diagram of the SNRPN 50 region analyzed by in vivo footprinting. Indicated are the
first exon (black box), the transcription initiation site (bent arrow), potential transcription factor binding sites (gray boxes) and sequences conserved between the
human and the mouse loci (horizontal brackets) Horizontal arrows specify the position of LMPCR primer sets and the extent of the sequence analyzed with each set.
Primer sets above and below the line assayed the upper and lower strands, respectively. (B–F) DMS in vivo footprint analysis of the SNRPN 50region. Lymphoblasts
derived from PWS and AS patients (UPD or Del, described in the text) were treated with DMS for the indicated periods of time. Time 0 s indicates purified genomic
DNA treated in vitro with DMS. Representative sequencing gels are shown and the position of in vivo footprints on the paternal allele (P1–P6) and on the maternal
allele (M6) are indicated with filled and open circles that represent protection or enhanced reactivity to DMS, respectively. The numbers flanking the autoradiograms
indicate positions relative to the transcription initiation site. Primer set TY528 identified footprint P1 (B) and P6/M6 (F) on the lower strand; primer set TY641
detected footprints P2–P5 on the upper strand (C–E). (G) Functional analysis of in vivo footprints by transient expression assays. Luciferase reporter constructs
including the SNRPN promoter carrying point mutations at in vivo footprints P1, P2, P4, P5 and M6/P6, were assayed by transient expression in SK-N-SH cells. Mut
M6/P6 carries point mutations for both the P6 and M6 footprints. Relative luciferase activities are shown compared with a control construct including the wild-type
SNRPN promoter (b), which was arbitrarily assigned the value 1. Error bars represent standard error of the mean and n indicates the number of times each construct
was assayed.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 15 4743
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
low levels of SNRPN mRNA (21) and, therefore, unlikely to
have a highly active SNRPN promoter maximally occupied by
transcription factors. In vivo footprints were detected as bands
of decreased or increased intensity relative to neighboring
bands in each in vivo-treated sample compared with the pattern
of relative band intensities in control naked DNA samples
purified from the same cells. Figure 2B–F shows representa-
tive DNA sequencing gels for the in vivo footprint analysis;
results are summarized in Figure 3.
Figure 2B shows in vivo footprint P1 at positions +56 and
+58, which was identified with primer set TY528 on the lower
strand of the paternal allele. Examination of relative band
intensities revealed enhanced DMS reactivity at position
+58, and protection from DMS modification at position+56
in the in vivo-treated samples containing the paternal allele
(lanes 6–8) compared with the control naked genomic DNA
samples (lanes 5). This pattern was not observed on the mater-
nal allele (compare the naked DNA sample in lane 1 and the in
vivo-treated samples in lanes 2–4). In vivo footprint P1 is
located at the SNRPN translation initiation site within a
sequence that shows weak similarity to an AP1 binding
site. Furthermore, the P1 in vivo footprint lies within a pre-
viously reported negative cis-acting regulatory element
mapped by transient expression assays within exon 1 of
SNRPN (14).
Footprints P2–P5 were detected with LMPCR primer set
TY641 on the upper strand exclusively on the paternal allele
(Figures 2C–E). Figure 2C shows enhanced DMS reactivity
at positions 4 (footprint P2) and 13 (footprint P3) in the
in vivo-treated samples from the paternal allele (lanes 6–8)
compared with the naked DNA control (lane 5) and that was
not observed on the maternal allele (compare lane 1 with lanes
2–4). Footprint P2 is associated with a potential E2F binding
site, and P3 lies within one of the three potential CTCF binding
sites located in the SNRPN 50 region (see Figure 3).
In vivo footprint P4, shown in Figure 2D, is detected at
position 34 as a band of enhanced DMS reactivity exclu-
sively on the paternal allele (compare lanes 5–6 with lane 4,
and compare lanes 2 and 3 with lane 1). Searches of the
transcription factor database did not identify a known tran-
scription factor binding site associated with P4. However,
footprint P4 is flanked on both sides by potential Sp1 binding
sites (Figure 3).
Figure 2E shows footprint P5 where two bands at positions
56 and 58 were protected from DMS modification exclu-
sively on the paternal allele (compare lanes 5 and 6 with lanes
1 and 4, as well as lanes 2 and 3); this was confirmed in similar
analysis using primer set TY540 (data not shown). Footprint
P5 is associated with a potential binding site for NRF-1
(nuclear respiratory factor-1). P5 is also the only footprint
that coincides with one of the six phylogenetically conserved
sequences in the promoter region (Figure 3) and is included
within the SBE (14).
Figure 2F shows footprints M6 and P6 that were identified
with primer set TY528 on the lower strand at positions 84
and 85 on the maternal and the paternal alleles, respectively.
The band at position 85 showed enhanced DMS reactivity
relative to bands above and below it in samples containing
only the in vivo-treated paternal allele (lanes 6–8) but neither
in control naked DNA samples (lanes 1 and 5) nor in in vivo-
treated samples carrying only the maternal allele (lanes 2-4).
This indicates that footprint P6 is specific to the paternal allele.
In contrast, the band at position 84, termed footprint M6,
showed enhanced DMS reactivity only in the in vivo-treated
samples carrying the maternal allele (lanes 2–4). Because the
finding of an in vivo footprint on the transcriptionally
repressed maternal allele was somewhat unexpected, footprint
M6 was confirmed by DNase I in vivo footprinting (data not
shown). The sequence shared by footprinted sites M6 and P6
lies within a potential NRF-1 binding site that partially over-
laps with a potential CTCF binding site.
Because only altered DMS reactivity at guanine residues
was used as the criterion for bona fide in vivo footprints,
altered DMS reactivity at other nucleotides, such the adenine
at position 83 in Figure 2F, was not deemed to reflect a
footprint. In addition, nucleotides of apparent altered DMS
reactivity that were not reproducible in at least 80% of the
corresponding autoradiograms were also not considered to be
Figure 3. Summary of in vivo footprints in the SNRPN 50 region. The nucleotide sequence corresponds to the human SNRPN 50 region. Indicated are the positions of
DMS in vivo footprints (circles and triangle), as well as the position of potential transcription factor binding sites (lines) and phylogenetically conserved sequences
(boxes). Circles and triangles denote paternal and maternal footprints, respectively. Open and filled symbols denote enhanced and decreased DMS reactivity,
respectively. Positions are indicated relative to the transcription initiation site (bent arrow).
4744 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 15
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
footprinted (e.g. the apparent footprint at position 79 in
Figure 2F, which was not reproducible in other autoradio-
grams). Analysis of the SNRPN 50 flanking region with the
remaining four LMPCR primer sets (Figure 2A) identified no
additional in vivo footprints.
Functional analysis of in vivo footprinted elements
in DHS1
To examine the potential function of the in vivo footprinted
sites, transient expression assays were performed in which
each footprinted sequence was mutated in a reporter construct
containing a 756 bp fragment of the SNRPN promoter region
(from position 676 to +80) driving the firefly luciferase gene.
Figure 2G shows the relative luciferase activity of the mutant
constructs compared with a wild-type control construct in
human neuroblastoma SK-N-SH cells (cells which showed
readily detectable SNRPN mRNA levels in northern blots;
data not shown).
Mutations of the paternal-specific sites P2 and P5 [(d) and
(f) in Figure 2G] significantly reduced the expression of the
reporter gene, suggesting the association of P2 and P5 with cis-
acting elements involved in SNRPN promoter function. Con-
struct (g) in Figure 2G showed a reduction in reporter gene
activity to 1/3 of wild-type levels upon mutation of the M6/
P6 site. This reduction was most likely due to effects on
interactions associated with the P6 footprint on the transcrip-
tionally active paternal allele and not with the M6 footprint
specific to the silent maternal allele.
Mutation of the sequences associated with footprinted sites
P1 and P4 [(c) and (e) in Figure 2G] did not alter significantly
the expression levels of the reporter. However, a potential role
for footprint P1 is described below. Footprint P3 was not
examined for effects on promoter function.
Identification of an activator function associated
with DHS2
To investigate the possibility that sequences within DHS2
might have an effect on SNRPN promoter function, a 2.2 kb
(EcoRI–SmaI) genomic DNA fragment (termed 2.2-DHS2)
that included DHS2 and flanking sequences was inserted
into luciferase reporter constructs that included 756 bp of
the SNRPN promoter (from positions 676 to +80) and ana-
lyzed by transient expression assays in SK-N-SH cells
(Figure 4A). Constructs in which 2.2-DSH2 was cloned down-
stream from the luciferase gene in the forward [Figure 4A, (b)]
or reverse orientations (c), and upstream of the promoter in the
forward (d) or reverse (e) orientations showed an 8-, 2-, 5- and
8-fold increase in reporter activity, respectively, compared
with a control construct lacking 2.2-DHS2 [(Figure 4A, (a)].
This strongly suggested that 2.2-DSH2 can act as an activator
of the SNRPN promoter independent of orientation and
position.
The activation function of 2.2-DHS2 was then examined in
the context of the SNRPN mutations of in vivo footprinted sites
shown in Figure 2G. We used a luciferase reporter construct
that contained 756 bp of the SNRPN promoter as before, plus
2.2-DHS2 [Figure 4A, construct (e)]. As shown by construct
(d) of Figure 4B, mutation of site P1 (which had no effect on
reporter activity in the absence of the enhancer; see Figure 2G)
resulted in a 50% increase in reporter activity in the presence
of 2.2-DHS2 [compared with control construct (c)]. This sug-
gested that regulatory elements associated with in vivo foot-
print P1 may be involved in negatively regulating the
activation of the SNRPN promoter by 2.2-DHS2. Mutation
of sites P2 and M6/P6 [Figure 4B, (e) and (h)] in the presence
of 2.2-DHS2 had effects similar to that seen in the absence of
Figure 4. Identification of an enhancer associated with 2.2-DHS2. (A) Reporter
constructs with 2.2-DHS2 (black arrow) at different positions and orientations
with respect to the SNRPN promoter were assayed by transient expression
assays as in Figure 2G. (B) Functional analysis of in vivo footprints in the
presence of 2.2-DHS2. Construct (b) in Figure 4A was mutated at each of the
in vivo footprints P1, P2, P4, P5 and M6/P6 and analyzed by transient expression
assays as in Figure 2G. Relative luciferase activities are shown in comparison
with reporter constructs containing the normal SNRPN promoter and/or 2.2-
DHS2. (C) Preferential activation of the SNRPN promoter by 2.2-DHS2. The
effect of 2.2-DHS2 on the promoter of various genes in the PWS-AS region
was examined by transient expression assays as in Figure 2G. Gray bars and
black bars represent the relative luciferase activity for reporter constructs
with the indicated promoters and lacking 2.2-DHS2 (gray bars) or carrying
2.2-DHS2 (black bars). The construct containing the SNRPN promoter and
no 2.2-DHS2 was arbitrarily assigned the value 1. The fold increase induced
by 2.2-DHS2 with each promoter is indicated on the right.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 15 4745
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
2.2-DHS2 (compare Figure 2G with Figure 4B). However,
mutation of the footprint P5 resulted in a smaller reduction
of promoter activity in the presence of 2.2-DHS2 [see
Figure 4B, (c) versus (g)] compared with the absence of
2.2-DHS2 [see Figure 2G, (b) versus (f)]. Mutation of site
P4 [construct (f)] had no effect on reporter activity, either
in the presence [Figure 4B, (f)] or in the absence
[Figure 2G, (e)] of 2.2-DHS2, which suggests that the factor(s)
binding this site may play a role in functions other than direct
promoter activity.
Effect of the intronic activator on other promoters in
the AS/PWS region
The human SNRPN locus includes several upstream promoters
that are functional only from the paternal allele at low levels
(5). Therefore, as shown in Figure 4C, we investigated the
effect of 2.2-DHS2 on two upstream SNRPN promoters, U1A
and U1B. Each of these promoter regions was cloned into a
luciferase reporter construct that included 2.2-DHS2 posi-
tioned downstream of the reporter in the forward orientation
[as in Figure 4A, construct (b)] and analyzed using transient
expression assays in SK-N-SH cells as before. Both the U1A
and U1B promoters were activated significantly by 2.2-DHS2
relative to a construct lacking 2.2-DHS2, though to a slightly
lesser extent than the major SNRPN promoter itself (5.1- and
5.7-fold versus 7.7-fold, respectively). We also examined the
effect of the 2.2-DHS2 sequence on promoter activity of other
imprinted genes within the AS/PWS region, including the
paternal MKRN3 gene located 1.4 Mb upstream of
SNRPN, and the maternal UBE3A gene located 0.5 Mb
downstream of SNRPN. As shown in Figure 4C, both the
UBE3A and MKRN3 promoters by themselves showed higher
levels of basal promoter activity than the SNRPN promoter and
were both activated by the 2.2-DHS2 fragment (2.0- and 1.9-
fold, respectively), though to a lesser extent than any of the
SNRPN-related promoters (5.1- to 7.7-fold). Analysis of the
SV40 promoter (that was activated up to 14-fold by 2.2-DHS2;
data not shown) further corroborated data that 2.2-DHS2 can
function as an activator of heterologous promoters. Further-
more, 2.2-DHS2 did not repress the maternally expressed
UBE3A promoter in these transient expression assays,
which suggests that 2.2-DHS2 is unlikely to play a direct
role in repressing maternal genes on the paternally inherited
chromosome.
Although 2.2-DHS2 does not activate the SNRPN promoter
with equal efficiency in all orientations and positions (see
Figure 4A), and distances (data not shown), or activate all
heterologous promoters to the same degree (Figure 4C, and
data not shown for the SV40 promoter), its activity in transient
expression assays nonetheless meets the classical criteria for
enhancer function.
Identification of regulatory elements in 2.2-DHS2
To identify candidate cis-acting DNA sequences within 2.2-
DHS2 that could mediate its activator function, we searched
for evolutionarily conserved sequences in the human 2.2-
DHS2 and the entire first intron of the mouse and rat Snrpn
genes. As shown in Figure 5A, comparison of these sequences
identified a single 80 bp region that showed significant con-
servation among these species. Sequence analysis of the
conserved sequence with the TRANSFAC database revealed
highly conserved potential binding sites for the transcription
factors Sp1, YY1 and NRF-1. Sp1 is a well-characterized
ubiquitous transcriptional activator (25). NRF-1 regulates a
variety of genes involved in mitochondrial function and
energy metabolism (26), and a binding site for NRF-1 was
also in vivo footprinted in the SNRPN promoter region (see
Figure 3). YY1 is a ubiquitous transcription factor associated
with transcriptional initiation, activation and repression
[reviewed in (27)]. In addition, there are other highly con-
served nucleotide sequences (from nucleotides +1302 to
+1310, and from nucleotides +1333 to +1343 of the human
sequence) that are not associated with known transcription
factor binding sites.
Sequence analysis of the region associated with DHS2 also
indicates that it contains a CpG island [(according to the cri-
teria established by Takai and Jones (28)], which includes the
80 bp phylogenetically conserved region. This CpG island in
DHS2 is distinct and separate from the CpG island at the
SNRPN promoter. The CpG island in the promoter region
has been well characterized in normal individuals and
shown to be hypermethylated on the maternal allele and
hypomethylated on the paternal allele (6). Analysis of the
CpG island associated with DHS2 (and the 80 bp conserved
sequence) also showed a similar pattern of allele-specific
methylation. Digestion of genomic DNA from PWS and AS
patients with methyl-sensitive restriction enzymes (HhaI to
analyze CpGs at +1325 and +1375, and EaeI to analyze
CpGs at +1354 and +1360) followed by PCR across the restric-
tion site indicated that the paternal allele is hypomethylated
and the maternal allele is hypermethylated (see Supplementary
Figure S1).
To determine whether cis-acting elements within the 80 bp
conserved sequence contributed to the activation function of
the 2.2-DHS2 fragment, subfragments of 2.2-DHS2 contain-
ing the conserved sequence were analyzed for the activation of
the SNRPN promoter by transient expression assays as before
(Figure 5B). A 94 bp BstNI–HaeIII subfragment (Bs-Ha in
Figure 5B) containing the entire 80 bp conserved sequence
activated the SNRPN promoter 4-fold over the promoter alone.
Thus, the 80 bp conserved sequence was termed the conserved
activator sequence (CAS). However, the BstNI–HaeIII sub-
fragment exhibited only about 2/3 and 1/2 of the activation
activity of a fragment that included sequences flanking the
CAS (the N-S subfragment in Figure 5B) and the entire
2.2-DHS2 fragment, respectively. This suggested that the
CAS requires additional sequences in 2.2-DHS2 to generate
the full promoter activation activity of 2.2-DHS2. However, it
is unclear what these sequences might be, since we have not
identified additional regions of significant sequence conserva-
tion in 2.2-DHS2 outside of the CAS and no other DNase
hypersensitive sites are detected in 2.2-DHS2 on the paternal
allele (24).
We also demonstrated a role for the putative YY1 binding
site in the activation function associated with 2.2-DHS2. Tran-
sient expression assays yielded a 4.5-fold reduction in the
activation of the SNRPN promoter by 2.2-DHS2, which was
mutated at the putative YY1 binding site compared with wild-
type 2.2-DHS2 (see Supplementary Material and Supplemen-
tary Figure S2A). Furthermore, electrophoretic mobility shift
assay analyses and supershift assays with YY1 antibodies
4746 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 15
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
indicated that the potential YY1 binding site in the CAS can
interact with YY1 in vitro (see Supplementary Figure S2B and C).
ChIP analysis of transcription factor binding in vivo
ChIP analysis was used to examine the binding of Sp1, YY1,
NRF-1 and CTCF to DHS1 (i.e. the SNRPN promoter region)
and to the CAS within DHS2 in vivo using lymphoblasts
derived from AS and PWS patients. As shown in Figure 6A,
five regions in the SNRPN locus were assayed by ChIP ana-
lysis: (1) the U1A upstream promoter; (2) 1.3 kb upstream of
the SNRPN promoter; (3) the SNRPN promoter; (4) the
intronic CAS and (5) 1.3 kb downstream of the CAS. The
analysis showed strong association of YY1 with the intronic
CAS in vivo on the transcriptionally active paternal allele (i.e.
in AS cells) and not on the maternal allele (i.e. in PWS cells,
Figure 6B). In contrast, similar ChIP analysis of the non-
imprinted glucocorticoid receptor gene, known to be bound
by YY1 at an upstream regulatory region (29), showed asso-
ciation of YY1 in this region on both alleles (i.e. in both the
AS- and PWS-derived cell lines; see Supplementary
Figure S3A). Analysis of NRF-1 by ChIP assays demonstrated
the association of NRF-1 with both the SNRPN promoter
region as well as the intronic CAS (Figure 6B) specifically
on the paternal allele. The association of NRF-1 with
the SNRPN promoter is most likely to be at the potential
NRF-1 binding sites associated with paternal footprints P5
and/or P6 (Figure 3). As a positive control for NRF-1 asso-
ciation, ChIP analysis of the 30 non-coding region of the non-
imprinted myotonic dystrophy protein kinase gene (DMPK)
that contains potential NRF-1 binding sites (as indicated by
analysis of the TRANSFAC database; S. Rodriguez-Jato,
unpublished data) detected NRF-1 binding in this region in
both the AS- and PWS-derived cell lines (see Supplementary
Figure S3A). The U1A upstream promoter of the SNRPN locus
also contains a potential NRF-1 binding site (based on analysis
of the TRANSFAC database); however, no association of
NRF-1 with U1A was detected on either allele (Figure 6B).
This is not unexpected since the upstream SNRPN transcripts
are not expressed in blood (5) and the U1 promoters have been
reported not to be nuclease hypersensitive in lymphoblast cells
(24). Analysis of Sp1 association using ChIP assays showed
interaction of Sp1 with both the promoter region as well as the
CAS only on the paternal allele (Figure 6B).
Despite the fact that two in vivo footprints in the SNRPN
promoter region were associated with potential CTCF binding
sites (Figure 3), we have been unable to detect in vivo inter-
actions involving CTCF on either the paternal or the maternal
allele of the SNRPN promoter region by ChIP assays (Sup-
plementary Figure S3B). As a positive control in these assays,
we analyzed the previously reported association of CTCF
with the 30 non-coding region of the DMPK gene (30) and
Figure 5. Identification and functional analysis of the CAS. (A) Sequence alignment between the human 2.2-DHS2 and the homologous regions of the mouse and rat
SNRPN first intron. Numbers indicate positions with respect to the SNRPN transcription initiation site. Shaded boxes indicate nucleotides conserved between all three
species. Potential transcription factor binding sites and restriction sites are also indicated. (B) Transient expression assays of activation function associated with the
CAS (as in Figure 2G). A restriction map of 2.2-DHS2 is shown on the top left, and each subfragment of 2.2-DHS2 assayed in reporter constructs is depicted below by
gray horizontal bars. Numbers refer to positions with respect to SNRPN transcription initiation site. Enzymes: B-BglII, Bs-BstNI, E-EcoRI, Ha-HaeIII, N-NotI,
S-StyI and Sm-SmaI.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 15 4747
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
confirmed the interaction of CTCF at this locus in both
AS- and PWS-derived cell lines (Supplementary Figure
S3A). Thus, it is likely that CTCF does not interact with either
the maternal or paternal alleles of the SNRPN promoter in
lymphoblast cells.
Association of RNA polymerase II with the intronic CAS
YY1 has been shown to interact with and recruit RNA poly-
merase II to core promoters and activate transcription (27).
Therefore, we examined the possibility that the intronic CAS,
with the possible involvement of YY1, could act as a site for
recruitment of pol II to the SNRPN locus. Antibodies specific
to the unphosphorylated form of RNA pol II were used in ChIP
assays of the same SNRPN regions as before (Figure 6A);
unphosphorylated RNA pol II is the non-processive form typi-
cally associated with transcription initiation at promoters. As
shown in Figure 6B, ChIP analysis revealed strong association
of unphosphorylated pol II with both the CAS and the pro-
moter specifically on the paternal allele. Furthermore, the level
Figure 6. ChIP analysis of the SNRPN locus. (A) A diagram of the region surrounding the SNRPN promoter. The location of primer sets used in the ChIP analysis is
indicated by horizontal arrows. U1A is an upstream SNRPN exon. (B and C) Results of ChIP analysis. Chromatin from lymphoblasts derived from AS and PWS
patients was cross-linked with formaldehyde and immunoprecipitated with antibodies against: (B) YY1, NRF-1, Sp1 and unphosphorylated RNA pol II, and (C)
H4Ac, H3-K9Ac and H3-K4diMe histones. Immunoprecipitated DNA was amplified and analyzed by PCR using primers sets 1–5 and quantified by fluorescence
scanning. The input DNA control sample was used to normalize the quantification of each PCR products. Average relative intensity values are shown. Error bars
represent standard error of the mean.
4748 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 15
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
of unphosphorylated pol II on the paternal allele was higher at
the CAS compared with the SNRPN promoter region. No
significant amplification of the regions 1.3 kb upstream and
downstream of the promoter and the CAS, respectively, was
observed. Analysis of the U1A upstream promoter, which is
inactive in blood, also did not detect association of pol II.
These findings are consistent with a model of transcriptional
activation in which the CAS may act to recruit unphosphory-
lated RNA pol II to the SNRPN locus (see Discussion).
Analysis of histone modifications in DHS1 and DHS2
Allele-specific patterns of histone modification associated
with the SNRPN promoter region have been reported previ-
ously (31,32) and consist of increased levels of H3 and H4
acetylation (H3 and H4 Ac) and H3 lysine 4 methylation (H3-
K4 Me) on the paternal allele, and H3 lysine 9 methylation
(H3-K9 Me) on the maternal allele. However, the elevated
levels of H3-K4 diMe and H3-K9 diMe in the promoter region
decrease drastically 200 and 600 bp, respectively, down-
stream from the transcription initiation site (32). To determine
whether the downstream CAS has a distinct pattern of allele-
specific histone modifications, we used ChIP analysis on
AS- and PWS-derived lymphoblasts as before. We analyzed
levels of H4 Ac, H3-K9 Ac and H3-K4 diMe, all of which are
generally associated with transcriptional activation and are
commonly elevated at the 50 and regulatory regions of active
genes (33,34). As shown in Figure 6C, the levels of all these
modifications in histones associated with the transcriptionally
active paternal allele are elevated at the CAS (and SNRPN
promoter), and lower at the inactive U1A promoter and
regions flanking the promoter and CAS. Significant levels
of these histone modifications were not observed at any region
assayed on the maternal allele. Of particular interest are the
high levels of H3-K4 diMe at the CAS, given that the levels of
H3-K4 diMe are known to drastically decrease 200 bp down-
stream from the SNRPN transcription initiation site (32). This
suggests that the SNRPN promoter region and CAS are asso-
ciated with two separate and distinct regions of chromatin,
both characterized by histone modification patterns typical
of regulatory regions in active chromatin (rather than co-
localization of these two regions within one continuous stretch
of chromatin having the same histone modification patterns).
These results are consistent with the notion that the CAS is a
regulatory region within the endogenous SNRPN locus.
DISCUSSION
We have analyzed the 50 region of the SNRPN gene for cis- and
trans-acting regulatory elements that may mediate SNRPN
transcription. These studies focused on the two DNase I hyper-
sensitive sites located within the SNRPN promoter (DHS1) and
first intron (DHS2). Both hypersensitive sites co-localize with
CpG islands that are differentially methylated on the maternal
and paternal alleles, a characteristic of regulatory regions asso-
ciated with imprinted genes (35).
In vivo footprint analysis of the SNRPN
promoter region
DHS1 is located within the PWS-SRO and co-localizes
with the SNRPN promoter. In vivo footprint analysis of the
endogenous promoter was used to identify cis-acting elements
associated with six footprints on the paternal allele (P1–P6)
and one on the maternal allele (M6). In vivo footprint P1 is
located adjacent to the translation initiation site in exon 1 and
is included within a previously described repressor sequence
(14). However, our analysis showed that the repressor function
appears to be limited to negatively regulating the activation of
the SNRPN promoter by the enhancer associated with DHS2
(Figure 4B). Footprint P2, a potential E2F binding site, appears
to be a cis-acting element essential for SNRPN promoter func-
tion in the presence or in the absence of the enhancer
(Figures 2G and 4B). E2F consists of a family of transcription
factors that participate in transcription activation and repres-
sion (36). The sequence associated with footprint P3 bears a
resemblance to a potential CTCF binding site (37). CTCF has
been implicated in the regulation of the imprinted H19/IGF2
locus where it is associated with an intergenic insulator (38).
However, we have been unable to demonstrate by ChIP assays
that CTCF is bound in the SNRPN promoter region on either
the paternal or maternal alleles. Therefore, in vivo footprint P3
is likely to be due to binding of a factor other than CTCF in
lymphoblasts. It is also possible that CTCF is bound to this site
in cell types other than lymphoblasts, possibly in the germ line.
By transient expression assays, footprint P4 does not appear to
play a direct role in SNRPN promoter function (Figures 2G and
4C) and does not seem to correspond to any known transcrip-
tion factor binding site. However, it is located between two
potential binding sites for Sp1, which our ChIP analysis
showed to be associated with the SNRPN promoter region
(Figure 6B). This suggests that footprint P4 may be the result
of Sp1 interaction with one or both of the flanking Sp1 binding
sites. Footprint P5 is associated with a potential NRF-1 bind-
ing site, which is phylogenetically conserved between the
human and mouse SNRPN promoters. The interaction of
NRF-1 with the paternal promoter region in vivo was demon-
strated by ChIP (Figure 6B). In addition, footprint P5 overlaps
with the previously reported SBE cis-acting element in the
SNRPN promoter (14). Our analysis also found that P5 is
essential for promoter function (Figure 2G). Footprints P6
on the paternal allele and M6 on the maternal allele show
two distinctly different in vivo footprint patterns that localize
to adjacent guanine nucleotides (Figure 2F). These data sug-
gest that P6 and M6 represent interaction of different trans-
acting factors at this sequence that perform different functions
on the maternal and paternal alleles; on the maternal allele, the
factor responsible for M6 may participate in the silencing of
the SNRPN gene, while on the paternal allele, the factor rep-
resenting P6 may contribute to SNRPN promoter function and
gene activation as suggested by mutation analysis of the M6/
P6 sequence (Figure 2G). The sequence associated with foot-
prints P6 and M6 corresponds to overlapping potential NRF-1
and CTCF binding sites (Figure 3). ChIP assays in lym-
phoblasts confirmed the interaction of NRF-1 with the paternal
allele of the SNRPN 50 region (Figure 6B), but failed to detect
association of CTCF with either the paternal or the maternal
allele (Supplementary Figure S3B). This would suggest that
footprint P6 on the paternal allele may be generated by inter-
action with NRF-1, and that it is unlikely that CTCF interacts
with neither P6 nor M6 in these cells Therefore, it is currently
unclear what factor(s) is generating the M6 footprint on the
maternal allele in these lymphoblast cells.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 15 4749
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Our in vivo footprint analysis of the SNRPN promoter
included all six sequences that are phylogenetically conserved
between the human and the mouse homologous regions (7).
However, only one of these sequences was in vivo footprinted
in lymphoblasts (footprint P5), which suggests that the other
five phylogenetically conserved sequences might not be func-
tional cis-acting elements in lymphoblasts and may be
restricted to function in other somatic cell types, the germ
line, and/or in early embryo development. In addition, Kantor
et al. (16) have identified a series of sequences within the
mouse Snrpn promoter (not including the SBE) that are
involved in the correct imprinting of a transgene in mice
that includes the mouse Snrpn promoter and the human AS-
SRO. However, these mouse promoter sequences do not over-
lap with any of the six phylogenetically conserved sequences
and are not present in the human SNRPN promoter. Therefore,
it is not possible at this time to draw a comparison between the
sequences identified by Kantor et al. (16) and the footprints
identified in our study.
The region associated with DHS1 is located within the
PWS-SRO and has been proposed to be involved in PWS-
IC function (7,24) as well as in SNRPN promoter function.
Thus, one or more of the cis-acting regulatory sequences asso-
ciated with DHS1 identified here by in vivo footprinting may
be essential not only for SNRPN expression as shown by our
transient expression assays, but may also be functional
elements of the PWS-IC.
The enhancer associated with DHS2
Transient expression assays demonstrated that intronic
sequences associated with DHS2 could function as an
enhancer of the SNRPN promoter (Figure 4A) and included a
highly conserved region we have termed the CAS. The CAS
contains evolutionarily conserved binding sites for three
known transcription factors, NRF-1, YY1 and Sp1
(Figure 5A), as well as two other highly conserved sequences
that may serve as binding sites for transcription factors that
have not yet been identified. One of these latter two sequences
in the CAS (from nucleotides +1302 to +1310) is highly homo-
logous to the MPI2 sequence in the mouse Snrpn promoter,
which has been shown to be involved in maintenance of pater-
nal imprinting of a construct in transgenic mice that contains
the human AS-SRO and the mouse Snrpn promoter, though the
corresponding DNA-binding factor for MPI2 element in the
mouse promoter has not been identified (16).
In addition to activating the SNRPN promoter, our data have
shown that the intronic enhancer can also function to activate
transcription of heterologous promoters in transient expression
assays, including the MKRN3 promoter (Figure 4C). Thus, it is
conceivable that the enhancer could also contribute to PWS-IC
function by activating the promoters of other genes in the AS/
PWS domain that are expressed only from the paternal chro-
mosome (e.g. MKNR3, NDN and MAGEL2). This would be
consistent with the model of PWS-IC function proposed by
Brannan and Bartolomei (39) in which the PWS-IC acts as a
positive regulator of genes expressed only from the paternal
chromosome.
ChIP analysis showed that NRF-1, YY1 and Sp1 are all
preferentially associated with the CAS region on the paternal
allele in vivo (Figure 6B). Gel-shift analysis of the potential
YY1 binding site demonstrated the ability of YY1 to bind to
this site in vitro (Supplementary Figure S2C), and transient
expression assays showed that this YY1 binding site is essen-
tial for the activation function of this intronic region (Supple-
mentary Figure S2A). YY1 is a ubiquitous factor that has been
shown to act as a transcriptional initiator, activator and repres-
sor (27), suggesting the possibility that YY1 could be involved
in mediating both activation and silencing of the SNRPN locus,
depending upon the parent-of-origin of the allele. A role for
YY1 in the regulation of imprinted genes has been postulated
for the imprinted PEG3 locus where YY1 appears to act as an
insulator-binding protein (40). YY1 is also reported to asso-
ciate with the nuclear matrix (41), suggesting a possible role
for the CAS in tethering this region of the paternally inherited
SNRPN locus to the matrix.
Similar to previous reports for the promoter region of
SNRPN (31,32), the intronic CAS on the paternal chromosome
(but not on the maternal chromosome) is associated with
histone modification patterns characteristic of transcription-
ally active chromatin (33) (Figure 6C). This is consistent
with a role for the CAS in regulating SNRPN transcription
in vivo. In addition, both YY1 and NRF-1 are known to inter-
act with histone modifying enzymes (27,42), suggesting that
these factors may have a role in establishing and/or maintain-
ing differential patterns of histone modification on the paternal
and/or maternal chromosomes.
The role of NRF-1 in the regulation of the SNRPN locus
DNA sequence analysis and ChIP assays indicate that NRF-1
interacts with both the promoter region and the CAS on the
paternal allele (Figure 6B). The upstream SNRPN promoters
U1A and U1B also contain potential NRF-1 binding sites;
however, no interaction of NRF-1 was detected with either
allele of the U1A promoter (Figure 6B), which is not active in
blood cells (5). In addition, we have identified by sequence
analysis a conserved potential NRF-1 binding site in the NDN
promoter region, which coincides with a sequence that is
in vivo footprinted on the paternal NDN allele only (43).
The fact that NRF-1 may be regulating at least some of the
genes in the PWS/AS region is interesting because of the
involvement of NRF-1 in the regulation of genes related to
mitochondrial biogenesis and function, metabolism (including
growth factor receptors and factors involved in glucose home-
ostasis), DNA replication and transcriptional regulation (26).
This suggests that genes in the AS/PWS region and genes that
function in metabolism and in cellular energetics may be co-
regulated through the common transcriptional regulator NRF-
1. This would further suggest a potential link between energy
metabolism and aspects of the PWS phenotype (e.g. obesity
and growth factor deficiency). However, the resting metabolic
rate of PWS patients does not seem to differ from that of
normal obese individuals (44).
Potential roles of the CAS
Using antibodies against unphosphorylated pol II in ChIP
assays, we found that the non-elongating form of pol II was
significantly enriched at the CAS (Figure 6B), an intronic
region that would normally be expected to be associated
only with elongating phosphorylated pol II. This suggested
that the CAS may be involved in recruiting and accumulating
4750 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 15
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
the initiating form of pol II at the SNRPN locus. This recruit-
ment of pol II to the CAS could be mediated by YY1, which is
known to interact with and recruit pol II to promoters (27), and
enhanced by Sp1 and NRF-1. Furthermore, recruitment of pol
II to the CAS may serve as a mechanism for facilitating activa-
tion and transcription of the SNRPN gene by transfer of pol II
from the CAS to the promoter and/or by increasing the local
concentration of pol II in the vicinity of the SNRPN promoter.
These mechanisms of promoter activation by distal regulatory
elements have been proposed for a variety of other loci. For
example, the locus control region (LCR) of the major histo-
compatibility complex (MHC) class II locus has been pro-
posed to recruit pol II and transfer it to the promoter via
either looping or tracking mechanisms (45). Alternatively,
the LCR of the b-globin locus (46) has been postulated to
recruit RNA pol II (and other trans-acting factors) by forma-
tion of a holocomplex or active chromatin hub (ACH) (47).
The formation of an ACH by the PWS-IC to coordinately
activate transcription of genes expressed from the paternal
chromosome would be consistent with the model for PWS-
IC function proposed by Brannan and Bartolomei (39). Thus,
we speculate that the PWS-IC may function via formation of
an ACH. Regulatory elements within the SNRPN 50 region,
including those associated with both DHS1 and DHS2 (and the
CAS) may participate in the formation of a holocomplex (i.e. a
chromatin hub) that interacts with and recruits regulatory
regions from each of the paternally expressed genes (e.g.
MAGEL2, NDN and MKRN3) to form an ACH specifically
on the paternally inherited chromosome. This ACH would
coordinately facilitate and activate transcription of the
genes that are expressed exclusively on the paternal chromo-
some, in part by creating a highly localized region within the
nucleus that is enriched in trans-acting positive regulators of
transcription, such as histone acetyltransferases, general tran-
scription factors and RNA polymerase II. Participation of the
CAS in formation of the ACH would be consistent with our
finding of unphosphorylated pol II at the CAS. As a variation
of this model, it is also possible that the PWS-IC acts by
facilitating recruitment of genes expressed from the paternal
chromosome into transcription factories described by Osborne
et al. (48). Both models would be consistent with the long-
range interactions reported between differentially methylated
regulatory regions that regulate imprinting in the Igf2/H19
domain (49).
Participation of the CAS in formation of an ACH would also
suggest a role for the CAS in PWS-IC function. The location of
the CAS relative to targeted deletions of the mouse Snrpn gene
that serve as mouse models for murine AS/PWS imprinting
defects provide evidence consistent with such a role. A tar-
geted 35 kb deletion extending 19 kb upstream and 16 kb
downstream of the mouse Snrpn promoter region that included
both the mouse CAS and Snrpn promoter region resulted in
100% neonatal lethality in mice when paternally inherited
(50). This was accompanied by a loss PWS-IC function,
including loss of paternal-specific gene expression and
DNA methylation patterns of other imprinted genes in the
region. These results suggested that the murine PWS-IC is
contained within the 35 kb deletion. A second targeted dele-
tion in this region, in which 0.9 kb of the Snrpn promoter
region and exon 1 were deleted, showed no disruption of
imprinted gene expression or DNA methylation patterns,
suggesting that the Snrpn promoter region does not, by itself,
function as the PWS-IC in the mouse (19). However, a 4.8 kb
deletion that included the previously deleted 0.9 kb promoter
region as well as sequences 1.9 kb upstream and 2 kb
downstream yielded mice with a partial imprinting defect,
and 40–50% perinatal lethality when paternally inherited
(19). This would suggest that sequences 1.9 kb upstream
and/or 2 kb downstream of the previous 0.9 kb promoter
deletion contain cis-acting elements that contribute to PWS-
IC function in the mouse. The mouse CAS sequence is located
1.8 kb downstream of the Snrpn transcription initiation site
and is, therefore, contained within the 2 kb region downstream
of the promoter, suggesting that loss of the CAS could have
contributed to the partial imprinting defect observed for the
4.8 kb Snrpn deletion. This would further suggest that the CAS
may be a functional component of the PWS-IC in the mouse,
and because of the high degree of sequence conservation of the
CAS between the humans and rodents, the CAS may also act
as a functional component of the human PWS-IC.
Because mice carrying the 4.8 kb deletion on the paternal
chromosome do not exhibit the full mutant phenotype shown
by mice carrying the paternally inherited 35 kb Snrpn deletion,
it is conceivable that other regions within the 35 kb deletion
(but outside of the 4.8 kb deletion) may also contribute to
PWS-IC function in the mouse (16). In addition, Kantor
et al. have proposed that components of the PWS-IC may
be redundant, such that deletion of one component, e.g. the
0.9 kb Snrpn promoter deletion, may be compensated for by
other components of the mouse PWS-IC (16). This functional
redundancy in a multicomponent PWS-IC may explain why no
human microdeletions that remove the CAS and not the
SNRPN promoter have been identified to date.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Material is available at NAR Online.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the US Public Health Service
Grant RO1-HD36436 and RO1-HD36417 from the National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development. The authors
thank Christopher Glenn for assistance with DNase I hyper-
sensitivity assays, Teresa Kunkel for assistance with the gel
mobility shift assays, Richard Scarpulla for anti-NRF-1 anti-
bodies, Edward Seto for purified YY1 protein and oligonucleo-
tides with a YY1 binding site and Jorg Bungert for valuable
discussions. Funding to pay the Open Access publication
charges for this article was provided by National Institutes
of Health Grant RO1-GM44286.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Schmauss,C., Brines,M.L. and Lerner,M.R. (1992) The gene encoding the
small nuclear ribonucleoprotein-associated protein N is expressed at
high levels in neurons. J. Biol. Chem., 267, 8521–8529.
2. Gray,T.A., Saitoh,S. and Nicholls,R.D. (1999) An imprinted, mammalian
bicistronic transcript encodes two independent proteins. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA, 96, 5616–5621.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 15 4751
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
3. Runte,M., Huttenhofer,A., Gross,S., Kiefmann,M., Horsthemke,B. and
Buiting,K. (2001) The IC-SNURF-SNRPN transcript serves as a host for
multiple small nucleolar RNA species and as an antisense RNA for
UBE3A. Hum. Mol. Genet., 10, 2687–2700.
4. Sutcliffe,J.S., Nakao,M., Christian,S., Orstavik,K.H., Tommerup,N.,
Ledbetter,D.H. and Beaudet,A.L. (1994) Deletions of a differentially
methylated CpG island at the SNRPN gene define a putative imprinting
control region. Nature Genet., 8, 52–58.
5. Dittrich,B., Buiting,K., Korn,B., Rickard,S., Buxton,J., Saitoh,S.,
Nicholls,R.D., Poustka,A., Winterpacht,A., Zabel,B. et al. (1996) Imprint
switching on human chromosome 15 may involve alternative transcripts
of the SNRPN gene. Nature Genet., 14, 163–170.
6. Nicholls,R.D. and Knepper,J.L. (2001) Genome organization, function,
and imprinting in Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes. Annu. Rev.
Genomics. Hum. Genet., 2, 153–175.
7. Ohta,T., Gray,T.A., Rogan,P.K., Buiting,K., Gabriel,J.M., Saitoh,S.,
Muralidhar,B., Bilienska,B., Krajewska-Walasek,M., Driscoll,D.J. et al.
(1999) Imprinting-mutation mechanisms in Prader-Willi syndrome.
Am. J. Hum. Genet., 64, 397–413.
8. Buiting,K., Lich,C., Cottrell,S., Barnicoat,A. and Horsthemke,B. (1999)
A 5-kb imprinting center deletion in a family with Angelman syndrome
reduces the shortest region of deletion overlap to 880 bp. Hum. Genet.,
105, 665–666.
9. Bielinska,B., Blaydes,S.M., Buiting,K., Yang,T., Krajewska-
Walasek,M., Horsthemke,B. and Brannan,C.I. (2000) De novo deletions
of SNRPN exon 1 in early humanand mouseembryos result in a paternal to
maternal imprint switch. Nature Genet., 25, 74–78.
10. El-Maarri,O., Buiting,K., Peery,E.G., Kroisel,P.M., Balaban,B.,
Wagner,K., Urman,B., Heyd,J., Lich,C., Brannan,C.I. et al. (2001)
Maternal methylation imprints on human chromosome 15 are established
during or after fertilization. Nature Genet., 27, 341–344.
11. Perk,J., Makedonski,K., Lande,L., Cedar,H., Razin,A. and Shemer,R.
(2002) The imprinting mechanism of the Prader-Willi/Angelman regional
control center. EMBO J., 21, 5807–5814.
12. Nicholls,R.D., Saitoh,S. and Horsthemke,B. (1998) Imprinting in Prader-
Willi and Angelman syndromes. Trends Genet., 14, 194–200.
13. Huq,A.H., Sutcliffe,J.S., Nakao,M., Shen,Y., Gibbs,R.A. and
Beaudet,A.L. (1997) Sequencing and functional analysis of the
SNRPN promoter: in vitro methylation abolishes promoter activity.
Genome Res., 7, 642–648.
14. Green Finberg,Y., Kantor,B., Hershko,A.Y. and Razin,A. (2003)
Characterization of the human Snrpn minimal promoter and cis elements
within it. Gene, 304, 201–206.
15. Hershko,A.Y., Finberg,Y., Kantor,B., Shemer,R. and Razin,A. (2001)
The mouse Snrpn minimal promoter and its human orthologue:
activity and imprinting. Genes Cells, 6, 967–975.
16. Kantor,B., Makedonski,K., Green-Finberg,Y., Shemer,R. and Razin,A.
(2004) Control elements within the PWS/AS imprinting box and their
function in the imprinting process. Hum. Mol. Genet., 13, 751–762.
17. Kantor,B., Kaufman,Y., Makedonski,K., Razin,A. and Shemer,R. (2004)
Establishing the epigenetic status of the Prader-Willi/Angelman
imprinting center in the gametes and embryo. Hum. Mol. Genet.,
13, 2767–2779.
18. Shemer,R., Hershko,A.Y., Perk,J., Mostoslavsky,R., Tsuberi,B.,
Cedar,H., Buiting,K. and Razin,A. (2000) The imprinting box of the
Prader-Willi/Angelman syndrome domain. Nature Genet., 26,
440–443.
19. Bressler,J., Tsai,T.F., Wu,M.Y., Tsai,S.F., Ramirez,M.A., Armstrong,D.
and Beaudet,A.L. (2001) The SNRPN promoter is not required for
genomic imprinting of the Prader-Willi/Angelman domain in mice.
Nature Genet., 28, 232–240.
20. Chen,C. and Yang,T.P. (2001) Nucleosomes are translationally
positioned on the active allele and rotationally positioned on the inactive
allele of the HPRT promoter. Mol. Cell. Biol., 21, 7682–7695.
21. Glenn,C.C., Saitoh,S., Jong,M.T., Filbrandt,M.M., Surti,U., Driscoll,D.J.
and Nicholls,R.D. (1996) Gene structure, DNA methylation, and
imprinted expression of the human SNRPN gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet., 58,
335–346.
22. Hornstra,I.K. and Yang,T.P. (1993) In vivo footprinting and genomic
sequencing by ligation-mediated PCR. Anal. Biochem., 213, 179–193.
23. Leach,K.M., Nightingale,K., Igarashi,K., Levings,P.P., Engel,J.D.,
Becker,P.B. and Bungert,J. (2001) Reconstitution of human beta-globin
locus control region hypersensitive sites in the absence of chromatin
assembly. Mol. Cell. Biol., 21, 2629–2640.
24. Schweizer,J., Zynger,D. and Francke,U. (1999) In vivo nuclease
hypersensitivity studies reveal multiple sites of parental origin-dependent
differential chromatin conformation in the 150 kb SNRPN transcription
unit. Hum. Mol. Genet., 8, 555–566.
25. Bouwman,P. and Philipsen,S. (2002) Regulation of the activity of Sp1-
related transcription factors. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol., 195, 27–38.
26. Cam,H., Balciunaite,E., Blais,A., Spektor,A., Scarpulla,R.C., Young,R.,
Kluger,Y. and Dynlacht,B.D. (2004) A common set of gene regulatory
networks links metabolism and growth inhibition. Mol. Cell, 16, 399–411.
27. Thomas,M.J. and Seto,E. (1999) Unlocking the mechanisms of
transcription factor YY1: are chromatin modifying enzymes the key?
Gene, 236, 197–208.
28. Takai,D. and Jones,P.A. (2002) Comprehensive analysis of CpG islands
in human chromosomes 21 and 22. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 99,
3740–3745.
29. Breslin,M.B. and Vedeckis,W.V. (1998) The human glucocorticoid
receptor promoter upstream sequences contain binding sites for the
ubiquitous transcription factor, Yin Yang 1. J. Steroid. Biochem.
Mol. Biol., 67, 369–381.
30. Filippova,G.N., Thienes,C.P., Penn,B.H., Cho,D.H., Hu,Y.J.,
Moore,J.M., Klesert,T.R., Lobanenkov,V.V. and Tapscott,S.J. (2001)
CTCF-binding sites flank CTG/CAG repeats and form a methylation-
sensitive insulator at the DM1 locus. Nature Genet., 28, 335–343.
31. Saitoh,S. and Wada,T. (2000) Parent-of-origin specific histone
acetylation and reactivation of a key imprinted gene locus in Prader-Willi
syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet., 66, 1958–1962.
32. Xin,Z., Allis,C.D. and Wagstaff,J. (2001) Parent-specific complementary
patterns of histone H3 lysine 9 and H3 lysine 4 methylation at the
Prader-Willi syndrome imprinting center. Am. J. Hum. Genet., 69,
1389–1394.
33. Liang,G., Lin,J.C., Wei,V., Yoo,C., Cheng,J.C., Nguyen,C.T.,
Weisenberger,D.J., Egger,G., Takai,D., Gonzales,F.A. et al. (2004)
Distinct localization of histone H3 acetylation and H3-K4 methylation to
the transcription start sites in the human genome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA, 101, 7357–7362.
34. Valverde-Garduno,V., Guyot,B., Anguita,E., Hamlett,I., Porcher,C. and
Vyas,P. (2004) Differences in the chromatin structure and cis-element
organization of the human and mouse GATA1 loci: implications for
cis-element identification. Blood, 104, 3106–3116.
35. Mann,J.R., Szabo,P.E., Reed,M.R. and Singer-Sam,J. (2000) Methylated
DNA sequences in genomic imprinting. Crit. Rev. Eukaryot. Gene Expr.,
10, 241–257.
36. DeGregori,J. (2002) The genetics of the E2F family of transcription
factors: shared functions and unique roles. Biochim. Biophys. Acta,
1602, 131–150.
37. Chao,W., Huynh,K.D., Spencer,R.J., Davidow,L.S. and Lee,J.T. (2002)
CTCF, a candidate trans-acting factor for X-inactivation choice.
Science, 295, 345–347.
38. Lewis,A. and Murrell,A. (2004) Genomic imprinting: CTCF protects the
boundaries. Curr. Biol., 14, R284–R286.
39. Brannan,C.I. and Bartolomei,M.S. (1999) Mechanisms of genomic
imprinting. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev., 9, 164–170.
40. Kim,J., Kollhoff,A., Bergmann,A. and Stubbs,L. (2003) Methylation-
sensitive binding of transcription factor YY1 to an insulator sequence
within the paternally expressed imprinted gene, Peg3. Hum. Mol. Genet.,
12, 233–245.
41. Bushmeyer,S.M. and Atchison,M.L. (1998) Identification of YY1
sequences necessary for association with the nuclear matrix and for
transcriptional repression functions. J. Cell. Biochem., 68, 484–499.
42. Izumi,H., Ohta,R., Nagatani,G., Ise,T., Nakayama,Y., Nomoto,M. and
Kohno,K. (2003) p300/CBP-associated factor (P/CAF) interacts with
nuclear respiratory factor-1 to regulate the UDP-N-acetyl-alpha-D-
galactosamine: polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase-3 gene.
Biochem. J., 373, 713–722.
43. Hanel,M.L., Lau,J.C., Paradis,I., Drouin,R. and Wevrick,R. (2005)
Chromatin modification of the human imprinted NDN (necdin)
gene detected by in vivo footprinting. J. Cell. Biochem.,
94, 1046–1057.
44. Goldstone,A.P., Brynes,A.E., Thomas,E.L., Bell,J.D., Frost,G.,
Holland,A., Ghatei,M.A. and Bloom,S.R. (2002) Resting metabolic rate,
plasma leptin concentrations, leptin receptor expression, and adipose
tissue measured by whole-body magnetic resonance imaging
in women with Prader-Willi syndrome. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.,
75, 468–475.
4752 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 15
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
45. Masternak,K., Peyraud,N., Krawczyk,M., Barras,E. and
Reith,W. (2003) Chromatin remodeling and extragenic transcription
at the MHC class II locus control region. Nature Immunol.,
4, 132–137.
46. Johnson,K.D., Christensen,H.M., Zhao,B. and Bresnick,E.H. (2001)
Distinct mechanisms control RNA polymerase II recruitment to
a tissue-specific locus control region and a downstream promoter.
Mol. Cell, 8, 465–471.
47. de Laat,W. and Grosveld,F. (2003) Spatial organization of gene
expression: the active chromatin hub. Chromosome Res.,
11, 447–459.
48. Osborne,C.S., Chakalova,L., Brown,K.E., Carter,D., Horton,A.,
Debrand,E., Goyenechea,B., Mitchell,J.A., Lopes,S., Reik,W. et al.
(2004) Active genes dynamically colocalize to shared sites of ongoing
transcription. Nature Genet., 36, 1065–1071.
49. Murrell,A., Heeson,S. and Reik,W. (2004) Interaction between
differentially methylated regions partitions the imprinted genes Igf2 and
H19 into parent-specific chromatin loops. Nature Genet., 36, 889–893.
50. Yang,T., Adamson,T.E., Resnick,J.L., Leff,S., Wevrick,R., Francke,U.,
Jenkins,N.A., Copeland,N.G. and Brannan,C.I. (1998) A mouse model for
Prader-Willi syndrome imprinting-centre mutations. Nature Genet.,
19, 25–31.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 15 4753
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 2, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
