Underthrusting-accretion cycle: Work budget as revealed
by the boundary element method
Mario Del Castello1 and Michele L. Cooke1
Received 16 February 2007; revised 3 August 2007; accepted 20 September 2007; published 29 December 2007.
[1] Sandbox models of accretionary wedges have demonstrated that fault systems grow
episodically via cycles of alternating wedge thickening, which is accommodated by slip
along faults within the wedge (underthrusting), and wedge lengthening, which is
accommodated by growth of new faults at the wedge toe (accretion). The transition
between these two modes of deformation is controlled by the interplay of work against
gravity, frictional heating, the work of deformation around faults, and the work of
fault propagation and seismic/acoustic energy. Using numerical mechanical models based
on the boundary element method, we have simulated the deformation observed in sandbox
experiments, providing a mechanical analysis of the underthrusting/accretion
transition. Our results show that the total work done by the contracting wedge increases
during the underthrusting stage up to a critical value when the propagation of a new frontal
thrust significantly reduces the work required for further deformation. The numerical
models also predict the location of the maximum shear along the basal de´collement during
underthrusting as well as the energetically most viable position and vergence for the
nucleation of a new thrust. These locations do not coincide, and the match of the
energetically most favorable position with the experimental results suggests that the new
thrust ramps develop first ahead and then link down and backward to the propagating
basal de´collement. The shear localization producing a new thrust ramp will occur
where the energy spent by the deforming wedge is minimized due to an optimal
combination of gravitational, frictional, internal, and propagation work terms.
Citation: Del Castello, M., and M. L. Cooke (2007), Underthrusting-accretion cycle: Work budget as revealed by the boundary
element method, J. Geophys. Res., 112, B12404, doi:10.1029/2007JB004997.
1. Introduction
1.1. Critical Taper Theory
[2] Since the proposition of the critical taper theory
[Dahlen et al., 1984; Dahlen, 1990], fold and thrust belts
have been successfully analyzed with the assumption that
they deform as a self-similar wedge of noncohesive brittle
material such as in front of an advancing bulldozer. The
theory states that the wedge deformation is ultimately
controlled by the ratio between internal coefficient of
friction (m) and the basal coefficient of friction (mb) and
that the wedge must be on the verge of Coulomb failure
everywhere and at every time. Only in this case can the
taper angle be calculated as a function of m and mb [Dahlen,
1990]. The requirements set in the analytical treatment
produce a constant taper angle during wedge growth, i.e.,
the wedge preserves a fixed length to height ratio through-
out deformation. However, this reflects observations only to
a first degree.
[3] The critical taper theory has been largely applied to
the evolution of fold and thrust belts since its proposition
and systematically tested against both natural analogues
[Lallemand et al., 1994; Ford, 2004; Bangs et al., 2004;
Vannucchi et al., 2003; Saffer and Bekins, 2006; Wang and
Hu, 2006] and experimental techniques [Bombolakis, 1994;
Lohrmann et al., 2003; Adam et al., 2005]. The wide
application of the theory of critical taper owes to its
intuitively simple approach to interpret wedge mechanics
in terms of m/mb ratio, despite the complexity of the
analytical treatment. By simply reducing or increasing the
aforementioned ratio, the equations derived for this theory
successfully predict the complete sequence of faulting
processes occurring at contractional margins (accretion,
underthrusting, underplating and basal erosion). Neverthe-
less, the current form of the critical taper theory provides an
end-member scenario that neglects the importance of elastic
processes and strain hardening/softening that might affect
the temporal distribution of the state of stress and ultimately
the wedge geometry [Wang and Hu, 2006]. For instance, the
theory correctly envisages transition between accretion and
underthrusting, but does not address why a wedge should
activate a deeper de´collement level nor where shear stresses
would localize in order to produce a new fore-thrust ramp.
Furthermore, the predicted constant taper is seldom ob-
served in natural case studies. Rather than growing self-
similarly, new material is generally seen to be incorporated
JOURNAL OF GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH, VOL. 112, B12404, doi:10.1029/2007JB004997, 2007
Click
Here
for
Full
Article
1Geosciences Department, University of Massachusetts, Amherst,
Massachusetts, USA.
Copyright 2007 by the American Geophysical Union.
0148-0227/07/2007JB004997$09.00
B12404 1 of 14
into the wedge episodically via processes that occur at
distinct times.
[4] Elastic effects related to subduction megathrust faults
locking are well known to influence the large-scale geom-
etry of the forearc. Zones of interseismic locking may act as
boundaries between subsiding basins and accreting regions
[Wells et al., 2003] and control variations in trench-parallel
forearc topography [Song and Simons, 2003], such as
steepening of the forearc slope [Bangs et al., 2004]. Also
rotations of large-scale sectors of orogens have been attrib-
uted to plate locking [McCaffrey et al., 2000]. However,
how the role of local elastic processes that operate on single
thrust fault might influence the wedge mechanics has not
yet been investigated in detail.
1.2. Overview of Sandbox Experiments of Wedge
Growth
[5] Sandbox models are a common technique to study
wedge kinematics. Analysis of analogue experiments sug-
gest that the wedge development is characterized by dis-
continuous phases of alternating wedge thickening,
accommodated by slip along thrust faults within the wedge,
and wedge lengthening, accommodated by nucleation of
new thrust faults in front of the wedge [e.g., Mulugeta and
Koyi, 1992; Storti and McClay, 1995; Gutscher et al., 1996;
McClay and Whitehouse, 2004; Konstantinovskaia and
Malavieille, 2005]. These two processes are referred to as
underthrusting and accretion. After an early phase of
accretion (Figure 1a), an underthrusting stage begins, when
a coherent sheet of undeformed material slides underneath
the wedge via activation of a roof thrust. The roof thrust
allows for the wedge to vertically thicken, increasing the
taper angle (Figure 1b). By contrast, the accretionary stage
predicts nucleation of new thrust ramps in front of the toe of
the wedge by concentrating the slip along the basal de´colle-
ment. New fore thrusts accrete at the wedge front and the
wedge taper decreases accordingly (Figure 1c). Recent
analyses showed the cyclic nature of this transition
[Gutscher et al., 1998; Del Castello et al., 2004; Adam et
al., 2005; Naylor et al., 2005]. As a result of these cyclic
processes, the wedge may display a variety of slope angles
during growth and does not obey the self-similar growth
requirement of critical taper theory. What controls the
duration in time and the persistence of the accretion and
underthrusting stages? Observation of wedge growth in
sand-box models suggests that the predominance of one
mode over the other can be controlled by such factors as
syntectonic erosion/sedimentation or temporarily unbal-
anced topography [Storti and McClay, 1995; Del Castello
et al., 2004], high basal friction [Gutscher et al., 1996;
Kukowski et al., 2002; Konstantinovskaia and Malavieille,
2005], wedge thickening and basal friction [Burbidge and
Braun, 2002], mechanical interaction between prowedge
and retrowedge [Del Castello et al., 2004; Naylor et al.,
2005]. Yet, all these approaches envisage static m/mb ratio
with faults in constant state of creep. In contrast, natural
faulting processes incur friction drop during slip (i.e., slip
weakening) that can change the mechanics of the system.
Consequently, previous studies underestimate or totally
neglect the effect of the phases of elastic loading predating
episodes of frictional slip on faults.
[6] Stick-slip behavior [e.g., Rabinowicz, 1958] has been,
until recently, disregarded in analogue modeling of accre-
tionary wedges, because of the general assumption that sand
cannot preserve a ‘‘mechanical’’ memory on preexisting
fractures. Because of the poor measurements of analog
material properties, the elastic interval of deformation and
strain hardening processes have been traditionally consid-
ered as of secondary importance for noncohesive wedge
growth. Recent refined laboratory analyses demonstrate that
granular analogue materials show a significant departure
from the Coulomb elastoperfectly plastic behavior, with a
marked decrease in m at the transition between material peak
strength and residual strength [Lohrmann et al., 2003; Ellis
et al., 2004; Panien et al., 2006]. The strain hardening prior
to peak strength and the strain softening post peak strength
has been related to decompaction/compaction cycles affect-
ing the sand during the compressional stress loading and
subsequent rupturing [Lohrmann et al., 2003]. The stress-
strain curves for the sand materials tested agree well with
characteristic curves of rocks and soils [Jaeger and Cook,
1969; Lambe andWhitman, 1969;Marone, 1998; Barnhoorn
et al., 2004]. Adam et al. [2005] used particle imaging
velocimetry (PIV) techniques within sandbox experiments
of wedge growth to document how accretion and under-
thrusting processes are not synchronous but cyclic and might
be related to strain hardening/softening cycles occurring at
the roof thrust and basal de´collement.
[7] In this paper we use a boundary element method
(BEM) code to numerically reproduce the sandbox exper-
iment of wedge deformation published by Adam et al.
[2005]. Analogue models based on noncohesive, Coulomb
Figure 1. Schematic diagram illustrating two sequential
cycles of underthrusting-accretion. (a) Initial accretion. (b)
Episodic deactivation of the basal de´collement causes
underthrusting under the roof thrust (white arrows). (c)
Nucleation of a new fore thrust that steps the wedge toe
forward. Continuous thick lines indicate active fault
segments. Insets in Figures 1b and 1c show transitory
increase/decrease of taper angle during underthrusting and
accretion phases, respectively.
B12404 DEL CASTELLO AND COOKE: UNDERTHRUSTING-ACCRETION WORK BUDGET
2 of 14
B12404
material are excellent tools to test the applicability of the
critical taper theory, yet their information is limited to
kinematics rather than a full mechanical deformation. We
try to bridge this gap by constructing a numerical model that
utilizes recently revisited strain hardening/softening proper-
ties of sand within a fully elastic BEM code. The investi-
gation is restricted to a single underthrusting/accretion
transition for which we calculate the work balance and
discriminate between different work terms, trying to assess
both the trade-off mechanisms between the energy terms
and the impact of each of them at the transition. The setup
of our numerical models is based on the fault configurations
and sequence of faulting revealed by PIV analysis of
sandbox experiments by Adam et al. [2005]. This paper
presents a systemic view of wedge growth using work
budget assessments that are consistent with natural and
sandbox observations, encompasses existing ideas of wedge
growth and does not rely on temporal nor spatial variations
in material properties to achieve cyclic transitions between
underthrusting and accretion modes.
2. Work Analysis by Boundary Element Method
2.1. Description of Work Terms
[8] Transitions between underthrusting and accretion
modes may reflect adjustments to the balance between work
against frictional slip along the basal and inner wedge faults,
work of deformation within the host material and uplift
work against gravity. Despite the lack of consensus on the
applicability of the principle of work minimization to large-
scale systems in nature [e.g., Bird and Yuen, 1979; Sleep et
al., 1979], systemic analysis of the interaction between
various work terms has yielded insights to the study of
deformation mechanics of geological structures [Mitra and
Boyer, 1986; Platt, 1988; Melosh and Williams, 1989;
Gutscher et al., 1998; Masek and Duncan, 1998; Burbidge
and Braun, 2002]. However, studies to date have not
revealed the trade-off between the various work components
as the system shifts between accretion and underthrusting
modes. Within accretionary systems, faults are constantly
growing, shutting down and initiating via a complex inter-
play of different work terms as the system persistently seeks
to minimize the total work. The total work in the
fault system, Wtot, is the sum of work against gravity, Wgrav,
work against frictional sliding, Wfric, work of internal
deformation in the material around the fault, Wint, work of
propagating new faults, Wprop, and work of seismic radiated
energy, Wseis [Cooke and Murphy, 2004].
Wtot ¼ Wgrav þWfric þWint þWprop þWseis ð1Þ
Each of these work terms is calculated as the product of
appropriate force times displacement. The work against
gravity is positive for contractional systems and negative for
extensional systems. Wgrav depends on the vertical uplift
and vertical normal stress due to overburden weight
integrated over the area of the system. In a two-dimensional
system with horizontal position, x, and depth of burial, d, as
a function of vertical position, z,
Wgrav ¼
ZZ
rgd zð Þdxdz ð2Þ
where g is gravitational acceleration and r is the average
density of the overburden. When a fault slips, work is done
resisting friction along the fault surface; this work is
expressed as frictional heating. For example, weak faults
(m = 0) produce no work against friction and do no exhibit
frictional heating.Wfric depends on fault slip and shear stress
integrated along the length of each fault in the system. Wfric
is one of several forms of work that is path-dependent.
Faults do not necessarily unslip when they are unloaded so
that different loading paths may produce different Wfric.
Consequently, this work is integrated over the loading path;
in this case the path of applied horizontal strain, "hor. Wfric is
also integrated over the fault length, l, along which normal
stress, sn, slip, s, and frictional coefficient, m, may vary.
Wfric ¼
ZZ
sn "hor;l
 
m lð Þs "hor;l
 
d"hor;dl ð3Þ
The internal work is the stored strain energy density, a
measure of mechanical work within the system. Wint is
calculated as strain times stress at a point, integrated over the
area of the system [e.g., Timoshenko and Goodier, 1934].
Using Hooke’s law, the strains can be formulated as stresses
to get
Wint ¼
ZZ
1 n2ð Þ
2E
s2xx þ s2zz
 þ 1þ nð Þ
E
s2xz þ nsxxszz
  
dzdx
ð4Þ
where E and v are the elastic properties Young’s modulus
and Poisson’s ratio, respectively. The work of fault
propagation, based on Gibb’s free energy, is the energy
required to break intact rock and create new fault surface
energy integrated over the length of new fault surfaces
[Scholz, 2002]. Fault surfaces are often accompanied by
abundant damage within the host rock so that the total new
surface area created is far greater than the area of new fault
surface. The seismic radiated energy, expressed as ground
shaking or acoustic energy, is the energy released from the
surrounding rock during fault slip. Wseis is path-dependent
and depends on the shear stress drop, Dt, and slip along the
sliding faults [Scholz, 2002].
Wseis ¼
ZZ
Dt "hor;l
 
s "hor;l
 
d"hor;dl ð5Þ
For finite models, such as that considered in this study, we
can also calculate external work on the system, which should
equal the sum of the individual work terms. This external
work is the product of displacement along the boundaries of
the system times the forces along that boundary.Wext is path-
dependent and is integrated over the loading path. Within
this study we are able to compare the Wext from our models
to Wtot in order estimate the errors in our work calculations.
[9] Whereas some forms of work are nonconservative
and lost to the system such as Wfric, Wprop and Wseis, others
serve to store work that can be later used to drive faulting,
Wgrav and Wint. For example, thrust faulting may release
stored internal strain within contracting systems, but this
occurs at the expense of producing greater work against
gravity. Cooke and Murphy [2004] expanded the theoretical
B12404 DEL CASTELLO AND COOKE: UNDERTHRUSTING-ACCRETION WORK BUDGET
3 of 14
B12404
formulations of Mitra and Boyer [1986] to include a more
rigorous internal work term (equation (4)) so that a com-
pletely balanced work budget can be evaluated within
numerical models to simulate the growth fault systems.
We use this formulation (1) to evaluate the principle of
work minimization theory for an accretion/underthrusting
cycle, (2) to quantify the role of each work component
within a cycle, and (3) to test the similarity of analog
experiments to results obtained by the boundary element
method (BEM) technique.
2.2. BEM
[10] The BEM uses the principle of continuum mechanics
to calculate stress and strain throughout a faulted rock body
[e.g., Crouch and Starfield, 1990]. All the data necessary
for analysis of the work terms, including slip, traction,
internal stress and strain and vertical displacements, are
constrained by the governing differential equations of
continuum mechanics. Unlike the Finite Element Method,
which requires discretization of the entire body, the BEM
only requires discretization of model boundaries and dis-
continuities (i.e., faults). This is advantageous for modeling
multiple interacting faults because BEM requires less effort
for discretization, and errors due to discretization and
approximation arise only on the boundaries and along fault
surfaces [Crouch and Starfield, 1990]. The BEM code used
in this study, FRIC2D, computes the two-dimensional
elastic and inelastic deformation associated with frictional
slip along faults using the displacement discontinuity for-
mulation of Crouch and Starfield [1990] with special
constitutive frictional-slip elements [Cooke and Pollard,
1997]. The model boundaries and fault surfaces are dis-
cretized into linear elements each with uniform shear and
normal displacement discontinuities. Additionally, along
fault surfaces FRIC2D requires prescription of constitutive
properties such as cohesion and friction coefficient.
FRIC2D has been used to investigate faulting [Cooke and
Pollard, 1997; Roering et al., 1997; Cooke and Kameda,
2002; Cooke and Murphy, 2004], bedding plane slip within
folds [Cooke et al., 2000], joint propagation [Cooke and
Underwood, 2001] and sediment compaction associated
with buried craters [Buczkowski and Cooke, 2004]. FRIC2D
assumes linear elastic, isotropic and homogeneous rheology,
which may not appropriately simulate sand deformation at
all scales or at all time intervals. Specifically, the code does
not capture the details of individual grain movement and
instead treats the entire sandbox as elastic for the short time
periods simulated. Because loose sand accumulates a large
amount inelastic deformation over the course of an analog
experiment, infinitesimal snap shots of quasi-elastic defor-
mation are simulated within each numerical experiments of
this study. These snapshots allow us to investigate the first-
order effects of fault geometry and growth on the work
budget of the accretionary system.
3. Model Setup
[11] The shape and properties of the wedge in the model
were designed to mimic the sandbox analog experiments
analyzed by the particle image velocimetry technique (PIV)
[Adam et al., 2005]. By comparing sequential high-resolu-
tion images, PIV is able to track grain-by-grain dislocation
and thus produce maps of shear strain within the wedge. In
this way, it is possible to obtain a continuous recording of
the activity of faults and their geometry.
[12] The BEM model simulates a 0.6 m length of the
sandbox experiment performed by Adam et al. [2005]. We
follow the observations of Adam et al. [2005] and focus our
investigation on the deformation within the toe of the wedge
at the transition from underthrusting to accretion. The total
length of the model is 1 m to ensure that the lateral sides of
the model are sufficiently far from the region of investiga-
tion to minimize boundary effects. The topography of the
top of the model resembles the laboratory experiment, and
in the model, the upper surface is prescribed to be stress free
(Figure 2). A series of numerical models investigates small
increments of deformation during the transition from un-
derthrusting to accretion; in this manner, the models simu-
late snapshots through this transition. Within each snapshot,
only fault surfaces with activity detected by PIVof Adam et
al. [2005] and the basal de´collement are included in the
model. For each snapshot, the left side and base of the
model are heaved to the right 0.5 cm (0.5% contraction)
while the upper portion of the right side of the mode is
horizontally fixed. The lower two elements of the right side
heave to the right creating a discontinuity along a horizontal
Figure 2. Conceptual diagram of model set up and boundary conditions. The deformation is modeled
by heaving the left, bottom elements and bottommost two elements of the right end side toward the right.
The residual and peak coefficients of friction are chosen for active and inactive segments of the basal
de´collement, respectively. The underthrusting stage is modeled by progressively lengthen the roof thrusts
to the right. Because of wedge geometry, the roof thrust will be loaded by increasing overburden as it
lengthens.
B12404 DEL CASTELLO AND COOKE: UNDERTHRUSTING-ACCRETION WORK BUDGET
4 of 14
B12404
frictional interface that simulates the base of the laboratory
experiment. Where the shear stress is low (i.e., less than
frictional strength) along this base, the overlying sand is
transported to the right; where shear stresses are high, the
sand may not be transported to the right creating a de´colle-
ment surface. In addition to the frictional interface simulat-
ing the basal de´collement, various roof thrust lengths and
accretion fore thrusts are prescribed as frictional interfaces
within the models.
[13] The frictional properties assigned to the fault surfa-
ces depend on whether they are slipping or not. For sliding
surfaces (faults within the wedge and portions of the basal
de´collement to the right of these faults) a friction coefficient
of 0.5 is assigned to mimic frictional properties under
dynamic slip conditions measured in laboratory tests of
Adam et al. [2005]. The portion of the basal de´collement to
the left of the thrust faults (in front of the thrust faults) is
assigned higher friction (m = 0.7). This higher value
corresponds to the coefficient of friction measured for the
sand at peak strength, i.e., at the verge of failure [Adam et
al., 2005]. The roof thrust and fore thrusts added in
sequential models are assigned the lower-valued dynamic
coefficient of friction (m = 0.5). The effective normal and
shear stiffness are estimated from the material stiffness and
the width of the fault zone observed in the experiments of
Adam et al. [2005]. To establish the values of Young’s
modulus and Poisson’s ratio for our models, we compared
the frictional strength of the fine sand used by Adam et al.
[2005] to physical properties compiled from soil engineer-
ing studies of a uniform fine to medium sand [Lambe and
Whitman, 1969]. Average values for the Poisson’s ratio
(0.25–0.40) and Young’s modulus (10.35–17.25 MPa)
were prescribed for our models (Turner-Fairbank Highway
Research Center, http://www.tfhrc.gov/safety/pubs/04094/
04.htm). The sand density was set at 1.732 g/cm3 [Adam
et al., 2005].
[14] Using the prescribed boundary conditions and mate-
rial properties, the BEM solves for the displacements and
stresses along external boundaries and faults within the
model so that that Wfric and external work Wext can be
calculated. For example, the only boundaries that produce
external work are the left side and bottom two elements of
the right side. The product of force times displacement is
zero along the other model boundaries. Additionally, dis-
placements and stresses can be sampled at specific points
throughout the fault system to calculate Wgrav and Wint. The
seismic and fault propagation energy are not directly
assessed within the quasi-static models because they reflect
a change in conditions over time. The seismic energy is the
energy released during slip. This can be calculated by
comparison of fault stresses within two models before and
after the fault has slipped. Similarly, the propagation energy
can be estimated by the length of new fault surface times the
energy needed to create new fault surface area in models
before and after the development of the new fault. The
energy needed to create new fault surface has been mea-
sured in the lab. Depending on different confining pressures
and rock type, the fracture energy can vary greatly (between
101 and 104 J/m2 [Wong, 1982, 1986; Cox and Scholz,
1988]). Recent studies suggest that these values can be
decreased by a factor of 3 to 5 if the dilation process before
rupture is properly taken into account [Labuz and Dai,
2000]. The sum of the seismic energy and the fault
propagation should equal the change in external energy
between models before and after fault slip or a new fault
develops.
4. Model Results
[15] Progressive underthrusting is simulated by lengthen-
ing the roof thrust. We examine five snapshots of under-
thrusting at intervals or 2 cm thrust length measured along
the upper horizontal portion of the roof thrust. The cumu-
lative error of all the work terms can be assessed from the
difference between the sum of all the work components
(Wtot) and the work done on the external boundary of the
system (Wext). Most models produce cumulative errors less
than 1.5% of the Wext (Figure 3). Much of this error arises
from the internal and gravitational work calculations, which
are integrated over the area of the model. Because the
stresses and displacements are numerically unreliable near
the edges of individual fault elements, some critical points
within regions of stress concentration near the faults are left
out of the integrations, resulting in underestimation of Wint
and Wgrav. Consequently, Wtot is consistently less than Wext
and the external work, which is not hampered by data gaps,
provides a reliable estimate of the total work in the system.
4.1. Work Increase During the Underthrusting Mode
[16] Numerical results show a systematic increase in Wext
as the sheet is progressively underthrust (Figure 3). This
suggests that with increasing underthrusting, continued
deformation of the wedge requires greater work applied to
the system. The largest portion of work goes into frictional
heating (Wfric > 0.5 Wext), while uplift against gravity
consumes only about 2% of Wext.
Figure 3. Increase in Wgrav, Wfric, and Wint for each stage
of roof thrust lengthening. This increase leads to systematic
increase of total work during progressive underthrusting.
The new fore thrust produces significantly less frictional
heating and less total work in spite of increased Wint. The
transition from underthrusting to accretion via the develop-
ment of the new fore thrust follows total work minimization
of the fault system.
B12404 DEL CASTELLO AND COOKE: UNDERTHRUSTING-ACCRETION WORK BUDGET
5 of 14
B12404
[17] Within the underthrusting system, uplift against
gravity only occurs near the dipping ramp section of the
roof thrust (Figure 4). Although small, Wgrav increases with
thrust sheet length due to increasing thickness of material
uplifted above the ramp. The increase in Wfric with progres-
sive underthrusting can be attributed to both increasing roof
thrust length and increased weight of overburden, which
resists frictional sliding and subsequently increases friction-
al heating within the system. For similar reasons, Wint
systematically increases as the roof thrust grows longer.
As the active ramp is under deeper portions of the wedge,
fault slip is inhibited and contraction instead is accommo-
dated by greater internal deformation of the surrounding
material. We see in the models a trade-off between the
contraction accommodated by fault slip and that accommo-
dated by deformation of the surrounding material.
4.2. Work Decrease During Transition
[18] We simulate the beginning of the accretionary stage
documented in sandbox experiments by removing the
inactive roof thrust and adding an active fault ramp at the
front of the deforming wedge in the position of fore
thrusting observed by Adam et al. [2005]. The transition
from underthrusting to accretionary mode is associated with
a significant decrease in the total work on the system
(Figure 3). This suggests that deforming a wedge system
with a ramp in front of the wedge takes less overall tectonic
work than deforming a system with a mature underthrust
sheet. The transition produces a net decrease in Wext via an
increase in Wint and a correspondingly larger decrease in
Wfric.
[19] The work against gravity decreases upon the transi-
tion to accretion because the active fault ramp has now less
overburden to uplift than the mature roof thrust (Figure 2).
The reduction of overburden weight on the active fault ramp
also decreases the resistance of the ramp to frictional
sliding. Thus, to accommodate the same amount of con-
traction, the accretionary fault system produces less fric-
tional heating than the long and mature underthrust fault
system. In apparent contrast to the lesser resistance of the
fore thrust to frictional slip, this fault has less slip than the
roof thrust in the underthrust models just prior to transition
to underthrusting (Figure 5). This is demonstrated by the
significant increase in internal work within the accretionary
model as the surrounding material accommodates deforma-
tion in lieu of fore-thrust slip (Figure 3). Consequently, the
accretion model that minimizes the overall contributions of
Wgrav, Wint and Wfric is not the fault configuration that
accommodates greatest slip.
4.3. Position of the Maximum Shear Stress Along the
Basal De´collement
[20] The position of the maximum shear stress on the
basal de´collement was calculated in the model with the
longest roof thrust just before the transition to the accretion
stage (based on the sandbox models of Adam et al. [2005]).
The numerical model gives a left-lateral maximum shear
stress located at 26 cm along the basal de´collement
(Figure 6b) that is also associated with a high distortional
strain energy (white arrow, Figure 6a) along the base of the
numerical wedge. High levels of distortional strain energy
density have been suggested to characterize the propagation
path of deformation bands [Okubo and Schultz, 2005].
Accordingly, we hypothesize that the localization of distor-
tional strain energy in our model may mimic the incipient
propagation of a new fore-thrust ramp at the wedge toe. A
striking fit can be observed between the position of the
maximum basal shear stress within the numerical model and
the location of accumulating shear strain at the base of the
Figure 4. Plot of vertical displacement within the wedge during shortening. The vertical uplift is
concentrated on the ramp portion of the roof thrust. The total work against gravity integrated throughout
the model is much smaller than other work terms.
Figure 5. Slip distribution along the (1) roof thrust ramp
and (2) fore-thrust ramp, respectively. The fore-thrust ramp
has less slip despite the lesser vertical overburden acting on
the fault compared to on the roof thrust ramp. The roof
thrust is at its maximum length, prior to transition to
accretion observed by Adam et al. [2005].
B12404 DEL CASTELLO AND COOKE: UNDERTHRUSTING-ACCRETION WORK BUDGET
6 of 14
B12404
sandbox model of Adam et al. [2005] (black arrow pointing
at yellow red patches in Figures 6d and 6e).
4.4. Efficient New Ramp Location and Vergence
[21] In the sandbox experiment, before the roof thrust is
totally abandoned (turning pale green from red) an area of
diffuse deformation can be observed ahead of the wedge toe
(Figure 6d). Adam et al. [2005] interpreted this area as a
dilational domain that produces strain hardening of the sand
just prior to nucleation of a new fault, which eventually
occurs toward the leftmost part of the dilational domain
(Figure 6e). The new fore-thrust ramp location is expected
to breach the dilational domain. On this premise, we tested
the most efficient position for a new ramp to nucleate based
on the principle of energy minimization. In our numerical
model, we explored two likely locations for fore-thrust and
back-thrust ramps for the accretionary stage: (1) the location
of maximum shear stress along the basal de´collement
(location 1, fore thrust 1 (FT1) and back thrust 1 (BT1);
Figure 7) and (2) beyond the wedge toe in the location of
faulting observed by Adam et al. [2005] (location 2, FT2
and BT2; Figure 7). FT 2, in front of the wedge, requires the
least external work to accommodate the same contraction as
the other ramps. The Wfric and Wgrav show nearly equal
values for both FT 1 and FT 2 (Figure 7); however, the Wint
within the FT 1 model exceeds the Wint within the FT 2
model. This reflects the resistance of FT 1 to slip (Figure 8)
due to increased overburden weight. The reduced slip on the
ramp increases the amount of local deformation (i.e., Wint)
ahead of the wedge toe, as displayed by plots of Strain
Energy Density (SED) (Figure 9b). Conversely, FT 2 more
efficiently accommodates contraction via a greater slip
(Figure 9a), resulting in a net decrease of the Wtot.
[22] The mechanical efficiency of fore thrusts and back
thrusts can also be compared. The wedge needs to expend a
larger amount of energy in order to develop back thrusts
rather than fore thrusts (Figure 7). Both BT1 and BT2 are
characterized by a lesser slip than the fore thrusts (Figure 8),
so that the Wfric is smaller than along the FTs, even where
BT1 has greater overburden than FT1. However, the lesser
slip yields disproportionably large increase in Wint. The
distribution of strain energy density within the wedge
indicates a higher level of wedge internal strain for back
thrusts compared to the model with fore thrusts (Figures 9c
and 9d). The overall effect is that of a larger Wtot that makes
the wedge less efficient to deform with a back thrust rather
than with a fore thrust. This is consistent with many
analogue experimental observations in that back thrusts do
not display prolonged activity. Consequently, the most
efficient location for a new ramp is not at the point of
maximum basal shear stress, as one would expect for a ramp
branching off the basal de´collement. Instead new faults
develop where the gravitational, frictional and internal
mechanical work terms are optimally combined. As valida-
tion of the work minimization principle, the fault configu-
Figure 6. (a) Distortional strain energy (DSE) density within the wedge. (b) Greatest shear stress
(negative is left lateral), which occurs at x = 26 cm along the base of the numerical sandbox, where the
model also shows an area of relatively high distortional strain energy. (c) PIV image of sandbox
experiment of Adam et al. [2005]. (d) Decrease of slip on the roof thrust that follows stress buildup at the
base of the wedge and frontal dilation of sand. (e) Shear localization in the form of a fore-thrust–back-
thrust couple. The numerical model is superimposed to show coincidence of numerically calculated
maximum shear stress with area of maximum shear strain at the base of the sand-box experiment (black
arrows in Figures 6d and 6e).
B12404 DEL CASTELLO AND COOKE: UNDERTHRUSTING-ACCRETION WORK BUDGET
7 of 14
B12404
ration that minimizes the overall work of the system
correlates with sandbox observations.
5. Discussion
5.1. Friction and Slip Evolution in Sandbox Models
[23] We have implemented a numerical model in order to
quantitatively study the work components of an underthrust-
ing/accretion transition. The analysis was based on the idea
that faults nucleate within sandbox models of wedge growth
to minimize the system’s overall work. Our results indicate
that gravity plays a fundamental role during deformation by
controlling the balance between the shear resistance on fault
surfaces (Wfric) and the overall strain around the fault (Wint).
While the critical taper theory predicts uniform deformation
within a growing wedge of constant taper angle, locally
changing wedge slope has been proposed to alter the normal
stress distribution along the basal de´collement to promote
the development of distinct under thusting and accretion
modes [Gutscher et al., 1998; Burbidge and Braun, 2002;
Del Castello et al., 2004]. Our numerical experiments
further verify that cycles of episodic cycles of underthrust-
ing and accretion should be expected within growing
accretionary wedges rather than monotonic growth pre-
dicted by critical taper theory. The analysis in this paper
offers an explanation of the trade-off mechanisms between
different energy terms that force slip to jump from fault to
fault across a sand wedge when a new fault propagates
along the basal de´collement, which was fully disclosed by
recent advances in visualization techniques of analogue
models of Coulomb wedges (PIV [Adam et al., 2005]).
5.2. Work Minimization
[24] The principle of work minimization predicts that the
fault system will evolve to a configuration that requires the
least total work so that we can compare the energetic costs
of various fault geometries to predict wedge system evolu-
tion. If we neglect the acoustic energy released by slip
(Wseis) and energy consumed in the formation of new fault
surface (Wprop), we can predict that the accretionary mode is
favored once the underthrust sheet is longer than 4.5 cm
(Figure 10). At this length the total work of accommodating
contraction by roof thrusting equals the work of accommo-
dating contraction along a new fore thrust in front of the
wedge. As the thrust sheet grows beyond 4.5 cm, the Wext
(Wint + Wgrav + Wfric) of continued underthrusting requires
greater energy than accretion (9.04 J). However, the system
persists in the underthrusting stage. Why? The energy
required to produce the new frontal ramp from the basal
de´collement must also be taken into account. Underthrust-
ing will be favored as long as the Wext is less than that
necessary for accretion plus Wseis and Wprop for the accre-
tionary model (equation (1)). The experiment of Adam et al.
[2005] demonstrates that the transition from underthrusting
to accretion occurs when the roof thrust is 10.5 cm long,
when the model is expending 9.44 J to continue under-
thrusting (Figure 10). The difference between theWext of the
underthrust model at the transition and Wext of the new
accretion model (0.4 J) reflects the energy lost during this
transition to acoustic energy and development of new fault
surface (Wseis + Wprop; Figure 10).
Figure 8. Slip along different fault locations and ramp
vergencemodeled. Fore thrust 2 shows the greatest amount of
slip. Positive sign is for left-lateral motion (FT), and negative
sign is for right-lateral motion along the ramp (BT).
Figure 7. Weight of different work terms for under-
thrusting phase (roof thrust length just prior to transition)
and accretion. Fore thrust 2 is the most energetically
efficient faulting geometry for this system setup as it
displays the least amount of Wtot required for wedge
deformation. In all other cases, the Wint increase overruns
Wfric decrease, making these faults not favorably positioned
in terms of work minimization.
B12404 DEL CASTELLO AND COOKE: UNDERTHRUSTING-ACCRETION WORK BUDGET
8 of 14
B12404
[25] Although the energy required to propagate faults in
sand is not available due to the difficulty of these measure-
ments, laboratory tests on soft cemented sedimentary rocks
at low confining pressure have shownWprop around 140 J/m
2
[Labuz and Dai, 2000]. If such sandstone grew a fault as
long as the fore thrust in our accretionary models, the rock
would consume 9.7 J. Of course, we expect loose sand to
require much less energy than soft cemented sandstone
because the unconfined compressive strength of soft,
cemented sandstone is 100 times greater than that of sand.
The order of magnitude of Wprop estimated by the model
(<0.4 J) agrees with our expectations from available labora-
tory data.
[26] The values of the various work terms reported here
reflect the specific fault geometry of and material properties
within the numerical experiment. Although the values of the
work components will vary with different fault configura-
tions, the tradeoffs between the different work components
within the overall work budget will remain the same. The
transition from underthrusting to accretion occurs when the
energetic benefit of slip along the new fore thrust exceeds
the energetic cost of producing this surface.
5.3. Is Work Against Gravity Not Important in
Sandboxes?
[27] The progressive increase of vertical overburden due
to thickening by no doubts constitutes one of the main
drivers to induce the wedge to switch from underthrusting to
accretion during cycles observed in analogue experiments
[Mulugeta and Koyi, 1992; Gutscher et al., 1996; Del
Castello et al., 2004]. The BEM models have relatively
small components of work against gravity (Wgrav ; Wint
and Wfric). To some degree, this is due to the small scale of
the sandbox, which produces small overburden pressures;
larger scaled numerical models display a higher portion of
work against gravity [Cooke and Murphy, 2004]. Adding a
dip to the base of the sandbox model would increase the
work against gravity slightly but not to the level of the other
work components. Our gravitational work values are in the
same order as the analytical estimates of Gutscher et al.
Figure 9. Plots of strain energy density for different fore-thrust and back-thrust location. A progressive
enlargement of wedge regions affected by high levels of strain (yellow, see scale for reference) can be
observed from Figure 9a (fore thrust 2) to Figure 9d (back thrust 1). These cross sections confirm that
fore thrust 2 accumulates the least internal strain within the wedge. The box in Figure 9a indicates the
location of Figure 11.
B12404 DEL CASTELLO AND COOKE: UNDERTHRUSTING-ACCRETION WORK BUDGET
9 of 14
B12404
[1998]. Does this mean that gravity is insignificant in
sandbox experiments of accreting systems? No. While work
against gravity is small (uplift against gravity occurs only
on the ramp portion of each fault, Figure 4), overburden
weight due to gravity critically influences changes in Wfric
and Wint that govern the transition from underthursting to
accretion. With increasing vertical overburden, the ramp
will tend to slip less, decreasing the Wfric and eventually
result in the clamping of the fault. However, at the same
time, decreasing the slip means a larger fraction of energy is
consumed in the form of internal strain of the host rock
(Wint). The variation of Wint can be smaller or larger than
that of Wfric (Figure 7). This trade-off will determine
whether or not a fault is efficiently located such that the
wedge minimizes the energy necessary for deformation.
Yet, gravity will always be the driving variable. Neverthe-
less, within natural systems that operate on larger scales, the
work against gravity can also become significant compared
to other work terms [Cooke and Murphy, 2004]. Conse-
quently, the work budget for natural systems may differ
from sandbox models, which are quite sensitive to changes
in Wfric. Future work should explore the scales of models so
that consideration can be given in extrapolating from
sandbox interpretations.
5.4. Fore Thrusts Are Energetically More Efficient
Than Back Thrusts
[28] The numerical model can also be used to evaluate
whether the site for spontaneous shear localization in a new
ramp observed in the models of Adam et al. [2005] responds
to the work minimization principle. In principle, the new
fore-thrust ramp could nucleate within the width of the
dilation zone along the weakest grain boundaries or largest
grains. A new imbricate splaying off at the basal de´colle-
ment tip may develop where shear stress is maximum along
the basal de´collement. The BTs consistently show a higher
Wtot than FTs, suggesting that back thrusts are less efficient
and may only be secondary features of the accretion process
that allow for a partial accommodation of contraction during
the folding process above the fault ramp. Even if our
numerical experiments simulate a very small amount of
contraction, we believe that work minimization can also
explain why the back thrusts are generally observed to die
out quite rapidly in sandbox models, immediately after their
nucleation [Mulugeta and Koyi, 1992]. This may occur
because these faults are steeper than fore thrusts and
therefore are not optimally oriented to the horizontal con-
traction [Cooke and Murphy, 2004]. This produces very
high level of internal strain, possibly leading to strain
hardening and clamping of the fault [Lohrmann et al.,
2003]. Other mechanisms must be active to produce a
long-lived BT, as in the case of weaker layers in the
deforming section [Liu et al., 1992; Cotton and Koyi,
2000; Bonini, 2001]. Another mechanism that may favor
back thrusting is exceptionally high levels of fluid over-
pressure, which produces micro fracturing, deformation
bands and cataclastic. Our model results show that the
stored internal work, Wint, controls the preference of fore
thrusts over back thrusts. This suggests that weak layers
and/or damage from fluid overpressures may serve to
reduce Wint locally in order to favor back-thrust develop-
ment. In nature, very few systems have back thrusts with
larger slip than fore thrusts. In the Cascadia subduction zone
accretionary complex, back thrusts seem to be favored
where conspicuous and rapid sedimentation promotes fluid
pressure build up [MacKay, 1995; Gutscher et al., 2001;
Adam et al., 2004].
[29] Panian and Wiltschko [2004, 2007] have suggested
that back thrusts play a key role in forward propagation of
fore thrusts. In their model, the initial back thrust develops
at the toe of the wedge and propagates downdip to the
de´collement. During propagation of the back thrust, a fore
thrust develops that intersects the back thrust at the de´colle-
ment. Within our model prior to fore thrusting, the area of
greatest strain energy density and Navier-Coulomb stress,
measures of propensity for fault development, occurs at the
tip of the wedge (Figure 11) and at the same location of
back-thrust initiation of Panian and Wiltschko [2004, 2007].
While the stress distribution may promote the development
of a back thrust, our models results show that for the overall
system, a fore thrust requires less work than the back thrust
to accommodate contraction; the fore thrust is more efficient
and takes over.
5.5. Downdip Propagation of the Fore-Thrust Ramp
[30] The observation that the energetically most efficient
fore thrust is located away from the position of the maxi-
mum shear along the basal de´collement may raise some
further questions. The position of maximum shear stress
calculated by our model just beneath the wedge toe is
consistent with previous mechanical analyses of frontal
imbrication [Platt, 1988]. In the absence of the results
Figure 10. (a) Models simulating successive thrust sheet
growth. In this setup, the topography remains constant for
each underthrust model. (b) External work (Wext) required
for contraction increases with length of the underthrust
sheet. The development of a fore thrust in front of the
wedge is energetically favored when the Wext required for
continued underthrusting exceeds the Wext for fore thrusting
plus the work required to develop the new fault surface of
the fore thrust (Wprop) and acoustic energy associated with
slip (Wseis).
B12404 DEL CASTELLO AND COOKE: UNDERTHRUSTING-ACCRETION WORK BUDGET
10 of 14
B12404
offered by our numerical model, one would normally expect
that the branching would occur at the point of maximum
shear along the basal de´collement or at the location of
maximum distortional strain or positions of maximum
Coulomb stress. The PIV experimental data of Adam et al.
[2005] show an area of diffuse dilatation within the not yet
faulted sand pack ahead of the maximum shear strain
(equivalent to our maximum shear stress point) location
on the basal de´collement. Within the dilatational domain,
material may be on the verge of failure. Our numerical
results show that it is mechanically more efficient to
nucleate a new ramp at the outer frontal limit of the
dilatational domain, which might then propagate downward
to the basal de´collement, rather than propagating a new
ramp from the basal de´collement at the point of maximum
shear strain/stress. The nucleation of the new ramp at
shallow depths is also supported by the shallow region of
high Navier-Coulomb stress displayed by the numerical
model in the area corresponding to the dilatational zone
(Figure 11). Our results contrast the generally accepted
paradigm that fault ramps propagate upward from the basal
thrust de´collement tip [e.g., Suppe and Medwedeff, 1990]
(Figure 12a) and concur with alternative models of ramp
nucleation that evoke failure within the layer and propaga-
tion of both fault tips toward upper and lower bedding plane
de´collements. These models propose that, under horizontal
compression, the more rigid layer fails first, creating the
ramp, which later propagates into the less competent bed-
ding planes [Eisenstadt and De Paor, 1987; McConnell et
al., 1997; Morley, 1994] (Figure 12b). This outcrop-scale
mechanical stratigraphy is analogous in the sandbox models
to the sand layer, which acts as a single homogeneous layer
bounded by a weaker basal de´collement and in the accre-
tionary wedge to deforming rock sequence. In principle, the
scale-invariant interaction between the various work terms
analyzed in this study at the laboratory scale can be applied
to the wedge scale to predict the nucleation of a shallow,
large-scale ramp at the foot of a deforming accreting wedge.
For example, initiation of a new frontal ramp was recently
proposed at the outer Western Alps to explain unexpectedly
high rates of local uplift [Nivie`re et al., 2006]. Unfortunate-
ly, the initiation of a new thrust ramp is difficult to detect in
nature as it is likely to be short-lived. Once the thrust ramp
localizes, the concentrated stresses at the fault tips will
facilitate propagation downward and the ramp will rapidly
link to the basal de´collement tip.
5.6. Coincidence Between BEM and Sandbox Model
for Small Amounts of Contraction
[31] A remarkable outcome of this paper is the coinci-
dence between the position of the maximum shear stress on
the basal de´collement calculated by our numerical model
with the maximum shear strain observed in the sandbox
experiment of Adam et al. [2005] (Figures 6d and 6e). We
emphasize that the location of the maximum shear stress
was neither set as a model boundary condition nor was it
prescribed at the beginning of the modeling procedure. This
is significant considering that although input parameters of
the numerical wedge were the same as the mechanical
properties of the noncohesive analogue material used in
the sand-box experiment, the BEM code was implemented
with the linear elastic continuum mechanics. It is certainly
Figure 11. Plots of (a) strain energy density and (b) Navier-Coulomb stress. High values of strain/stress
are visible at shallow depth in the vicinity of the wedge toe (outlined by the dashed line).
B12404 DEL CASTELLO AND COOKE: UNDERTHRUSTING-ACCRETION WORK BUDGET
11 of 14
B12404
surprising that sand, which is generally thought as deform-
ing plastically, can be modeled so well by a purely elastic
numerical code along short timescales. In the recent past
different models (FEM, DEM [Ellis et al., 2004; Burbidge
and Braun, 2002; Yamada and Matsuoka, 2005; Naylor et
al., 2005]) were used to numerically simulate deformation
observed in experimental Coulomb wedges. Our BEM
model, which underestimates the effects of plasticity, might
not be able yet to capture the full continuous deformation
process within a Coulomb wedge. Certainly, more detailed
models are needed to further assess whether elasticity can
be effective on a continuous timescale or to appraise the
importance of elasticity over plasticity as the key rheology
driving the wedge deformation. However, our model dem-
onstrates that at least for small temporal scales elasticity
contributes to the wedge mechanics. Indeed, if the wedge
deformation is discretized into several snapshots, we can
observe that important wedge characteristics such as (1) size
and spacing of imbricates, (2) switching between different
deformation modes, and (3) activation/deactivation of single
fault due to strain hardening/weakening processes can be
analyzed in the light of elastic models and that these
respond to mechanical concepts of work minimization.
6. Conclusions
[32] Our BEM models have successfully reproduced the
transitory deformation of accreting wedges during an accre-
tion-underthrusting cycle observed in analog experiments.
The modeling results confirm that the underthrusting to
accretion transition is driven by a complex interaction
between gravitational forces and shear resistance along
fault surfaces such that a trade-off exists between the
amount of energy dissipated as internal strain and that
absorbed via frictional heating on the faults. Consideration
of individual and total work of the accreting system
demonstrates that the development of new fore thrusts
reflects the overall tendency of the system to minimize
total work even while individual work terms may increase.
Because every new fore thrust will accumulate slip and
mature to a progressively less efficient underthrusting stage,
a repetitive cycle of underthrusting and accretion arises.
The transition from underthrusting to accretion occurs when
the increase in system efficiency associated with the devel-
opment of a new fore thrust exceeds the energetic cost of
growing the fore thrust (Wprop + Wseis). Our model results
show distinct phases of underthrusting and accretion during
wedge growth, such as observed in different segments of
the Alaskan margin [Gutscher et al., 1998; Moore et al.,
1991] that are not explained by critical taper theory. In the
models, fore thrusts are characterized by higher efficiency
compared to back thrusts. This is consistent with observa-
tion from previous analogue and numerical models that slip
along back thrusts rapidly lessens with increasing displace-
ment. Furthermore, the position and vergence of a ramp that
is most energetically efficient matches that produced in the
analog experiments.
[33] The work budget analysis offers results consistent
with both observations of physical models [Adam et al.,
2005] and analytical treatments of accretion [Platt, 1988].
Our numerical approach fills in knowledge gaps from
previous analyses of accreting systems that were limited
to work against gravity and frictional sliding [Gutscher et
al., 1998; Burbidge and Braun, 2002]. By considering the
significant component of work accumulating as internal
deformation within the wedge (Wint), we are able to paint
a more complete picture of the dynamics of underthrusting-
accretion transitions. During the transition from underthrust-
ing to accretion, the decrease of work against friction
accounts for all of the increase in fault system efficiency
and overcomes associated increases in internal work.
Consequently, we expect that even small changes in wedge
slope and thickness, such as investigated by Gutscher et
al. [1998] and Burbidge and Braun [2002], will have
significant impact on slip distribution and mode of wedge
deformation.
[34] Acknowledgments. The work was funded by a grant from the
National Science Foundation (EAR-0349070). N. Kukowski, M. A.
Gutscher, and G. Moore are acknowledged for their fruitful comments.
D. Wiltschko kindly offered suggestions and unpublished material as a
useful comparison.
References
Adam, J., D. Klaeschen, N. Kukowski, and E. Flueh (2004), Upward
delamination of Cascadia Basin sediment infill with landward frontal
accretion thrusting caused by rapid glacial age material flux, Tectonics,
23, TC3009, doi:10.1029/2002TC001475.
Adam, J., J. L. Urai, B. Wieneke, O. Oncken, K. Pfeiffer, N. Kukowski,
J. Lohrmann, S. Hoth, W. van der Zee, and J. Schmatz (2005), Shear
localization and strain distribution during tectonic faulting-new insights
from granular-flow experiments and high resolution optical image
correlation techniques, J. Struct. Geol., 27, 283–301.
Figure 12. Two alternative models for ramp generation. (a) Ramps growing upward from the tip of the
propagating de´collement. (b) Ramps nucleating first within the rigid layer and then propagating
downward to the tip of the sole thrust. (c) Two scenarios producing almost identical styles of ramp-related
folding (see McConnell et al. [1997] and Morley [1994] for more details).
B12404 DEL CASTELLO AND COOKE: UNDERTHRUSTING-ACCRETION WORK BUDGET
12 of 14
B12404
Bangs, N. L., T. H. Shipley, S. P. S. Gulick, G. F. Moore, S. Kuromoto, and
Y. Nakamura (2004), Evolution of the Nankai Trough de´collement from
the trench into the seismogenic zone: Inferences from three-dimensional
seismic reflection imaging, Geology, 32, 273 – 276, doi:10.1130/
G20211.2.
Barnhoorn, A., M. Bystricky, L. Burlini, and K. Kunze (2004), The role of
recrystallisation on the deformation behaviour of calcite rocks: Large
strain torsion experiments on Carrara marble, J. Struct. Geol., 26,
885–903.
Bird, P., and D. A. Yuen (1979), The use of minimum dissipation principle
in tectonophysics, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 45, 214–217.
Bombolakis, E. G. (1994), Applicability of critical-wedge theories to
foreland belts, Geology, 22, 535–538.
Bonini, M. (2001), Passive roof thrusting and forelandward fold propaga-
tion in scaled brittle-ductile physical models of thrust wedges, J. Geo-
phys. Res., 106, 2291–2311.
Buczkowski, D. L., and M. L. Cooke (2004), Formation of double-ring
circular grabens due to volumetric compaction over buried impact craters:
Implications for thickness and nature of cover material in Utopia Planitia,
Mars, J. Geophys. Res., 109, E02006, doi:10.1029/2003JE002144.
Burbidge, D. R., and J. Braun (2002), Numerical models of the evolution of
accretionary wedges and fold-and-thrust belts using the distinct-element
method, Geophys. J. Int., 148, 542–561.
Cooke, M. L., and A. Kameda (2002), Mechanical fault interaction within
the Los Angeles Basin: A two-dimensional analysis using mechanical
efficiency, J. Geophys. Res., 107(B7), 2146, doi:10.1029/2001JB000542.
Cooke, M. L., and S. Murphy (2004), Assessing the work budget and
efficiency of fault systems using mechanical models, J. Geophys. Res.,
109, B10408, doi:10.1029/2004JB002968.
Cooke, M. L., and D. D. Pollard (1997), Bedding-plane slip in initial stages
of fault-related folding, J. Struct. Geol., 19, 567–581.
Cooke, M. L., and C. A. Underwood (2001), Fracture termination and step-
over at bedding interfaces due to frictional slip and interface opening,
J. Struct. Geol., 23, 223–238.
Cooke, M. L., D. Mollema, D. D. Pollard, and A. Aydin (2000), Interlayer
slip and joint localization in East Kaibab Monocline, Utah: Field
evidence and results from numerical modeling, in Forced Folds and
Fractures, edited by J. W. Cosgrove and M. S. Ameen, Geol. Soc. Spec.
Publ., 169, 23–49.
Cotton, J. T., and E. Koyi (2000), Modeling of thrust fronts above ductile
and frictional detachments: Application to structures in the Salt Range
and Potwar Plateau, Pakistan, Geol. Soc. Am. Bull., 112, 351–363.
Cox, S. J. D., and C. H. Scholz (1988), Rupture initiation in shear fracture
of rocks: An experimental study, J. Geophys. Res., 93, 3307–3320.
Crouch, S. L. and A. M. Starfield (1990), Boundary Element Methods in
Solid Mechanics, Unwin Hyman, Boston, Mass.
Dahlen, F. A. (1990), Critical taper model of fold-and-thrust belts and
accretionary wedges, Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 18, 55–99.
Dahlen, F. A., J. Suppe, and D. Davis (1984), Mechanics of fold-and-thrust
belts and accretionary wedges: Cohesive Coulomb theory, J. Geophys.
Res., 89, 87–101.
Del Castello, M., G. A. Pini, and K. R. McClay (2004), Effect of unbalanced
topography and overloading on Coulomb wedge kinematics: Insights
from sandbox modeling, J. Geophys. Res., 109, B05405, doi:10.1029/
2003JB002709.
Eisenstadt, G., and D. G. De Paor (1987), Alternative model of thrust-fault
propagation, Geology, 15, 630–633.
Ellis, S., G. Schreurs, and M. Panien (2004), Comparisons between
analogue and numerical models of thrust wedge development, J. Struct.
Geol., 26, 1659–1675.
Ford, M. (2004), Depositional wedge tops: Interaction between low basal
friction external orogenic wedges and flexural foreland basins, Basin
Res., 16, 361–375.
Gutscher, M. A., N. Kukowski, J. Malavieille, and S. Lallemand (1996),
Cyclic behavior of thrust wedges: Insights from high basal friction
sandbox experiments, Geology, 24, 135–138.
Gutscher, M. A., N. Kukowski, J. Malavieille, and S. Lallemand (1998),
Episodic imbricate thrusting and underthrusting: Analog experiments and
mechanical analysis applied to the Alaskan Accretionary Wedge, J. Geo-
phys. Res., 103, 10,161–10,176.
Gutscher, M. A., D. Klaeschen, E. Flueh, and J. Malavieille (2001), Non-
Coulomb wedges, wrong-way thrusting, and the natural hazards in
Cascadia, Geology, 29, 379–382.
Jaeger, J. C. and N. G. Cook (1969), Fundamentals of Rock Mechanics, 513
pp., Methuen, London.
Konstantinovskaia, E., and J. Malavieille (2005), Erosion and exhumation
in accretionary orogens: Experimental and geological approaches,
Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 6, Q02006, doi:10.1029/2004GC000794.
Kukowski, N., S. E. Lallemand, J. Malavieille, M. A. Gutscher, and T. J.
Reston (2002), Mechanical decoupling and basal duplex formation
observed in sandbox experiments with application to the Western
Mediterranean Ridge accretionary complex, Mar. Geol., 186, 29–42.
Labuz, J. F., and S. T. Dai (2000), Residual strength and fracture energy
from plane-strain testing, J. Geotech. Geoenviron. Eng., 126, 882–889.
Lallemand, S. E., P. Schnurle, and J. Malavieille (1994), Coulomb theory
applied to accretionary and non-accretionary wedges: Possible causes for
tectonic erosion and/or frontal accretion, J. Geophys. Res., 99, 12,033–
12,055.
Lambe, T. W. and R. V. Whitman (1969), Soil Mechanics, 553 pp., John
Wiley, New York.
Liu, H., K. R. McClay, and D. Powell (1992), Physical models of thrust
wedges, in Thrust Tectonics, edited by K. R. McClay, pp. 71 –81,
Chapman and Hall, New York.
Lohrmann, J., N. Kukowski, J. Adam, and O. Oncken (2003), The impact
of analogue material properties on the geometry, kinematics, and
dynamics of convergent sand wedges, J. Struct. Geol., 25, 1691–1711.
MacKay, M. E. (1995), Structural variation and landward vergence at the
toe of the Oregon accretionary prism, Tectonics, 14, 1309–1320.
Marone, C. (1998), Laboratory-derived friction laws and their application to
seismic faulting, Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 26, 643–696.
Masek, J. G., and C. C. Duncan (1998), Minimum-work mountain building,
J. Geophys. Res., 103, 907–917.
McCaffrey, R., M. D. Long, C. Goldfinger, P. C. Zwick, J. L. Nabelek, C. K.
Johnson, and C. Smith (2000), Rotation and plate locking at the southern
Cascadia subduction zone, Geophys. Res. Lett., 27, 3117–3120.
McClay, K. R. and P. S. Whitehouse (2004), Analog modeling of doubly
vergent thrust wedges, in Thrust Tectonics and Hydrocarbon Systems,
edited by K. R. McClay, AAPG Mem., 82, 187–209.
McConnell, D. A., S. A. Kattenhorn, and L. M. Benner (1997), Distribution
of fault slip in outcrop-scale fault-related folds, Appalachian Mountains,
J. Struct. Geol., 19, 257–267.
Melosh, H. J., and C. A. Williams Jr. (1989), Mechanics of graben
formation in crustal rocks: A finite element analysis, J. Geophys. Res.,
94, 13,961–13,973.
Mitra, G., and S. E. Boyer (1986), Energy balance and deformation
mechanisms of duplexes, J. Struct. Geol., 8, 291–304.
Moore, J. C., et al. (1991), Edge deep seismic-reflection transect of the
eastern Aleutian arc-trench layered lower crust reveals underplating and
continental growth, Geology, 19, 420–424.
Morley, C. K. (1994), Fold-generated imbricates: Examples from the
Caledonides of southern Norway, J. Struct. Geol., 16, 619–631.
Mulugeta, G., and H. Koyi (1992), Episodic accretion and strain partition-
ing in a model sand wedge, Tectonophysics, 202, 319–333.
Naylor, M., H. D. Sinclair, S. Willett, and P. A. Cowie (2005), A discrete
element model for orogenesis and accretionary wedge growth, J. Geo-
phys. Res., 110, B12403, doi:10.1029/2003JB002940.
Nivie`re, B., M. Giamboni, I. Christophe, and T. Winter (2006), Kinematic
evolution of a tectonic wedge above a flat-lying de´collement: The Alpine
foreland at the interface between the Jura Mountains (Northern Alps) and
the Upper Rhine Graben, Geology, 34, 469–472.
Okubo, C. H., and R. A. Schultz (2005), Evolution of damage zone
geometry and intensity in porous sandstone: Insight gained from strain
energy density, J. Geol. Soc. London, 162, 939–949.
Panian, J., and D. Wiltschko (2004), Ramp initiation in a thrust wedge,
Nature, 427, 624–627.
Panian, J., and D. Wiltschko (2007), Ramp initiation and spacing in a
homogeneous thrust wedge, J. Geophys. Res., 112, B05417,
doi:10.1029/2004JB003596.
Panien, M., G. Schreurs, and A. Pfiffner (2006), Mechanical behaviour of
granular materials used in analogue modelling: Insights from grain
characterisation, ring-shear tests and analogue experiments, J. Struct.
Geol., 28, 1710–1724.
Platt, J. P. (1988), The mechanics of frontal imbrication: A first order
analysis, Geol. Rundsch., 77, 577–589.
Rabinowicz, E. (1958), The intrinsic variables affecting the stick-slip
process, Proc. Phys. Soc., 71, 668–675.
Roering, J. J., M. L. Cooke, and D. D. Pollard (1997), Why blind thrust
faults do not propagate to the Earth’s surface: Numerical modeling of
coseismic deformation associated with thrust-related anticlines, J. Geo-
phys. Res., 102, 11,901–11,912.
Saffer, D. M., and B. A. Bekins (2006), An evaluation of factors
influencing pore pressure in accretionary complexes: Implications for
taper angle and wedge mechanics, J. Geophys. Res., 111, B04101,
doi:10.1029/2005JB003990.
Scholz, C. H. (2002), The Mechanics of Earthquakes and Faulting, 472 pp.,
Cambridge Univ. Press, New York.
Sleep, N. H., S. Stein, R. J. Geller, and R. G. Gordon (1979), Comment on
‘‘The use of the minimum-dissipation principle in tectonophysics’’ by
P. Bird and D. A. Yuen, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 45, 218–220.
B12404 DEL CASTELLO AND COOKE: UNDERTHRUSTING-ACCRETION WORK BUDGET
13 of 14
B12404
Song, T. A., and M. Simons (2003), Large trench-parallel gravity variations
predict seismogenic behavior in subduction zones, Science, 301, 630–
633.
Storti, F., and K. McClay (1995), Influence of syntectonic sedimentation on
thrust wedges in analog models, Geology, 23, 999–1002.
Suppe, J., and D. A. Medwedeff (1990), Geometry and kinematics of fault-
propagation folding, Eclogae Geol. Helv., 83, 409–454.
Timoshenko, S. P. and J. N. Goodier (1934), Theory of Elasticity,
McGraw-Hill, New York.
Vannucchi, P., C. R. Ranero, S. Galeotti, S. M. Straub, D. W. Scholl, and
K. McDougall-Reid (2003), Fast rates of subduction erosion along the
Costa Rica Pacific margin: Implications for nonsteady rates of crustal
recycling at subduction zones, J. Geophys. Res., 108(B11), 2511,
doi:10.1029/2002JB002207.
Wang, K., and Y. Hu (2006), Accretionary prisms in subduction earthquake
cycles: The theory of dynamic Coulomb wedge, J. Geophys. Res., 111,
B06410, doi:10.1029/2005JB004094.
Wells, R. E., R. J. Blakely, Y. Sugiyama, D. W. Scholl, and P. A. Dinterman
(2003), Basin-centered asperities in great subduction zone earthquakes:
A link between slip, subsidence, and subduction erosion?, J. Geophys.
Res., 108(B10), 2507, doi:10.1029/2002JB002072.
Wong, T. F. (1982), Shear fracture energy of Westerly granite from post-
failure behavior, J. Geophys. Res., 87, 990–1000.
Wong, T. F. (1986), On the normal stress dependence of the shear fracture
energy, in Earthquake Source Mechanics, Geophys. Monogr. Ser.,
vol. 37, edited by S. Das, J. Boatwright, and C. H. Scholz, pp. 1–12,
AGU, Washington, D. C.
Yamada, Y. and T. Matsuoka (2005), Digital sandbox modeling using
distinct element method: Applications to fault tectonics, in Faults, fluid
flow, and Petroleum Traps, edited by R. Sorkhabi and Y. Tsuji, AAPG
Mem., 85, 107–123.

M. L. Cooke and M. Del Castello, Geosciences Department, University
of Massachusetts, 611 North Pleasant Street, Amherst, MA 01003, USA.
(mariod@geo.umass.edu)
B12404 DEL CASTELLO AND COOKE: UNDERTHRUSTING-ACCRETION WORK BUDGET
14 of 14
B12404
