DOI: 10.1007/s10936-005-9011-6
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, Vol. 35, No. 2, March 2006 (© 2006)
Planning at the Phonological Level during Sentence
Production
Tatiana T. Schnur,1,2,5 Albert Costa,3 and Alfonso Caramazza4
In two picture–word interference experiments we examined whether phrase boundaries affected
how far in advance speakers plan the sounds of words during sentence production. Participants
produced sentences of varying lengths (short: determiner + noun + verb or long: determiner +
adjective + noun + verb) while ignoring phonologically related and unrelated words to the verb
of the sentence. Response times to begin producing both types of sentences were faster in the
presence of a related versus unrelated distractor. The results suggest that the activation of pho-
nological properties of words outside the ﬁrst phrase and ﬁrst and second phonological word
affect onset of articulation during sentence production. The results are discussed in the light of
previous evidence of phonological planning during multi-word production. Implications for the
phonological facilitation effect in the picture–word interference paradigm are also discussed.
KEY WORDS: phonological encoding; planning; picture–word interference paradigm; sen-
tence production.
INTRODUCTION
Although producing speech feels unplanned and spontaneous, our lan-
guage system considers multiple words before speaking begins. When a
speaker wants to produce a sentence, how much phonological information
is activated in advance of speaking? Here we investigated whether phrase
and word boundaries affected the extent of phonological planning dur-
ing sentence production. Previous research has shown that multiple words
The research reported in this article served as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for the
PhD degree at Harvard University for Tatiana T. Schnur.
1 Moss Rehabilitation Research Institute, Korman, Suite 213, 1200 West Tabor Road,
Philadelphia, PA 19147, USA.
2 University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
3 Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
4 Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
5 To whom all correspondence should be addressed. e-mail: tschnur@mail.med.upenn.edu
189
0090-6905/06/0300–0189/0 © 2006 Springer Science+Business Media, Inc.
190 Schnur, Costa, and Caramazza
are phonologically planned before a single phrase (e.g., a noun phrase like
the red car) is produced (Alario & Caramazza, 2002; Costa & Caramazza,
2002; Jescheniak et al., 2003; Miozzo & Caramazza, 1999) but only one
word and phrase (e.g., the arrow) is phonologically planned in advance
of articulation when multiple phrases are produced (e.g., the arrow and
the bag; Meyer, 1996). The disparate results left open the possibility that
the extent of phonological planning is determined by phrase boundaries
(major grammatical or phonological phrase boundaries), not by phonolog-
ical word boundaries (a content word and any unstressed function word)
suggesting that entire phrases are phonologically planned before articula-
tion begins. We present results from two experiments that investigated how
far in advance of articulation the sounds associated with a sentence are
planned when multiple phrases are produced. We used the picture–word
interference paradigm where participants produced intransitive sentences
of varying lengths (either with a simple or complex subject noun phrase)
while ignoring distractor words phonologically related and unrelated to the
verb (the second or third phonological word) of the sentence. The results
suggest that phonological planning extends across phrase boundaries dur-
ing sentence production. The sounds associated with several words are
retrieved before articulation begins. We discuss the implication of these
results for models that predict how far in advance of articulation the lan-
guage system considers future words.
Because speech errors occur in a systematic fashion, they are a poten-
tially useful database for examining processing constraints on speech pro-
duction. Evidence for the extent of planning during speech production has
come from two types of speech errors, word exchanges and sound exchanges.
For example, in the word exchange error Give a baby to the banana (exam-
ple taken from Meyer, 1996), words are exchanged in a sentence and these
exchanges can occur across phrases and usually within a clause. These errors
usually involve whole words and tend to be restricted to the same syntac-
tic class (e.g., noun for noun, verb for verb). In contrast, sound exchange
errors like Bill snovels show (vs. Bill shovels snow) (taken from Garrett, 1980),
involve sound exchanges and occur regardless of grammatical class (see
Dell & Reich, 1981 for discussion of errors reﬂecting both phonological and
grammatical processing constraints, i.e., lexical-bias effects). Because speech
errors obey different constraints, they are thought to arise at different levels
of encoding. In the case of whole word exchanges, because the exchanges are
whole words and are not related by sound it is believed that they occur at
the grammatical encoding stage when lexical items are selected and ordered.
In the case of sound exchanges, the errors are believed to arise at the phono-
logical encoding level where the sounds of words are selected. Phonological
Phonological Planning During Sentence Production 191
errors can thus reveal how much of an utterance is phonologically available
at one time.
Patterns in phonological errors suggest that phonological encoding is
less extensive than grammatical encoding, in that phonological encoding
occurs within phrases (involving adjacent words), as opposed to across
clausal boundaries. For example, sound exchanges occur within a phrase
and clause, as opposed to across clauses, approximately 87% of the time
(where a phrase is deﬁned as a simple noun phrase (NP), or a verb-phrase
(VP) and any of its direct object NPs; Garrett, 1980).
Theoretically, how much planning produces ﬂuent speech? Consider
production of the sentence The girl kicks the ball. Assume that the mes-
sage has been conceptually formulated, and the speaker now needs to
select the words that correspond to the concepts in the message. If each
processing level must wait for processing of the entire message before
the next level of processing to begin, then all the words corresponding to the
message would have to be selected and encoded grammatically before the
sounds were retrieved during phonological encoding. Before the utterance
could be articulated, all the sounds corresponding to the utterance would
have to be selected. This planning strategy might result in long hesitations
between bursts of speech. In order to facilitate ﬂuent speech and limit severe
dysﬂuencies it has been suggested that only a minimal amount of informa-
tion needs to be processed at one level for the next processing level to begin
(Levelt, 1989). With incremental planning, words are delivered one at a time
from grammatical to phonological encoding. Articulation of the motor pro-
gram for the ﬁrst syllable the begins when the phonological segments corre-
sponding to the girl, (the ﬁrst phonological word) are syllabiﬁed. Onset of
articulation depends on how long it takes to construct the ﬁrst phonological
word of the utterance. In most cases, the amount of planning needs to be
no more than one lexical or phonological word in advance of articulation.
However, there may be some exceptions. Planning may vary as a function
of the rate of speech, where slow rates may induce more planning. Alterna-
tively, articulation in some cases may begin with less than a phonological
word (Meyer et al., 2003; Schriefers & Teruel, 1999). However, it is argued
that in general, speech proceeds one lexical and phonological word at a time,
where “execution can follow phonological encoding at a very short distance,
a distance smaller than a full phonological phrase. This distance is proba-
bly the size of a phonological word. . . [where] buffering will be minimal or
absent” (Levelt, 1989, p. 421). We will refer to this idea as radical incre-
mentality (following Ferreira & Swets, 2002). Thus the question of interest
here is the degree to which phonological planning is radically incremental
during sentence production, e.g., whether articulation follows phonological
192 Schnur, Costa, and Caramazza
encoding at a distance of a phonological word, or whether several elements
(words or phrases) are phonologically activated before articulation begins.
Speech error evidence suggests that phonological information is acti-
vated one word in advance of speaking. Although speech error evidence
has provided useful insights into how the speech production system is
organized, errors may not reﬂect normal speech processing (see Meyer,
1992). With regard to planning, slips of the tongue may arise precisely
because too many words are computed at the same time. They thus erro-
neously suggest more planning than normally occurs. Although error evi-
dence has provided insight into planning in spontaneous speech for the
reasons mentioned above, it is important to complement error evidence
with evidence from speech produced without errors, under experimental
control.
The question of whether articulation follows phonological encoding
within a distance of a phonological word (radical incrementality) has been
addressed here and elsewhere using the picture–word interference para-
digm. In this paradigm, participants simply name a picture. For example,
they may see a picture of a table and produce table. Printed on the pic-
ture is a distractor word which participants automatically read although
they are told to ignore it. A distractor word interferes with picture naming
by affecting naming speed. By varying the relationship between the word
and the picture, the interference produced by the distractor is systemat-
ically varied. For example, participants name the picture table and the
word written inside is chair. These concepts are semantically (categorically)
related. Participants are slower to name table with chair written inside in
comparison to an unrelated word. This is referred to as the semantic inter-
ference effect (Glaser & Dungelhoff, 1984; Glaser & Glaser, 1989; Lupker,
1979). Naming of the picture in this case is thought to be slower because
the closer the word and picture are in meaning, the harder it is to decide
which one must be selected for production (Levelt et al., 1999; Roelofs,
1992). While the semantic interference effect slows selection of the correct
word, another effect occurs when sounds are retrieved. For example, a par-
ticipant names the picture table with the word tape written inside. Here,
picture naming is accelerated when the word sounds like the picture name
in comparison to an unrelated word. This is referred to as the phonolog-
ical facilitation effect (Lupker, 1982; Meyer & Schriefers, 1991; Rayner &
Springer, 1986). This acceleration of speech could be the result of overlap-
ping of sound representations between the picture name and the written
word.
It is important to note that depending on where the phonological
facilitation effect occurs during the speech production process, phonolog-
ical facilitation effects may reﬂect processes at more than one level of
Phonological Planning During Sentence Production 193
speech production. With the picture–word interference paradigm, evidence
suggests that the semantic interference and phonological facilitation effects
arise at different levels. Because semantic and phonological effects follow
different time courses (depending on when a distractor is displayed rela-
tive to the picture), the effects are thought to arise at different levels of
the speech process (Levelt et al., 1991; Schriefers et al., 1990; Starreveld &
La Heij, 1996). Semantic interference is thought to arise during the selec-
tion of the lexical item, at the grammatical encoding stage. Phonological
facilitation is thought to occur during selection of the phonological repre-
sentation of the word to be produced, during phonological encoding. We
return to this issue in the General Discussion.
Because the domain of syllabiﬁcation is the phonological word
(Levelt, 1989, 1992; Levelt & Wheeldon, 1994) and this is the smallest pro-
sodic unit, most studies have examined whether one phonological word
(radically incremental planning) or more than one phonological word is
planned before articulation. Meyer (1996) looked at the extent of plan-
ning at the grammatical and phonological encoding stages for Dutch utter-
ances of two objects using the picture–word interference paradigm. For
example, participants described pictures of object pairs using phrases like
de pijl en de tas (the arrow and the bag) and de pijl staat naast de tas
(the arrow is next to the bag). To look at planning at the grammatical
encoding stage, semantically related word distractors to the ﬁrst (spear for
arrow) or the second noun (suitcase for bag) were displayed during pic-
ture naming. It was found that response times were slowed when the dis-
tractor was semantically related to either noun. This suggested that before
participants produced the utterance, they had already selected the ﬁrst and
second noun at the grammatical level. To examine phonological encod-
ing, the distractor word was phonologically related to either the ﬁrst noun
(art for arrow) or the second noun (ball for bag). Meyer found phonolog-
ical facilitation to the ﬁrst noun, but no facilitation to the second noun.
These results support radical incrementality where only a minimal amount
of information is necessary for articulation to begin, i.e., a phonological
word.
Further support for radical incrementality has been argued from
evidence from a prepared speech paradigm in Dutch when two and three
phonological word sentences were produced (Wheeldon & Lahiri, 1997).
Participants were instructed to memorize a visually presented noun phrase
(e.g., fresh water), listen to an auditory question (e.g., what do you seek)
and after a variable delay, produce a prepared response (e.g., I seek fresh
water). Response times were assumed to reﬂect preparation of an entire
abstract phonological representation, that is, a phonological representation
produced after syntactic structure is determined but before the motor plans
194 Schnur, Costa, and Caramazza
corresponding to the syllables to be produced (phonetic encoding) occurs.
The inﬂuence of the number of phonological words and their complexity was
examined, while the number of syllables and content words was held con-
stant. Three phonological word phrases were produced more slowly than
two phonological word phrases. These results show that when memorized
utterances are produced, phonological planning depends on the number of
phonological words in the utterance. In a separate experiment when mem-
orized utterances were produced immediately, planning encompassed the
ﬁrst phonological word, but whether planning extended to two phonological
words was not tested.
In contrast to the above results, the activation of phonological proper-
ties of words outside the ﬁrst phonological word was seen to affect the onset
of articulation during noun phrase production. Using the picture–word
interference paradigm, Costa and Caramazza (2002) found phonological
facilitation to both the adjective and noun in both English and Spanish
noun phrases (e.g., the red car or el coche rojo). The words are part of the
ﬁrst and second phonological words. Using the same paradigm, Jescheniak
et al. (2003) found phonological activation of the object name in noun
phrase production in German when it was part of the second and third
phonological word (although the effect varied between phonological facili-
tation and interference). Using a simple picture-naming paradigm, phono-
logical properties outside the ﬁrst phonological word was seen to affect onset
of articulation in noun phrase production in French and Italian (Alario &
Caramazza, 2002; Miozzo & Caramazza, 1999).
Thus, evidence for the extent of phonological planning is mixed. The
production of single phrases showed evidence that the level of activation
of the phonological properties of words belonging to the second and third
phonological word affected the onset of articulation (Alario & Caramazza,
2002; Costa & Caramazza, 2002; Miozzo & Caramazza, 1999). When
multiple noun phrases were produced, only activation of phonological prop-
erties of words in the ﬁrst phonological word affected articulation, consistent
with radical incrementality (Meyer, 1996; Wheeldon & Lahiri, 1997).
The difference in the extent of phonological planning between the
above sets of experiments when the picture–word interference paradigm
was used may be due to the number of phrases produced. Two phrases
were produced in Meyer’s (1996) study, versus only one phrase in other
studies (Alario & Caramazza, 2002; Costa & Caramazza, 2002; Miozzo &
Caramazza, 1999). Phonological facilitation may not have occurred for the
second object in Meyer (1996) because it occurred across a phrase bound-
ary, in the second noun phrase. It is thus possible that phonological planning
extended across multiple phonological words because an entire phrase was
planned, as opposed to one or more phonological words.
Phonological Planning During Sentence Production 195
In the experiments presented here, we addressed whether the difference
in previous results was due to the number of phrases produced, e.g.,
whether the presence of a phrase boundary inﬂuences phonological plan-
ning. Consistent with the design of the experiments outlined above, we
manipulated a phrase boundary deﬁned both syntactically and phonolog-
ically.6 The extent of phonological planning is addressed in terms of
phonological representations, e.g., prosodic units under the assumption
from modular production models that syntactic structure does not impact
processing at the phonological level (Levelt et al., 1999). Thus, we assume
here that phonological phrase boundaries are relevant to planning at the
phonological level, consistent with previous work. However, whether syn-
tactic structure impacts phonological planning independent of prosodic
structure is a separate empirical question.
Because the extent of phonological planning has primarily been
addressed in the production of single words and concatenated phrases, the
experiments here further explore phonological planning when sentences are
produced. Previous work by Meyer (1996) involved sentence production
where the verb was always is, a potentially syntactically and phonolog-
ically impoverished verb (see Ferreira, 2000). Thus it is also of interest
to explore phonological planning during sentence production when non-
gerundial verbs are produced.
The picture–word interference paradigm and the phonological facili-
tation effect were employed to test whether the activation of phonologi-
cal properties beyond a phonological word (PW) and phrase (P) (e.g., [The
girl]PW P [ jumps]PW P; Experiment 1) and multiple phonological words
(e.g., [[The orange]PW [girl] PW]P [jumps]PW P; Experiment 2) affected onset
of articulation.
In Experiment 1, we maintained a property of Costa and Caramazza
(2002) where three words were produced (e.g., the red car) while increasing
the number of phrases produced. Participants produced intransitive sen-
tences describing an actor and action (e.g., girl jumping) while producing
two phrases, a noun phrase (NP) and a verb phrase (VP) (e.g., the girl
jumps).
6 Phonological phrases are created from groups of phonological words and are derived from
syntactic structure. Speciﬁcally, all phonological words that fall within a major grammati-
cal phrase up to the phrase’s right boundary are grouped together to form a phonological
phrase (the X-max algorithm, Selkirk, 1986; for discussion of deﬁnitions of a phonological
phrase, see Levelt, 1989; Selkirk, 1986). Phonological phrases are always syntactic phrases;
however, the reverse is not always the case (e.g., She kicks the ball is considered one phono-
logical phrase but is comprised of several grammatical phrases).
196 Schnur, Costa, and Caramazza
EXPERIMENT 1
In Experiment 1 we tested whether the activation of the phonological
properties associated with the verb in a sentence affected articulation
onset for sentences like The girl jumps where the verb was part of the
second phonological word and phrase ([The girl]PW P / [ jumps]PW P).
Phonologically related distractors to the verb were displayed in compari-
son to unrelated distractors and a baseline condition of a string of XXXs.
The baseline condition was included to verify that the presentation of
word distractors affected response times. Participants described pictures
depicting four different actors (men, women, boys, and girls) performing
intransitive actions. If response times were faster in the phonological con-
dition in comparison to the unrelated condition, this was taken to indicate
that the level of activation of the phonological properties of the verb and
any preceding content had an impact on the onset of articulation. If artic-
ulation followed phonological encoding at a distance of a phonological
word (radical incrementality) or only for a single phrase when sentences
were produced, then we did not expect response times to differ when nam-
ing with a related versus unrelated distractor word. Evidence from Meyer
(1996), where no phonological effects were found beyond the ﬁrst phrase
and phonological word, supports this prediction. However, if phonologi-
cal planning occurred for more than one phonological word and phrase,
then we expected participants to name pictures more rapidly in the context
of a phonologically related word in comparison to an unrelated word. As
a control to verify that participants were processing the word distractors,
we expected participants to be slower to name pictures in the presence of
unrelated words, in comparison to the baseline condition of a string of
XXXs.
Method
Participants
Sixteen Harvard University undergraduate students participated. They
were paid or received credit for an introductory psychology course. All
were native English speakers. None participated in other experiments.
Materials
Twenty-eight line drawings depicting actions were used as target stim-
uli (modiﬁed from the materials used in Masterson & Druks, 1998) (see
Appendix A). All pictures depicted an actor performing an intransitive
action. An actor was depicted as either a boy, girl, man, or woman, so
Phonological Planning During Sentence Production 197
that seven of the 28 actions fell into each category. Each picture was pre-
sented with four distractor words: (a) phonologically related to the verb
(e.g., rust for run); (b) phonologically unrelated to the verb (e.g., shawl
for run); (c) a baseline condition (a string of 6 Xs printed inside each
picture); and (d) a ﬁller condition. The ﬁller condition was included to
reduce the percentage of trials where the distractor and picture were pho-
nologically related to 25% of the total trials. The ﬁller condition included
unrelated distractors and was not analyzed. The pictures and the distrac-
tors were paired so that each distractor appeared once in the phonologi-
cally related and once in the unrelated condition. For example, the picture
the girl jumps appeared once with the phonologically related distractor jug,
and once with the unrelated distractor sneer. The same distractors were
displayed for the picture the man sneezes. Except in this case, sneer was the
phonologically related distractor, and jug was the unrelated distractor. The
distractors paired with each picture had similar frequencies (Francis &
Kucera, 1982). Distractors were chosen so that they did not sound similar
to the agent of the sentence except in two cases due to experimenter error.
Phonologically related distractors shared the ﬁrst two segments with the
verb of the picture. Because it was difﬁcult to select distractors that sat-
isﬁed all the above conditions, distractor grammatical class was not con-
trolled for.
The distractors were shown in 28-point boldface capital letters in
Geneva font, superimposed on the pictures. Pictures were centered at ﬁxa-
tion. Word position varied randomly in the region around ﬁxation to pre-
vent participants from systematically ﬁxating the portion of the picture not
containing the distractor. However, for an individual picture, the position
of all of its distractors was the same. Distractors and pictures were pre-
sented simultaneously.
The experimental stimuli were presented in four different blocks of 32
trials each (28 experimental trials and four warm-up trials) for a total of
128 trials. Each picture was presented once per block. At the beginning
of each block, four pictures were included as warm-up trials. The trials
were randomized so that (a) the same picture did not occur twice in the
same block; (b) the same distractor condition occurred no more than three
times in a row; (c) no agent occurred more than twice in a row; and (d)
no phoneme in the subject or verb was the same from trial to trial. Four
different block orders were designed and presented to participants accord-
ing to a Latin-square design.
Before the experiment proper, participants had two practice series.
In the ﬁrst series participants were presented with all the pictures with
a series of Xs printed inside each picture, to train the subject to use
the correct name for each picture. In the second practice series, they
198 Schnur, Costa, and Caramazza
were presented with all the pictures with practice distractors printed
inside every picture. These practice distractors were not used during the
experiment.
Apparatus
The pictures were presented on a Macintosh using the PsychLab pro-
gram (Bub and Gym, University of Victoria, British Columbia, Canada).
Response times (RTs) were measured to the nearest millisecond by means
of a voice key (KOSS headset/CMU voicebox) from appearance of the pic-
ture until the voice key was triggered.
Procedure
Participants were asked to name the picture using a full sentence (e.g.,
the girl jumps). Participants were tested individually in a darkened testing
room. They were instructed to name pictures “like they normally speak”
and as accurately as possible. When participants made mistakes during
the practice session, they were asked to name the picture correctly. Each
trial proceeded as follows: A ﬁxation point (+) was shown for 700ms, fol-
lowed by presentation of the stimulus 300ms later. Pictures remained on
the screen until the microphone was triggered. There was a 2000ms pause
between trials. The experimenter remained in the testing room in order
to record incorrect responses and when voice key malfunctions occurred.
A session lasted approximately 25min.
Analyses
Three types of responses were classiﬁed as errors: (a) production of
the wrong name; (b) verbal disﬂuencies (stuttering, utterance repairs, etc.);
and (c) voice key malfunctions. Responses faster than 300ms and three
SDs from a participant’s condition mean were also eliminated. Separate
ANOVAs were carried out on the errors and response times using either
the means per subject or means per item as dependent variables yielding
F1 and F2 statistics, respectively. The variable Type of distractor was ana-
lyzed with two levels for all ANOVAs: either phonologically related and
unrelated to test the phonological facilitation effect, or unrelated and base-
line, to test the effectiveness of the presentation of a word distractor. Type
of distractor was considered a within-subject and within-item variable.
Results and Discussion
Table I reports a summary of the data. The naming latencies from one
item were removed because it elicited a high percentage of errors (more
Phonological Planning During Sentence Production 199
Table I. Experiment 1. Mean Response Times (ms),
Standard Deviations (SD) and Percentage of Errors
(Error %), for Phonologically Related, Unrelated, and
Baseline Conditions
Type of distractor Mean SD Error %
Phonologically related 792 83 8.7
Phonologically unrelated 818 91 12.5
Baseline (XXXs) 784 76 7.4
Phonological effect
(Related—Unrelated) −26*
A signiﬁcant difference of p < 0.05 is indicated by an *.
than 30%). Error rates consisted of 8.7% of the data before outliers were
removed and 9.5% of the data after outliers were eliminated. The differ-
ence in error rates between phonologically related and unrelated conditions
reached near signiﬁcance [F1(1, 15) = 9.23, MSE= 0.2962 p = 0.008;
F2(1, 26) = 3.82, MSE= 0.2962, p = 0.06] and error rates were signiﬁ-
cantly higher for the unrelated versus baseline condition [F1(1, 15) = 9.13,
MSE= 0.5601, p = 0.008; F2(1, 26) = 11.08, MSE = 0.5601, p = 0.002].
The pattern does not reﬂect a speed-accuracy trade-off as errors were higher
when RTs were slower for both comparisons.
Response times were faster in the phonologically related condition
(792ms) versus the unrelated condition [818ms; F1(1, 15) = 6.29, MSE =
136527, p = 0.02; F2(1, 26) = 5.08, MSE = 142441, p = 0.03]. The
baseline condition produced faster naming latencies (784ms) in compari-
son to the unrelated condition [818ms; F1(1, 15) = 16.32, MSE = 240646,
p = 0.001; F2(1, 26) = 8.62, MSE = 228128, p = 0.006].7
We additionally examined whether the phonological facilitation effect
changed between the ﬁrst half and second half of the experiment to
test whether participants developed a strategy whereby they intentionally
focused their attention on the relationship between distractor and verb,
delaying onset of articulation until the verb was phonologically encoded.
If this were the case we would expect the facilitation effect to be larger
during the second half of the experiment as participants learned the rela-
tionship between distractor and target. Response times in the ﬁrst half
7 In order to test whether the chosen distractors could reliably produce an effect independent
of sentence context, a separate group of participants named the same items, but named
the verb in isolation using the 3rd person singular form of the action name (e.g. jumps).
When participants named verbs alone, response times were signiﬁcantly faster in the pho-
nologically related condition in comparison to the unrelated condition [F1(1, 9) = 10.97,
MSE= 264348, p = 0.009; F2(1, 27) = 13.79, MSE= 297477, p < 0.001].
200 Schnur, Costa, and Caramazza
of the experiment were on average 39ms longer than in the second half
which resulted in a signiﬁcant effect of experiment half (F1(1, 15) = 20.51,
MSE = 182620, p < 0.0001). Although experiment half interacted signiﬁ-
cantly with condition (F1(1, 15) = 13.58, MSE = 120915, p < 0.01) the
phonological facilitation effect decreased between the ﬁrst (−51ms) and
second half of the experiment (−4ms) suggesting that participants were
more susceptible to the distractor effect when they had been less exposed
to the experiment, which does not support a strategic interpretation to the
phonological facilitation effect seen here. Additionally, related words were
presented on only 25% of all trials so that three-quarters of the time there
was no relationship between distractor and verb, limiting the usefulness of
a strategy of focusing on the distractor–verb relationship. Elsewhere it has
been shown that the magnitude of the facilitation effect does not change
whether phonologically related distractors comprise 50% or 25% of total
trials, suggesting that the facilitation effect is not a strategic one (Meyer &
Schriefers, 1991).
The experiment showed that production of a sentence (e.g., the girl
jumps) was facilitated with a distractor phonologically related to the verb
(jug) compared to an unrelated distractor (sneer). Assuming that the
phonological facilitation effect reﬂects processes at the level of phonolog-
ical encoding, the phonological properties of the verb, part of the sec-
ond phonological word and phrase were active before articulation. This
result is compatible with results from Costa and Caramazza (2002) and
Jescheniak et al. (2003), where phonological facilitation was observed for
the second phonological word for noun phrases like the red car. This
result is also compatible with evidence from noun phrase production,
where phonological planning extended two phonological words (Alario &
Caramazza, 2002; Miozzo & Caramazza, 1999; Roelofs, 1998). Experiment
1 extends these results by showing that phonological planning extends
beyond phrase boundaries. The presence of a phrase boundary does not
necessarily limit the extent of phonological planning. Put another way,
articulation can begin with more than a single phonological word or
phrase phonologically encoded.
These results are inconsistent with results of sentence production
from Meyer (1996) as more than one phonological word was planned in
advance of articulation. The lack of phonological facilitation to the sec-
ond object in the second phrase in sentences like de pijl en de tas (the
arrow and the bag; Meyer, 1996) may have been due to the number of
phonological words in these utterances as opposed to the presence of a
phrase boundary. The utterance, de pijl en de tas may be produced in two
phonological words, [de pijl en]PW [de tas]PW, with the main stress on pijl
(arrow) and tas (bag). However, it is possible that participants provided
Phonological Planning During Sentence Production 201
extra stress on the function word en (and), creating a three phonologi-
cal word utterance, [de pijl] PW [EN]PW [de tas]PW. The second object de
tas (the bag), would have been part of the third phonological word. Did
Meyer (1996) fail to ﬁnd phonological facilitation to the second object
because the bag was part of the third phonological word? Jescheniak
et al. (2003) found when complex noun phrases like the big red dog were
produced, phonologically related distractors to the object of the noun
phrase (and third phonological word) produced interference, not facilita-
tion. Thus, we tested whether we could obtain a phonological facilitation
effect to the second phrase and third phonological word of a sentence
where previous results have found either no signiﬁcant effects (Meyer,
1996) or interference (Jescheniak et al., 2003).
EXPERIMENT 2
In order to test whether phonological planning extends to three pho-
nological words and second phrase in an utterance, in this experiment par-
ticipants described the same pictures as in Experiment 1, but they also
named the color the person was drawn in, e.g., The orange girl jumps. The
verb in the sentence is part of the third phonological word and second
phrase (e.g., [[the orange]PW [girl]PW]P [jumps]PW P). If phonological plan-
ning extends to three phonological words during sentence production, then
we expected to see the same pattern of results seen in Experiment 1—pho-
nological facilitation to the verb. However, if phonological planning does
not extend beyond the second phonological word we did not expect facil-
itation effects to the verb.
Method
Participants
Twenty-one Harvard University undergraduate students were paid,
or received course credit for their participation. All were native English
speakers. None participated in other experiments.
Materials
The same materials and distractors from Experiment 1 were used in
this experiment. However, the actors were depicted in one of four colors:
pink, red, orange, and yellow (see Appendix A). Colors were assigned to
pictures so that no words in the sentence began with the same sound or
rhymed. The same color was used in a single picture for all conditions
202 Schnur, Costa, and Caramazza
except for the ﬁller condition. In this case, an alternative color (one of the
other three) was used. For example, for the picture of the girl jumps, the
girl appeared in orange for the phonologically related, unrelated, and base-
line conditions. However, when the picture was displayed in the ﬁller con-
dition, the picture appeared in a different color, e.g., the yellow girl jumps.
This was to mitigate any participant strategy where a picture was mem-
orized with regard to its color. Although unlikely considering there were
32 different pictures, by having a picture appear in a different color for
25% of the total trials, we thought this would ensure spontaneous sentence
description. All colors were named an equal number of times.
The experimental stimuli were presented in four different blocks, for
a total of 128 trials (112 experimental trials and 16 ﬁller trials), as in
Experiment 1. The trials were randomized as in Experiment 1 with the
further restriction that no color occurred more than twice in a row.
Procedure
Participants were asked to name the picture using a full sentence (e.g.,
the orange girl jumps). All other aspects of the experiment were the same
as Experiment 1.
Results and Discussion
Table II reports a summary of the data. The naming latencies from
one item and subject were removed because of a high percentage of errors
(more than 30%). Because of experimenter error, the sixth replication of
the Latin-square design was not completed.
Table II. Experiment 2. Mean Response Times (ms),
Standard Deviations (SD) and Percentage of Errors
(Error %), for Phonologically Related, Unrelated, and
Baseline Conditions
Type of distractor Mean SD Error %
Phonologically related 861 139 12.9
Phonologically unrelated 898 169 18.7
Baseline (XXXs) 857 159 13.5
Phonological effect
(Related–Unrelated) −37
A signiﬁcant difference of p < 0.05 is indicated by an *.
Phonological Planning During Sentence Production 203
Error rates consisted of 14.2% of the data before outliers were removed
and 15% of the data after outliers were eliminated.8 Error rates were
signiﬁcantly different between phonologically related and unrelated condi-
tions [F1(1, 19) = 10.50, MSE = 0.8898, p = 0.004; F2(1, 26) = 7.75,
MSE = 0.8898, p = 0.009]. The difference between errors rates for unre-
lated and baseline conditions was marginally signiﬁcant [F1(1, 19) = 4.07,
MSE = 0.7259, p = 0.06; F2(1, 26) = 4.87, MSE = 0.7259, p = 0.04)]. As
in Experiment 1, there was no speed-accuracy tradeoff.
Response times were faster in the phonologically related condi-
tion (861ms) than the unrelated condition [898ms; F1(1, 19) = 10.56,
MSE = 469104, p = 0.004; F2(1, 26) = 5.86, MSE = 31306, p = 0.02].
The baseline condition produced faster naming latencies (857ms) in compar-
ison to the unrelated condition [898ms; F1(1, 19) = 15.89, MSE = 469104,
p < 0.001; F2(1, 26) = 4.40, MSE = 326070, p = 0.04]. We examined
whether the phonological facilitation effect increased in magnitude from the
ﬁrst half to the second half of the experiment as in Experiment 1. Response
times were 49ms slower in the ﬁrst half than second half of the experiment
which resulted in a signiﬁcant effect of experiment half (F1(1, 15) = 17.14,
MSE = 524735, p < 0.001). However, experiment half did not interact with
condition (F1 < 1).
As in Experiment 1, phonologically related distractors to the verb
facilitated sentence production compared to unrelated distractors. Here
however, the phonological properties corresponding to the verb were part
of the third phonological word, and second phrase. Experiment 2 showed
that in the case of sentence production, phonological planning extends
three phonological words, and two phrases. The results from Experiment
2 again suggest that phrase boundaries do not play a role in the extent of
phonological planning. The lack of effect to the second object in Meyer
(1996) cannot have been due to the object being outside the extent of pho-
nological planning if that extent is deﬁned by a phrase or phonological
word boundary. The direction of the phonological effect (facilitation) in
Experiment 2 was in contrast to the inhibition seen by Jescheniak et al.
(2003). In the General Discussion we will discuss possible reasons for the
varying effects in phonological planning.
8 Although error rates are higher than in Experiment 1, they are within the range seen in
multi-word production studies (an average 14% error reported by Meyer (1996) and an
average of 9.6% reported by Jescheniak et al. (2003)).
204 Schnur, Costa, and Caramazza
690
720
750
780
810
840
870
900
930
960
Experiment 1: The girl walks Experiment2: The orange girl walks
R
es
po
ns
e 
Ti
m
e 
(m
s)
Phonologically related
Phonologically unrelated
Fig. 1. Experiments 1 and 2: Response times and standard error bars for sentences where
distractors phonologically related and unrelated to the verb were displayed, when the verb
was part of the second phrase.
GENERAL DISCUSSION
The principal ﬁnding of the work presented here is that during
sentence production phonological planning crosses phonological word
and phrase boundaries extending several items in advance of speak-
ing. In two separate experiments participants were asked to name two-
phrase sentences (NP+VP) of two phonological words (e.g., [ The girl]PW
[ jumps]PW) or three phonological words (e.g., [ The orange]PW [girl]PW
[ jumps]PW). Participants were faster to produce both types of sentences in
the presence of a phonologically related distractor to the verb in compar-
ison to an unrelated distractor. The results of Experiments 1 and 2 (see
Fig. 1) extend previous evidence by demonstrating that modiﬁcation of the
level of activation of phonological properties of the second phrase and
second and third phonological word in utterances affected the onset of
articulation when sentences were produced. This evidence is not consistent
with radical incrementality where articulation follows phonological encod-
ing at a distance of one phonological word. These results suggest that sev-
eral items are buffered instead of the buffer being “minimal or absent”
(Levelt, 1989).
Phonological Planning During Sentence Production 205
Previous investigations of phonological planning have yielded mixed
results. When multiple phrases were produced, phonological planning
extended one phonological word (Meyer, 1996). Similarly, evidence from
a prepared speech paradigm where two and three phonological word
utterances were produced has also been used to support the phonolog-
ical word as the preferred extent of planning during sentence produc-
tion (Wheeldon & Lahiri, 1997). However, when one phrase consisting
of two or three phonological words was produced, phonological planning
extended to all phonological words (Alario & Caramazza, 2002; Costa &
Caramazza, 2002; Miozzo & Caramazza, 1999). We tested whether differ-
ences in results were due to the number of phonological words or phrases.
Differences between results cannot be due to the presence of phrase
boundaries or the number of phonological words produced. The results
from Experiments 1 and 2, where the extent of phonological planning
included the second phrase and second and third phonological words, rule
out this possibility.
Why the discrepancy between results showing phonological planning
of one phonological word versus more than one word before articula-
tion begins? In the following we discuss two possible explanations. One
concerns the fact that for the experiments here verbs were phonologi-
cally facilitated, and verbs may play a special role during grammatical
and therefore phonological encoding. The second possibility concerns a
qualitative difference when naming pictures that depict integrated versus
discrete entities.
In the Experiments presented in this paper distractors were displayed
related to the verb in comparison to distractors being related to an adjec-
tive or noun in previous work. Ferreira (2000) in her model of syntac-
tic production suggested that the main verb of a sentence is crucial for
creation of a sentence’s syntactic structure. In her model, a verb must be
part of the syntactic representation of the sentence before the subject NP
is grammatically encoded. Thus, a main verb is lexically selected before
other elements in the sentence. Elsewhere it has been suggested that a verb
is selected either at the same time as a subject NP or soon afterwards
(Bock, 1987; Grifﬁn, 2000). If we assume that phonological properties of
selected lexical items are automatically activated, under this framework
even if the verb is not the ﬁrst item to be produced, its phonological prop-
erties are activated before elements in the subject NP. By presenting a dis-
tractor phonologically similar to the verb, it is possible this may have sped
up retrieval of its phonological properties, freeing up resources for the
retrieval of phonological properties corresponding to the subject NP.
Although we are not aware of any speciﬁc evidence that speaks to
whether verbs are selected before other elements in a sentence, other
206 Schnur, Costa, and Caramazza
results have shown that the grammatical “importance” of the primed item
in the picture–word interference task does not independently account for
phonological facilitation effects. Costa and Caramazza (2002) asked par-
ticipants to produce noun phrases in both English (the red car) and
Spanish (el coche roja). Participants were faster to produce the noun
phrase in English when a distractor was phonologically related to the word
car. The phonological facilitation effect may have been seen for car in
English because car was the lexical head of the noun phrase. To address
this issue they also had participants name the same pictures in Spanish,
where the word order is reversed. In Spanish, the adjective roja occurs
after the noun in el coche roja. If car were phonologically active only
because it is the lexical head of the noun phrase then one would not
expect to see phonological facilitation to an item after the lexical head.
Results showed in Spanish that both car and red were phonologically
active. These results suggest that priming a lexical head of phrase phono-
logically does not alone account for the extent of phonological planning.
A verb could be conceptually or grammatically important indepen-
dent of its status as a lexical head of phrase and thus it is possible this
is why we found phonological facilitation for the verb when it was part of
the second and third phonological word. However, some evidence suggests
that planning is not determined by the grammatical status of the primed
element during sentence production. Schriefers et al. (1998) examined the
semantic interference effect for verbs during sentence production using the
picture–word interference task in German. Semantic interference effects
were only found when a verb occupied the ﬁrst position in an utterance,
and only when it was transitive. Schriefers et al. interpreted these results
to suggest that articulation of a sentence was not dependent on the lexical
selection of the verb of the sentence. Unfortunately the lack of a semantic
interference effect is hard to interpret because semantic interference effects
to verbs when produced in isolation have been inconsistent (Schnur et al.,
2002). In sum, although the grammatical importance (i.e., lexical head of
phrase) does not appear to account for the extent of phonological plan-
ning seen in the experiments presented here, it is not clear from current
evidence whether the conceptual or grammatical importance of verbs was
a factor.
A second difference between these experiments was the number of dis-
tinct entities named e.g., two in Meyer (1996) (the arrow and the bag)
versus one elsewhere (the red car; the girl kicks). Although this distinc-
tion is not fully formulated, intuitively the concepts depicted in pictures of
a girl jumping or a red car are integrated in a way that arrow and bag
are not. The action is not independent of the actor, or the color inde-
pendent of the object. The difference in extent of phonological planning
Phonological Planning During Sentence Production 207
might be due to a difference in the number of distinct entities named.
The extent of phonological planning depends on, among other factors,
its input from conceptual and grammatical encoding. In picture naming,
articulation may not follow phonological encoding at a distance of multi-
ple phonological words. Instead the amount phonologically planned may
correspond to the number of phonological words that describe a single
conceptual unit. Articulation may begin when the ﬁrst conceptual unit is
fully phonologically planned. This may be another possibility for why the
experiments presented here pattern with those of Costa and Caramazza
(2002) and Jescheniak et al. (2003) in comparison to Meyer (1996). Evi-
dence from eye gaze durations where two objects are named sequentially
suggests that speakers processed the left-most object until its grammatical
and/or phonological properties were retrieved before accessing information
about the right-most object (Grifﬁn, 2001; Meyer et al., 1998; Meyer &
van der Meulen, 2000). In this case, single discrete entities were processed
sequentially. A future experiment to further understand whether phonolog-
ical planning proceeds one distinct entity at a time, could examine eye-
gaze durations while complex NPs or sentences are being produced.
Other results suggest different factors to explain the disparate results
(Jescheniak et al., 2003). As mentioned previously, Jescheniak et al.
(2003) conducted a picture–word interference experiment where partici-
pants described pictures in German with noun phrases of varying com-
plexity. For example, participants either produced Hund (dog), der hund
(the dog), or der groBe rote hund (the big red dog), referred to as, respec-
tively, bare noun, simple noun phrase, and complex noun phrase utterance
formats. Auditory distractors phonologically related to the noun of the
utterances were presented at several different SOAs including 0ms. Their
results showed that more than one phonological word was phonological-
ly encoded before articulation began, in accordance with our results and
others (Alario & Caramazza, 2002; Costa & Caramazza, 2002; Miozzo &
Caramazza, 1999). However, as the target item occurred later in the sen-
tence, the magnitude of the phonological facilitation effect changed. For
the SOA of 0ms, Jescheniak et al. found that the phonological facilitation
effect was largest for bare noun naming, reduced in simple noun phrase
naming, and was inhibitory during complex noun phrase production. In
a post hoc analysis, Jescheniak et al. divided the items into two groups,
items that produced smaller facilitation effects in bare noun naming ver-
sus items that produced larger facilitation effects. They found that items
that produced a small facilitation effect when nouns were produced in
isolation (27ms) produced statistically signiﬁcant inhibition for complex
NP utterances (41ms). In contrast, items that produced a “large” phono-
logical facilitation in isolation (71ms) showed a non-signiﬁcant inhibition
208 Schnur, Costa, and Caramazza
effect (16ms) when the items were produced in complex NP utterance.
Jescheniak et al. suggested that the “base priming effect” and the rel-
ative position of the word in the utterance predicted the magnitude of
phonological facilitation. It was proposed that when multi-word utter-
ances are produced, each word receives graded phonological activation
whose strength corresponds to position in the utterance, e.g., more activa-
tion for earlier positions and less activation for later positions. Disparate
results from Meyer (1996), Costa and Caramazza (2002) and others were
explained in terms of both the base priming effect, and relative position
of the primed item in the utterance.
Although our results are in accordance with Jescheniak et al. (2003)
where phonological planning extended to the third phonological word,
they do not show the predicted pattern of inhibition for the targeted
item as it moved to later positions in the utterance. In a pre-test exper-
iment to ensure that the phonologically related distractors produced pho-
nological facilitation in comparison to unrelated distractors when the verb
was named in isolation, we found a facilitation effect of 42ms. However,
instead of increasing degrees of inhibition (e.g., less facilitation) as the
verb was produced in later positions in the utterance, we found phono-
logical facilitation effects of 26 and 37ms, for the simple NP + V and
complex NP+V utterances. A post hoc analysis showed that the size of
the phonological facilitation effect did not interact with the position of the
verb in the utterance (alone, second phonological word, third phonological
word; F1 and F2 < 1).
We also did a post hoc analysis to see whether a “base priming
effect” for each item could predict the amount of phonological facilitation
when the item occurred in complex NP + V utterances (e.g., the orange girl
jumps). We divided the items evenly based on whether the produced larger
or smaller amounts of facilitation in isolation (−98 and + 12ms on aver-
age of facilitation). “Larger” facilitation items produced −46ms of facil-
itation and “smaller” facilitation items produced −24ms of facilitation
when they were produced as the third phonological word, and latest posi-
tion in the utterance. The base priming effect of items in isolation (large
versus small) did not interact with the phonological facilitation effect for
the orange girl jumps (F1 and F2 < 1). It is not clear whether both “posi-
tion in utterance” and “base priming effect” predict phonological facil-
itation effects. However, our experiments were not speciﬁcally designed
to address these questions and a further exploration of Jescheniak et al.
model should include investigation of the magnitude of phonological facil-
itation during sentence production, as opposed to single NP production.
Whether the phonological facilitation effect reﬂects lexical selection
or phonological encoding depends on assumptions made about processing
Phonological Planning During Sentence Production 209
during word production. Let us assume that the phonologically related dis-
tractor activates the phonological representation of the word to be pro-
duced. If interactivity is assumed, where phonological information sends
activation back to the grammatical level (i.e., activation ﬂows in two direc-
tions: Dell, 1986; Dell et al., 1997; Stemberger, 1985), then the phono-
logical facilitation effect may reﬂect the inﬂuence of the distractor at the
grammatical level where the target item is lexically selected. For example,
when a picture is shown with a phonologically related distractor, speech
could be accelerated because the appropriate target picture name received
feedback from its corresponding phonological segments, which were acti-
vated by the distractor. This feedback would facilitate both lexical selec-
tion and the phonological representation corresponding to the target word.
In contrast, when no interactivity is assumed between phonological and
grammatical encoding levels, then the facilitation effect can be assumed
to be solely a phonological one. For example, if processing during word
production is strictly discontinuous and serial (activation only ﬂows in one
direction from grammatical to phonological levels; Garrett, 1980; Levelt,
1989, 1992; Levelt et al., 1991; Roelofs, 1992, 1997; Schriefers et al., 1990)
or cascaded (processing is continuous in one direction where phonological
representations corresponding to more than one word are activated during
word production; Caramazza, 1997; Morsella & Miozzo, 2002; Peterson &
Savoy, 1998) a phonologically related distractor can only inﬂuence process-
ing at the phonological encoding level. This is an area of much debate (see
Dell & O’Seaghdha, 1992; Levelt et al., 1991, 1999) and there is differ-
ent evidence to support each position (see Rapp & Goldrick, 2000; Ruml
et al., 2000; Starreveld, 2000). Exactly how phonological facilitation takes
place during phonological encoding is also still debated (see Starreveld,
2000 for a discussion on this point). However, whichever mechanism one
posits to account for phonological facilitation, all involve activation of
the phonological properties associated with the target word. Although the
phonological facilitation effect may reﬂect some inﬂuence at the level of
lexical selection, we assume the bulk of the effect lies at the level of pho-
nological encoding in accordance with the general view of the picture–
word interference paradigm.
In sum, if the phonological facilitation effect primarily reﬂects
activation at the phonological encoding level, then the experimental evidence
to date does not support the role of the phonological word as a preferred
phonological planning unit. Phonological planning is not restricted to
single phrases and appears to vary, extending from one to several
phonological words and phrases. It has been argued that there is no
ﬁxed unit of phonological (Schriefers & Teruel, 1999) or conceptual/
grammatical planning (Ferreira & Swets, 2002). Ferreira and Swets (2002)
210 Schnur, Costa, and Caramazza
proposed that language speakers are “strategically incremental”, in that they
weigh how much speech to plan in advance with how quickly they can begin
speaking. Strategic incrementality may partially result from a strategy where
participants name pictures using different response deadlines (Lupker et al.,
1997; Meyer et al., 2003). Schriefers and Teruel (1999) suggested that the
amount phonologically planned depends on the utterance produced, and the
experimental and speaking demands. We suggest that the extent of phono-
logical planning when measured during picture naming might depend on the
number of integrated conceptual units named where articulation begins after
the phonological properties corresponding to an integrated conceptual unit
are activated. It is also possible that priming verbs phonologically during
sentence production may extend the extent of phonological planning. The
results presented here show that phonological planning is not restricted by
the presence of a phrase boundary and extends multiple words and phrases.
These results in conjunction with past evidence do not support a ﬁxed unit
of phonological encoding.
APPENDIX A
Appendix A. Stimuli for Experiments 1 and 2. Frequency (FREQ), letter length
(LTTR), and number of syllables (SYLL) of the written distractors paired with the
target pictures
PICTURES Phonologically related Unrelated
COLOR AGENT VERB FREQ LTTR SYLL FREQ LTTR SYLL
yellow man BEG bend 50 4 1 plate 44 5 1
yellow woman CRY crisis 102 6 2 ﬁll 184 4 1
orange woman DANCE dam 5 3 1 swig 2 4 1
orange man DIG dish 36 4 1 shade 39 5 1
Pink man DIVE dice 1 4 1 sleet 1 5 1
yellow boy DREAMS dress 67 5 1 sick 51 4 1
pink boy FISH ﬁll 184 4 1 crisis 102 6 1
orange girl JUMP jug 6 3 1 sneer 3 5 1
red boy LAUGH ladder 19 6 2 yarn 20 4 1
yellow boy PLAY plate 44 5 1 bend 50 4 1
red woman POINT poise 12 5 1 sizzle 5 6 1
yellow woman PRAY praise 21 6 1 scare 26 5 1
orange woman RUN rust 7 4 1 shawl 5 5 1
yellow man SHAVE shade 39 5 1 dish 36 4 1
orange man SHOOT shawl 5 5 1 rust 7 4 1
orange boy SING sick 51 4 1 dress 67 5 1
Phonological Planning During Sentence Production 211
Appendix A. Continued
PICTURES Phonologically related Unrelated
COLOR AGENT VERB FREQ LTTR SYLL FREQ LTTR SYLL
pink girl SIT sizzle 5 6 1 poise 12 5 1
red girl SKATE scare 26 5 1 praise 21 6 1
pink woman SKI scheme 39 6 1 waste 31 5 2
pink man SLEEP sleet 1 5 1 dice 1 4 2
pink boy SLIDE slice 12 5 1 walnut 16 6 1
red man SNEEZE sneer 3 5 1 jug 6 3 1
red woman SWIM swivel 2 6 2 wig 1 3 1
yellow girl SWING swig 2 4 1 dam 5 3 1
orange girl WALK walnut 16 6 1 slice 12 5 1
pink girl WAVE waste 31 5 1 scheme 39 6 1
red boy WINK wig 1 3 1 swivel 2 6 1
red girl YAWN yarn 20 4 1 ladder 19 6 1
REFERENCES
Alario, F. X., & Caramazza, A. (2002). The production of determiners: Evidence from
French. Cognition, 82(3), 179–223.
Bock, J. K. (1987). Coordinating words and syntax in speech plans. In A. Ellis (Ed.), Pro-
gress in the Psychology of Language (Vol. 3, pp. 337–390). London: Erlbaum.
Caramazza, A. (1997). How many levels of processing are there in lexical access? Cognitive
Neuropsychology, 14, 177–208.
Costa, A., & Caramazza, A. (2002). The production of noun phrases in English and
Spanish: Implications for the scope of phonological encoding in speech production.
Journal of Memory and Language, 46(1), 178–198.
Dell, G. S. (1986). A spreading-activation theory of retrieval in sentence production. Psycho-
logical Review, 93(3), 283–321.
Dell, G. S., Burger, L. K., & Svec, W. R. (1997). Language production and serial order: A
functional analysis and a model. Psychological Review, 104(1), 123–147.
Dell, G. S., & O’Seaghdha, P. G. (1992). Stages of lexical access in language production. Cog-
nition, 42, 287–314.
Dell, G. S., & Reich, P. A. (1981). Stages in sentence production: An analysis of speech error
data. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 20, 611–629.
Ferreira, F. (2000). Syntax in language production: An approach using tree-adjoining gram-
mars. In L. Wheeldon, (Ed.), Aspects of Language Production. Studies in Cognition
Series. (pp. 291–330). Philadelphia, PA, US: Psychology Press/Taylor & Francis.
Ferreira, F., & Swets, B. (2002). How incremental is language production? Evidence from the
production of utterances requiring the computation of arithmetic sums. Journal of Mem-
ory and Language, 46(1), 57–84.
Francis, W. N., & Kucera, H. (1982). Frequency Analysis of English Usage: Lexicon and
Grammar. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
212 Schnur, Costa, and Caramazza
Garrett, M. F. (1980). Levels of processing in sentence production. In B. Butterworth (Ed.),
Language Production (Vol. 1, pp. 177–220). London: Academic Press.
Glaser, W. R., & Dungelhoff, F. J. (1984). The time course of picture–word interference. Jour-
nal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 10, 640–654.
Glaser, W. R., & Glaser, M. O. (1989). Context effects in Stroop-like word and picture pro-
cessing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 118(1), 13–42.
Grifﬁn, Z. M. (2000). How Early are Verbs Selected in Extemporaneous English Sentence pro-
duction? Paper presented at the Architectures and Mechanisms of Language Processes
conference, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Grifﬁn, Z. M. (2001). Gaze durations during speech reﬂect word selection and phonological
encoding. Cognition, 82(1), B1–B14.
Jescheniak, J. D., Schriefers, H., & Hantsch, A. (2003). Utterance format affects phonologi-
cal priming in the picture–word task: Implications for models of phonological encoding
in speech production. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Perfor-
mance, 29(2), 441–454.
Levelt, W. J., Schriefers, H., Vorberg, D., Meyer, A. S., & et al. (1991). The time course of
lexical access in speech production: A study of picture naming. Psychological Review,
98(1), 122–142.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1989). Speaking: From Intention to Articulation. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1992). Accessing words in speech production: Stages, processes and repre-
sentations. Cognition, 42, 1–22.
Levelt, W. J. M., Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1999). A theory of lexical access in speech pro-
duction. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 1–75.
Levelt, W. J. M., & Wheeldon, L. (1994). Do speakers have access to a mental syllabary?
Cognition, 50, 239–269.
Lupker, S. J. (1979). The semantic nature of response competition in the picture–word
interference task. Memory and Cognition, 7, 485–495.
Lupker, S. J. (1982). The role of phonetic and orthographic similarity in picture–word
interference. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 36, 349–367.
Lupker, S. J., Brown, P., & Colombo, L. (1997). Strategic control in a naming task: Changing
routes or changing deadlines? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 23(3), 570–590.
Masterson, J., & Druks, J. (1998). Description of a set of 164 nouns and 102 verbs matched
for printed word and frequency, familiarity and age-of-acquisition. Journal of Neurolin-
guistics, 11(4), 331–354.
Meyer, A. S. (1992). Investigation of phonological encoding through speech error
analyses — achievements, limitations, and alternatives. Cognition, 42(1–3), 181–211.
Meyer, A. S. (1996). Lexical access in phrase and sentence production: Results from
picture – word interference experiments. Journal of Memory and Language, 35, 477–496.
Meyer, A. S., Roelofs, A., & Levelt, W. J. M. (2003). Word length effects in object naming:
The role of a response criterion. Journal of Memory and Language, 48, 131–147.
Meyer, A. S., & Schriefers, H. (1991). Phonological facilitation in picture–word interference
experiments: Effects of stimulus onset asynchrony and types of interfering stimuli. Jour-
nal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 17(6), 1146–1160.
Meyer, A. S., Sleiderink, A. M., & Levelt, W. J. M. (1998). Viewing and naming objects: Eye
movements during noun phrase production. Cognition, 66, B25–B33.
Meyer, A. S., & van der Meulen, F. F. (2000). Phonological priming effects on speech
onset latencies and viewing times in object naming. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 7,
314–319.
Phonological Planning During Sentence Production 213
Miozzo, M., & Caramazza, A. (1999). The selection of determiners in noun phrase pro-
duction. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and Cognition, 25(4),
907–922.
Morsella, E., & Miozzo, M. (2002). Evidence for a cascade model of lexical access in speech
production. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and Cognition, 28(3),
555–563.
Peterson, R. R., & Savoy, P. (1998). Lexical selection and phonological encoding during
language production: Evidence for cascaded processing. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 24, 539–557.
Rapp, B. C., & Goldrick, M. (2000). Discreteness and interactivity in spoken word produc-
tion. Psychological Review, 107(3), 460–499.
Rayner, K., & Springer, C. J. (1986). Graphemic and semantic similarity effects in the pic-
ture–word interference task. British Journal of Experimental Psychology, 77, 207–222.
Roelofs, A. (1992). A spreading-activation theory of lemma retrieval in speaking. Cognition,
42(1–3), 107–142.
Roelofs, A. (1997). Syllabiﬁcation in speech production: Evaluation of WEAVER. Language
and Cognitive Processes, 12(5–6), 657–693.
Roelofs, A. (1998). Rightward incrementality in encoding simple phrasal forms in speech
production: Verb–particle combinations. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning
Memory and Cognition, 24(4), 904–921.
Ruml, W., Caramazza, A., Shelton, J. R., & Chialant, D. (2000). Testing assumptions in com-
putational theories of aphasia. Journal of Memory and Language, 43, 217–248.
Schnur, T., Costa, A., & Caramazza, A. (2002). Verb production and the semantic interfer-
ence effect. Journal of Cognitive Science, 3(1), 1–26.
Schriefers, H., Meyer, A. S., & Levelt, W. J. (1990). Exploring the time course of lexical
access in language production: Picture–word interference studies. Journal of Memory and
Language, 29(1), 86–102.
Schriefers, H., & Teruel, E. (1999). Phonological facilitation in the production of two-word
utterances. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 11(1), 17–50.
Schriefers, H., Teruel, E., & Meinshausen, R. M. (1998). Producing simple sentences: Results
from picture–word interference experiments. Journal of Memory and Language, 39(4),
609–632.
Selkirk, E. (1986). On derived domains in sentence phonology. Phonology Yearbook, 3, 371–
405.
Starreveld, P. A. (2000). On the interpretation of onsets of auditory context effects in word
production. Journal of Memory and Language, 42(4), 497–525.
Starreveld, P. A., & La Heij, W. (1996). Time-course analysis of semantic and orthographic
context effects in picture naming. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Mem-
ory, and Cognition, 22(4), 896–918.
Stemberger, J. P. (1985). An interactive activation model of language production. In A. Ellis
(Ed.), Progress in the Psychology of Language (pp. 143–186). London: Erlbaum.
Wheeldon, L., & Lahiri, A. (1997). Prosodic units in speech production. Journal of Memory
and Language, 37(3), 356–381.
