THE EMERGING COMMUNICATION ARCHITECTURE IN 
ELECTRICAL ENERGY SUPPLY AND ITS IMPLICATIONS 
 
E. Handschin (*), O. Krause (*), H. F. Wedde (+), S. Lehnhoff (+) 
(*)  Chair of Energy Systems and Economics, (+)  School of Computer Science 
University of Dortmund, Germany 
Introduction 
In the course of liberalisation of the electrical 
energy market, the pressure on the utilities to reduce 
their investment and maintenance costs is increasing. 
In order to lower these expenses and to be able to 
offer a more efficient supply with electrical energy, 
the utilities are increasingly using modern 
communication techniques. Control mechanisms that 
have been realized with a huge amount of hardware 
so far are more and more replaced by software-
based solutions. Major points of concern in the near 
future are the standardisation of communication 
interfaces and protocols, as well as the 
implementation of autonomously acting entities 
performing vitally important actions like controlling 
protective systems. 
 
Content 
In this paper three major aspects of the present 
development of communication standards in the field 
of electrical energy supply are discussed. The first 
part of the paper focuses the nature of the emerging 
communication that will integrate wide areas of a 
utilities communication needs. In the second part 
some advanced integration issues, related to the 
further extension of the communication standards to 
new processes and views are briefly discussed. The 
final part gives an outlook on certain question related 
to the implementation of real-time operating systems. 
 
Communication in electrical power supply 
The controlling and monitoring of electrical 
systems has in general two perspectives. The first 
perspective is the process related one, concerned with 
the primary equipment and the processes necessary to 
provide customers with the needed electrical energy. 
In this scope real time data and real time control are 
of great importance. The main aim here is to provide 
the industry with standards in the sense of 
transmitting, representing and addressing the data. 
Currently there are many initiatives to standardize the 
representation of typical processes, like substation 
control, wind turbine control or the control of 
distributed energy resources (DER).[1] 
The second perspective is a top down view on 
the electrical system. This perspective is concerned 
with topological information and tries to provide the 
needed information to monitor the electrical system 
as a whole. 
For both perspectives it is possible to define a 
set of information needed for the operation of the 
particular part electrical system and additional 
information, not crucial for operation, but necessary 
for monitoring and maintenance purposes. 
Future development will focus on integrating 
these two perspectives and provide an integrated 
communication system throughout the utility in order 
to provide the different divisions of a utility directly 
with the information needed. 
 
Status quo 
One standard widely used today is the protocol 
family of IEC 60870. The IEC 60870 family was 
developed by the IEC Technical Committee 57 to 
bring a communication standard to the field of 
electrical energy supply. It was meant to enable 
equipment from different vendors to cooperate with a 
minimum of integration effort. By the time of 
development the predominant architecture of 
programming languages was the so called functional 
orientation or 2nd Generation programming 
languages. Therefore IEC 60870 was also oriented 
on serial data structures. Thus IEC 60870 is a so 
called “signal-oriented” protocol. Within one node 
there are specific addresses for each signal, 
containing the actual information. As this address is a 
binary code, there is no possibility to figure out from 
the address what kind of information the specific 
field represents. This brings the necessity to map 
these addresses to their “meaning” while interpreting 
the data. This task is complex and cost-intensive and 
increases the risk of human errors. 
 
Members of the protocol family are: 
 
• IEC 60870-5-101 [2] 
“Transmission protocols – Companion 
standard for basic telecontrol tasks” 
• IEC 60870-5-102 [3] 
“Companion standard for the transmission of 
integrated totals in electric power systems” 
• IEC 60870-5-103 [4] 
“Companion standard for the informative 
interface of protection systems” 
• IEC 60870-5-104 [5] 
“Network access for IEC 60870-5-101 using 
standard transport profiles” 
  
IEC 60870 was meant to cover all aspects of 
communication within a substation, between 
substation and control centre and control centres 
between each other. Therefore IEC 60870 also 
includes standards for the physical and session layer 
of the Open System Interconnection Reference 
Model (OSI Reference Model). It includes 
definitions of bit sequence telegrams formats and 
defines obligatory data integrity standards. But this 
brings with it tough restrictions for the choice of the 
communication channel. 
IEC 60870 was developed as a standard 
primarily for serial communication on dedicated 
communication channels and not for the use in 
packet switched networks. But with the enormous 
spread of IP-based networks and network equipment 
the necessity to adapt to this network technology to 
benefit from its development and the lower 
component prices increased. IEC 60870-5-104 was 
an intent to encapsulate IEC 60870-5-101 
communication into IP networks to take advantage of 
the routing capabilities and to overcome the physical 
layer restriction. 
 
In modern Energy Transmission Systems the 
protocol family of IEC 60870 is widely in use. From 
the control of secondary reserve power plants to the 
communication between two Intelligent Electronic 
Devices (IED) within one substation it is one of the 
most important standard. Figure 1 illustrates the field 
of applications of some protocol member standards. 
 
IEC
 60
870
-5-1
01
IE
C
 6
08
34
IE
C
 6
08
70
-5
-1
04
IE
C
 6
08
70
-6
IE
C
 6
08
70
-5
-1
01
 
Figure 1: IEC 60870 and its application. 
Although most of these protocols are part of the 
IEC 60870 protocol family communication is not 
directly possible between two devices using different 
standards (e.g. a Control Centre workstation and an 
IDE in the substation). In such communications there 
is always the necessity to use a gateway to couple 
both worlds. In the case of a substation for instance 
there has to be an IEC 60870-5-103 to -101 or 104 
Gateway in order to connect the substation to a 
control centre. A big disadvantage is that if the IDE 
and the workstation of the above mentioned example 
would have implemented a function not supported by 
the gateway a use of this function would be 
impossible. 
 
The IEC 60870 standard does not only restrict 
the domain in which data exchange is directly 
possible, but also which data can be exchanged and 
how it could be exchanged. These are strong 
restrictions to the design of utility communications 
and in many cases impede the different divisions to 
get the information they need with a minimum of 
effort. 
 
To overcome restrictions like the lack of direct 
communication and to include a system for easing the 
configuration and deployment of equipment from 
different vendors the development of IEC 61850 was 
started. 
 
IEC 61850 
IEC 61850 is initially designed to integrate all 
the devices within a substation. It is intended to 
provide interoperability between devices of different 
manufacturers and vendors, as well as being capable 
to be adapted to new communication technologies 
and technical requirements. To be able to take 
advantage of mainstream communication 
technologies IEC 61850 does not define a concrete 
communication stack. Presently IEC 61850 includes 
a standard on how to map the communication on to 
TCP/IP and Manufacturing Message Specification 
(MMS) [6]. IEC 61850 strictly divides the process of 
communication and control into three main aspects. 
The first aspect is the structure of the data 
representation. This is on how information is stored 
and structured and how data is related to each other. 
It is also about naming conventions and a 
prerequisite to integrate equipment from different 
vendors. In the following to data representation will 
be referred to as “data model”. 
The second aspect deals with accessing the data 
model. Equipment from different manufacturers has 
to use a common syntax and semantics in order to be 
able to “understand” each other. In IEC 61850 this is 
not about how to address another device or open a 
communication channel to it. At this level of the 
standard it is just about standardizing orders and 
reactions to orders in an abstract manner [7]. 
The third aspect is the transmission of data. It 
deals with mapping the communication onto a 
concrete communications infrastructure. This 
communication layer is independent from the two 
upper layers. This makes it possible to adapt to a new 
communication technology without having to change 
the data model or the standard to access these data 
models. 
 
  
In contrast to IEC 60870 IEC 61850 did not 
integrate these three aspects into one standard, but 
defined sharp interfaces between these three layers of 
the communication (cf. Fig. 2).  
 
IEC 61850-7-3 and -4 [8][9] 
Defines the data model for substations 
IEC 61850-7-2 [7] 
Defines the syntax and semantic of the 
exchange of data. 
IEC 61850-8-1 [6] 
Defines the mapping of communication onto 
TCP/IP and MMS 
 
 
Figure 2: IEC 60870 and its application. 
 
Each of these components of the standard can 
be replaced without influence on the others. E.g. for 
the mapping onto a new communication technology a 
standard replacing IEC 61850-8-1 could be defined 
without the necessity to change the other two layers. 
The same is true for the data structure and the data 
exchange methods. Currently under development are 
extending standards to standardize the data model for 
other processes like Power Quality Monitoring, 
Control and Monitoring of Hydroelectric power 
plants and for the control and monitoring of DER in 
general [1][10]. 
All of these data models have a common 
structure enabling them to be mapped onto other 
layers of the communication standards within IEC 
61850.  
 
IEC 61850 was developed under the influence 
of 3rd generation programming languages. The so 
called object oriented (OO) programming Languages 
use a data storage structure where data and functions 
are organized in Classes and Instances of classes, 
called Objects. Classes are blueprints for Objects, 
defining their interface to the outside world and their 
inner data structure. These Classes are organized in a 
heritage tree structure, in which the offspring of a 
parent class inherits functions and data structures 
from the parent class. In this manner Classes can be 
specialized to their specific behaviour while leaving 
common function implementations to the parent 
class. This eases the standardization of common 
functionality without the loss of specialization. 
Equipment of different vendors can implement 
common basic functionalities and at the same time 
additional features only provided by a particular 
vendor. 
The possibility to form tree structures of 
instances also simplifies the representation of nested 
configurations. A whole substation can, in the first 
place, be addressed as a single node within a tree 
structure of components. 
 
Class 
A class defines the characteristics of the 
representation for a real or abstract thing, including 
attributes and properties. This is needed by an object 
to store its state in order to represent the real or 
abstract element it was instantiated for. Additionally 
a class contains definitions for methods. Methods 
represent the ability of a Logical or Physical Node to 
perform a certain operation. 
 
Object 
Objects are instantiated from a certain class. By 
instantiating an Object a new set of attributes defined 
in the particular class is generated, so that the new 
object represents one single real or abstract 
counterpart. 
 
Method 
Methods encode the ability of an Object to 
perform certain actions. They are are called members 
of that class. From a programmers point of view it is 
possible to give an object orders by calling one of its 
methods. 
 
Message 
Messages are used to invoke a remote object’s 
method and to pass data to it. 
 
Inheritance 
Class definitions can be ordered hierarchically. 
More general characteristics can be defined in a 
parent class whose offspring inherit these 
characteristics and methods. 
 
Encapsulation 
Object-oriented programming languages usually 
realize a low-level security mechanism in order to 
impede the manipulation of data or the invocation of 
methods by parts of the running program that are not 
supposed to do this. Often members (attributes, 
methods, etc.) are named to be either private, or 
protected or public. 
 
  
Data representation in IEC 61850 
 
Corresponding to the structure of Object 
Orientation the data structure of IEC 61850 bases on 
the representation of physical devices, called 
Physical Nodes (PN) as Logical Nodes (LN) within 
the communication system. A logical node represents 
the physical device as a logical device that can be 
accessed by other software components. The before 
mentioned data models are standards for the structure 
of this Logical Nodes and therefore defined a classes. 
 
 
Figure 3: Physical Nodes within a substation. 
 
Substation data model 
 
As mentioned before IEC 61850 was primarily 
designed to standardize the communication within 
substations. In order to model the processes of a 
substation four major object classes were defined to 
meet the requirements of all used IED. The four 
major classes are: 
 
• Power System Model Object (PSOM) 
• Client-Server Object Model (CSOM) 
• Generic Service Provider (GSP) 
• Storage Subsystem 
 
These four basic classes are integrated by the 
Common Application Services (CAS) which is the 
messaging specifications for substations. 
 
 
Figure 4: Data Model of a substation. 
 
The basic components of IEC 61850-7-3 and -
4 in details are: 
PSOM 
The Power System Model Object defines a 
data model for autonomous protection subsystems 
that can also be used for data acquisition. 
 
CSOM 
The Client-Server Object Model is designated 
for general communication issued inside a substation. 
This includes Peer-to-peer communication between 
two IDE, as well as general client-server 
relationships. 
 
GSP 
Effectively the Generic Service Provider can 
be seen as being the communication controller of the 
substation. It is in charge of managing the data 
exchange between devices of the substation as well 
as the communication with the outside world. 
 
Storage Subsystem 
The Storage Subsystem may be centralized 
within a substation, or as well distributed among 
several IDE, servers or storage systems inside the 
substation. 
 
The ability of IDE to communicate in a peer-
to-peer manner together with the storage subsystem 
being able to reside in more than one location brings 
with it the issue of critical tasks concurring on 
distributed resources. In this case the distributed 
resource is the data stored in the storage subsystem. 
This issue will be addressed later on. 
 
Further requirements to IDE from IEC 61850 
Self description services 
In order to ease up the integration and 
configuration of IED IEC 61850 includes a standard 
that enables IED to inform communication partner 
about what parts of the data model they actually are 
using. Within IEC 61850 a file format called 
“Substation Configuration description language” 
(SCL) is defined as standard. SCL is a format based 
on the “Extensible Markup Language” (XML), a 
cross-vendor standard for storing nested data. Every 
IED has at least to provide a file containing its 
configuration so other IEC 61850 compatible devices 
can access this IED. More complex IED may also be 
able to receive their configuration through a SCL 
configuration file delivered through IEC 61850. 
 
Data transfer services 
In order to transmit the above mentioned SCL 
files as well as larger amounts of data whose 
transmission is not time-critical, IDE have to provide 
a basic file transfer service. IEC 61850 contains a 
definition of such a service, but may be 
complemented by services like FTP. 
 
  
Priorities: 
Priority is a Quality of Service (QoS) 
parameter negotiated at connection time between any 
two IDE. Four levels are defined in IEC 60850: 
• Reserved: for network management 
• High: highest level intended for 
short, critical control messages 
• Normal: medium data level 
• Low: for large, non-critical files 
If just two levels are supported by the 
transport protocol the high priority should be 
exclusively reserved for the highest priority level of 
the original priority scheme. 
 
Integrating other parts of the Electrical Energy 
system 
Presently IEC 61850 focuses on substation 
control. But there are many approaches to integrate 
further aspects of electrical energy supply into IEC 
61850. Due to the open communication standard this 
is mainly an issue to the definition of data models, 
reflecting the requirements in the certain field of 
technology. Present development intends to integrate 
the following aspects: 
 
• Data model for monitoring and 
control of wind power plants (IEC 
61400-25) [11] 
• Data model of a power system from 
the control centres point of view 
(IEC 61970 CIM) [12] 
• Data model for Distributed Energy 
Resources (DIN 61850-7-420) [10] 
 
Control Centre data model 
The data model for communication on 
substation control level is well defined within IEC 
61850. When transmitting this information to a 
control centre the requested data has to be mapped 
into a data model suited for the use on Control Centre 
level. IEC 61970 defines such a data model, called 
“Common Information Model” (CIM) [12]. The 
integration of process related data representation to 
CIM and its more general perspective would need a 
gateway to map data between both standards. The 
locally available information relevant for the control 
centre has to be mapped into a CIM representation by 
the substation controller or some kind of gateway 
connected to the substation network and the control 
centre. In order to be able to represent the whole 
substation to the outside world, the gateway has to 
hold local copies of the relevant data generated by 
the IED. These local copies are subject to 
accessibility concerns addressed later on. 
 
Mapping between Data models 
 
 
Figure 5: Mapping the substation data model to 
Control Centre data model. 
 
Real Time Operating Systems 
A real time operating system is an operating 
system that is deterministic in terms of the execution 
time of tasks. Typically one or more tasks are created 
by external sensors or human interaction, on which 
the operating system has to react in a certain amount 
of time. 
 
This is of grand importance in terms of safety 
and fault tolerance. Task may arrive whose timely 
execution is crucial for the survivability of a system. 
In case of this task not being executed before its 
deadline, it could damage or even destroy the system. 
These kinds of tasks are called essentially critical. 
Wide areas of tasks within the field of protection 
systems do include tasks of this kind. In case of an 
electrical network failure, a failed attempt to open a 
circuit breaker may be fatal and even result in its 
destruction. 
 
In electrical utilities the technological trend 
leads to an increase of digital and autonomous 
systems that need to interact. In the situation of a 
substation consisting of several sensors, circuit 
breakers and autonomous security systems, a 
distributed real time operating system is needed to 
coordinate those entities in a way that meets the 
requirements. 
 
The standard IEC 61850 does not include 
standards for implementation. The design of the 
operating system of the IED is up to the 
manufacturers’ choice. But within the above 
described scenario of distributed critical tasks 
dependent on distributed data and concurrently 
accessing this data it is not possible to guarantee the 
timely execution of critical task, because it is not 
foreseeable if the allocation of the needed resources 
will be possible in time.  
 
  
MELODY 
To meet this kind of requirements a real time 
operating system, called “MELODY”, has been 
developed at the School of Computer Science at the 
University of Dortmund. MELODY. One major part 
of MELODY is the extension of the standard task 
criticality based scheduling by the introduction of 
resource sensibility based scheduling. 
 
The criticality is a measure of how much the 
survivability of a system depends on the execution of 
a certain task before a given deadline. Tasks may be 
characterized as being non-critical, critical or 
essentially critical. Tasks that are considered 
essentially critical affect the survivability of the 
system directly. MELODY incorporates a task 
scheduling scheme that supports increasing criticality 
of tasks, depending of how often a critical task failed 
to complete before its deadline. After a certain 
amount of deadlines not met, a critical task may 
become essentially critical. Essentially critical tasks 
that failed to complete before their deadline are not 
further scheduled [13]. 
By preferring essentially critical tasks over 
critical tasks and critical tasks over non-critical tasks 
for execution the scheduler’s objective is to execute 
as many essentially critical tasks as possible. In the 
environment of i.e. a substation the occurrence of 
tasks is not predictable, thus completion before their 
deadline cannot be guaranteed. By utilizing the 
measure of criticality, the chances for a timely 
execution of crucial and thus essentially critical tasks 
improve drastically. 
Another cause that can impede the execution of 
tasks before they reach their deadline is the allocation 
of resources. In the situation of a substation with data 
acquired and made accessible at different locations 
that are out of scope and influence of the task 
scheduler, a task may not be able to meet its deadline 
because it was not able to access the required data in 
time. In this context MELODY introduces a second 
measure for tasks, the sensibility [14].  
The sensibility is a measure of how much a 
certain task really requires the latest information 
about a process. By approaching the deadline of an 
essentially critical task and the task not being able to 
receive the latest information about a process due to 
concurrent access on the needed resource, it may be 
useful to use a local copy of that data, even if it might 
be slightly out of date, instead of failing to meet the 
deadline. Therefore MELODY defines a dynamic 
sensibility for tasks scheduled. It is possible to 
decrease the sensibility of a task while increasing its 
criticality, so that at a certain point in time it may use 
a local copy of the data needed instead of waiting for 
the remote resource to be freed.  
To enable MELODY to provide the local tasks 
with a copy of a remote resource a system of public 
and private copies was developed. 
Private copies are copies that are updated from 
their source in an eventually manner, while public 
copies are held mutually consistent. When a local 
critical task may be dependent on remote data, 
MELODY can provide it with a local copy of this 
data. When a task needs to access this data, 
MELODY tries to update it to the latest value by 
reserving, not blocking, the remote resource. In case 
that the remote resource can not be accessed the 
sensibility of the task for this resource may decrease. 
When this task comes close to its deadline and its 
sensitivity decreased under a certain level, MELODY 
can decide not to wait for an update, but to provide 
the task with the best information it has, the local 
copy. 
 
Conclusion 
Experiments have shown that this way of 
integrating a sensitivity measure into the task 
scheduling has significant advantages over the basic 
scheduling based solely on criticality. For a 
substation the trade-off between up-to-dateness and 
completing essentially critical tasks before their 
deadline may pay off.  
Future communication standards do not yet 
define a concrete implementation of the IED 
operating system, thus introduction of an advanced 
scheduling based on criticality and sensitivity 
appears promising. 
Parts of the distributed real-time operating 
system MELODY may serve as a blueprint for such 
an advanced strategy to improve the system 
reliability under the influence of a concurrent access 
on distributed resources in a real-time environment 
and unpredictable occurrence of critical tasks. 
References 
[1] Karlheinz Schwarz. “IEC 61850, IEC 61400-25, 
and IEC 61970: Information models and information 
exchange for electrical power systems” Paper 
presented at the Distributech 2004-01-20 
[2] Deutsches Institut für Normung – DIN: “DIN IEC 
60870-5-101 – Fernwirkeinrichtungen und –systeme 
– Teil 5-101: Übertragungsprotokolle; Anwendungs-
bezogene Norm für grundlegende Fernwirkaufgaben 
(IEC 60870-5-101:2003)“, Deutsche Fassung EN 
60870-5-101:2003,, Beuth Verlag, Berlin Wien 
Zürich,  
[3] Deutsches Institut für Normung – DIN: “DIN IEC 
60870-5-102 – Fernwirkeinrichtungen und –systeme 
– Teil 5: Übertragungsprotokolle; Hauptabschnitt 
102; Anwendungsbezogene Norm für die 
Zählerstandsübertragung in der 
Elektrizitätsversorgung (IEC 60870-5-102:1996)“, 
Deutsche Fassung EN 60870-5-102:1996, Beuth 
Verlag, Berlin Wien Zürich,  
[4] Deutsches Institut für Normung – DIN: “DIN IEC 
60870-5-103 – Fernwirkeinrichtungen und –systeme 
– Teil 5-103: Übertragungsprotokolle; 
Anwendungsbezogene Norm für die 
Informationsschnittstelle von Schutzeinrichtungen 
(IEC 60870-5-103:1997)“, Deutsche Fassung EN 
  
60870-5-103:1998, Beuth Verlag, Berlin Wien 
Zürich,  
[5] Deutsches Institut für Normung – DIN: “DIN IEC 
60870-5-104 – Fernwirkeinrichtungen und – systeme 
– Teil 5-104: Übertragungsprotokolle; Zugriff für 
IEC 60870-5-101 auf Netze mit genormten 
Transportprofilen (IEC 60870-5-104:2000)“, 
Deutsche Fassung EN 60870-5-104:2001, Beuth 
Verlag, Berlin Wien Zürich,  
 [6] Deutsches Institut für Normung – DIN: “DIN 
IEC 61850-8-1 – Kommunikationsnetze und –
systeme in Stationen – Teil 8-1: Spezifische 
Abildung von Kommunikationsdiensten (SCSM) – 
Abbildung auf MMS (nach ISO 9506-1 und ISO 
9506-2) und ISO/IEC 8802-3 (IEC 61850-8-
1:2004)“, Deutsche Fassung EN 61850-8-1:2004, 
Beuth Verlag, Berlin Wien Zürich,  
[7] Deutsches Institut für Normung – DIN: “DIN IEC 
61850-7-2 – Kommunikationsnetze und –systeme in 
Stationen – Teil 7-2: Grundlegende 
Kommunikationsstruktur für stations- und 
feldbezogene Ausrüstung – Abstrakte Schnittstelle 
für Kommunikationsdienste (ACSI) (IEC 61850-7-
2:2003)“, Deutsche Fassung EN 61850-7-2:2003, 
Beuth Verlag, Berlin Wien Zürich,  
[8] Deutsches Institut für Normung – DIN: “DIN IEC 
61850-7-3 – Kommunikationsnetze und –systeme in 
Stationen – Teil 7-3: Grundlegende 
Kommunikationsstruktur für stations- und 
feldbezogene Ausrüstung – Gemeinsame 
Datenklassen (IEC 61850-7-3:2003)“, Deutsche 
Fassung EN 61850-7-3:2003, Beuth Verlag, Berlin 
Wien Zürich,  
[9] Deutsches Institut für Normung – DIN: “DIN IEC 
61850-7-4 – Kommunikationsnetze und –systeme in 
Stationen – Teil 7-4: Grundlegende 
Kommunikationsstruktur für stations- und 
feldbezogene Ausrüstung – Kompatible 
Logikknoten- und Datenklassen (IEC 61850-7-
4:2003)“, Deutsche Fassung EN 61850-7-4:2003, 
Beuth Verlag, Berlin Wien Zürich,  
[10] Deutsches Institut für Normung – DIN: “DIN 
IEC 61850-7-420 – Norm-Entwurf: 
Kommunikationsnetze und –systeme in Stationen – 
Teil 7-420: Kommunikationssysteme für verteilte 
Energieversorgung – Logische Knoten (IEC 
57/818/CDV:2006)“, Deutsche Fassung prEN 61850-
7-420:2006, Beuth Verlag, Berlin Wien Zürich,  
[11] Deutsches Institut für Normung – DIN: “DIN 
IEC 61400-25 – Windenergieanlagen – Teil 25-1: 
Kommunikation für die Überwachung und Steuerung 
von Windenergieanlagen – Einführende 
Beschreibung der Prinzipien und Modelle (IEC 
88/238/CDV:2005)“, Deutsche Fassung prEN 61400-
25-1:2005, Beuth Verlag, Berlin Wien Zürich,  
[12] Deutsches Institut für Normung – DIN: “DIN 
IEC 61970-1 – Norm-Entwurf: 
Anwendungsprogramm-Schnittstelle für 
Netzbetriebsführungssysteme (EMS-API) – Teil 1: 
Leitfaden und allgemeine Anforderungen (IEC 
61970-1:2005)“, Deutsche Fassung prEN 61970-
1:2003, Beuth Verlag, Berlin Wien Zürich,  
[13] Horst F. Wedde and Jon A Lind. “Building 
Large, Complex, Distributed Safety-Critical 
Systems” In Real-Time Systems, 13(3), 1997-
November 
[14] Horst F. Wedde, Sabine Böhm and Wolfgang 
Freund. “Concurrent Read/Write – Real-Time 
Theory and Practice” In the 4th IEEE International 
Symposium on Object-Oriented Real-Time 
Distributed Computing, Magdeburg, Germany, 2001-
January. IEEE. 
 
 
