TRDB—The Tandem Repeats Database
Yevgeniy Gelfand1,*, Alfredo Rodriguez4 and Gary Benson1,2,3,*
1Lab for Biocomputing and Informatics, 2Department of Computer Science and 3Department of Biology,
Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA and 4Department of Neuroscience, Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
New York, NY 10029, USA
Received August 15, 2006; Revised October 30, 2006; Accepted October 31, 2006
ABSTRACT
Tandem repeats in DNA have been under intensive
study for many years, first, as a consequence of
their usefulness as genomic markers and DNA
fingerprints and more recently as their role in
human disease and regulatory processes has
become apparent. The Tandem Repeats Database
(TRDB) is a public repository of information on
tandem repeats in genomic DNA. It contains a
variety of tools for repeat analysis, including the
Tandem Repeats Finder program, query and filter-
ing capabilities, repeat clustering, polymorphism
prediction, PCR primer selection, data visualiza-
tion and data download in a variety of formats.
In addition, TRDB serves as a centralized research
workbench. It provides user storage space and
permits collaborators to privately share their data
and analysis. TRDB is available at https://tandem.
bu.edu/cgi-bin/trdb/trdb.exe.
INTRODUCTION
Our understanding of the role of tandem repeats in DNA has
grown significantly over the past 40 years. The discovery of
satellite DNA in 1961 (1) prompted research into the proper-
ties of repetitive DNA and this eventually led to an under-
standing of the wide range of sizes and genomic locations
of tandem repeats. One class, the microsatellites, was recog-
nized early on as useful genomic markers and today they
form the basis of DNA fingerprints in forensics. Even in
the face of strong competition from the more numerous sin-
gle nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), polymorphic tandem
repeats including microsatellites, and also the longer pat-
terned minisatellites or VNTRs (variable number of tandem
repeats) remain as important tools in genetic testing and link-
age analysis because, unlike SNPs, they frequently exhibit
more than two high frequency copy-number-variant alleles
and thus can have high heterozygosity rates.
Starting 15 or so years ago, it became widely recognized
that tandem repeats are causally associated with human
disease. Perhaps the most well-known disease-associated
repeats are the trinucloetide tandem repeats which cause
severe neurological syndromes including those associated
with polyglutamine (CAG)n expansion, such as Spinobulbar
muscular atrophy (2); Huntington’s disease (3); and
Spinocerebellar ataxias types 1, 2, 3, 6 and 7; and those
associated with expansion in non-coding regions, such as
Fragile X mental retardation (4); Friedreich’s ataxia (5);
Myotonic dystrophy (6); and Spinocerebellar ataxias types 8
and 12 (7,8).
Other, more common, affective disorders and addictive
behaviors have been associated with longer unit tandem
repeats. For example, variations in a 40 bp VNTR at the
30 end of the dopamine transporter gene (DAT1) (9) have
been linked to attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD) (10), medication response to that disorder in chil-
dren (11), and response to amphetamine in adults (12). A
30 bp VNTR in intron 8 of the same gene has been linked
to cocaine dependence (13). In the serotonin transporter
gene (5-HTT), variations in a 16–17 bp VNTR in intron 2
have been associated with bipolar disorder. The transcription
factors, YB-1 and CTCF, have been shown to interact with
the VNTR and modulate differences in gene expression
in different copy number variants (14). Numerous studies
have linked common polymorphisms in a 20–23 bp VNTR
in the promoter of the same gene with various affective
disorders, including autism (15), and response to medication
for depression (16). A common, non-neurological disease
associated with tandem repeat polymorphism is type 1 dia-
betes which is linked to allelic variation in a 14–15 bp
VNTR at the IDDM2 locus situated 600 bp 50 to the insulin
gene (17,18).
Some or all of the effects of intronic and non-coding poly-
morphic tandem repeats are presumably mediated by changes
in cis-regulation of gene expression. A non-human example
occurs in maize where a large tandem repeat is required for
paramutational suppression of the b1 transcription factor
gene which affects plant pigmentation. The paramutagenic
region, 100 kb upstream of the gene, contains seven tandem
copies of an 853 bp motif, while alleles with fewer copies
have decreased or no paramutational effect (19). The mecha-
nism, which involves differential cytosine methylation within
the repeat region, requires an RNA-dependent RNA poly-
merase (20) and thus may be related to RNA interference
through repeat mediated formation of double stranded RNA.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 617 358 2965; Fax:+1 617 353 4814; Email: gbenson@bu.edu
 2006 The Author(s).
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 00, Database issue D1–D8
doi:10.1093/nar/gkl1013
 Nucleic Acids Research Advance Access published December 14, 2006
Due to a variety of mechanisms that affect their stability,
including slippage replication and unequal crossing over, tan-
dem repeats can exhibit high-mutation rates and this property
may yield plasticity in a species. In dogs, variations in copy
number for trinucloetide tandem repeats found in the coding
regions of developmental genes have been quantitatively
associated with morphological variations in the foot and
skull among different domestic breeds (21). The implication
is that plasticity in these repeats has enabled the selective
breeding of dogs to achieve widely divergent morphologies.
The foregoing examples of known functional roles for
tandem repeats are suggestive of future discoveries. They
also highlight the need for readily available computational
resources to study repeats. The growing interest in tandem
repeats in the late 1990s led one of us (Benson) to develop
the Tandem Repeats Finder program in 1999 (22), one of sev-
eral now used to rapidly identify approximate tandem repeats
in genomic DNA. Despite that program’s usefulness and
heavy usage (100 citations in 2005), what has been lacking
is a more comprehensive computational resource. The
Tandem Repeats Database (TRDB), described here, has been
designed to fill that void. It consists of two parts: the first is
a web accessible, public repository of information on the
presence and characteristics of tandem repeats in a variety
of genomes; the second is a research workbench which (hope-
fully) will serve as a model for future biological database
development.
Currently, the public database contains 22 genomes,
including six land vertebrates (human, chimpanzee, mouse,
rat, dog, chicken), three fish (Fugu, Tetraodon, zebrafish),
seven insects (five Drosophila species, honeybee, mosquito),
two roundworms (Caenorhabditis species), two plants (Ara-
bidopsis, rice), Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Escherichia
coli (see also Table 1). In addition, archival copies of some
of these genomes are maintained. Other species are being
added as they become available and as interest warrants. A
variety of tools, built into TRDB, simplify the study of
repeats. These include query and filtering capabilities for
finding particular repeats of interest, repeat clustering algo-
rithms based on sequence similarity, polymorphism predic-
tion based on common patterns of mutation, an interface
for PCR primer selection using the Primer3 software (23),
and data download in a variety of formats. Along with the
tools, TRDB provides data visualization features including
dynamically generated histograms and scatterplots of repeat
characteristics, a browser for visualizing repeats in the con-
text of other sequence features, and alignment views which
accentuate both patterns of mutations and sequence similarity
among repeats.
The major design feature of the workbench is the user
workspace which is a centralized storage space for user
data and the results of analysis. The workspace permits
users to collect public information, upload and analyze their
own sequences, add sequence annotations, and store the
results of analysis in projects and reports so that work may
extend over multiple sessions. All the tools provided for the
public data are available for use with private data as well.
Most features of TRDB are available for anonymous use,
and data stored anonymously in the workspace is generally
available for a limited time (currently 7 days). Users have
the option of registering with TRDB which gives access to
several tools that require high-computational resources,
such as repeat clustering and polymorphism prediction, and
eliminates the time limit for data stored in the workspace.
In addition, for registered users, TRDB facilitates sharing
and exchange of information through a collaboration proto-
col. Collaborators may be added simply by supplying their
user names in the system (email addresses) and can then
share data and independently work on and view joint projects.
Collaboration as implemented in TRDB eliminates the need
for back-and-forth data transfer between colleagues and per-
mits simultaneous multi-party viewing and analysis.
DATA STORED IN TRDB
Repeats
The primary data stored in TRDB are tandem repeats as
detected by the Tandem Repeats Finder (TRF) program
(22). TRDB currently uses TRF version 4.0. Repeats stored
in the Public Database are detected with default TRF parame-
ter values. For repeat detection in user supplied sequences,
other parameter settings are available (see Supplementary
Data). Tandem repeats are organized into groups called
sets. For most public genomes, TRDB maintains one set
per chromosome and one set for mitochondrial repeats. All
the repeats for a genome are additionally combined into a sin-
gle set. Some genomes are incomplete and for these TRDB
stores only what is currently available. Table 1 gives the
total number of repeats stored for each of the public genomes
in TRDB.
Sets of repeats are presented to the user in a table format.
For each repeat, various descriptive characteristics are dis-
played. These are conceptually grouped into four categories
described below. Figure 1 shows two partial tables from
Table 1. Tandem repeats in the public database genomes for pattern sizes from
1 to 2000 nt
Genome Repeats
Anopheles gambiae (February 2003) 84 076
Apis mellifera (January 2005) 178 586
Arabidopsis thaliana (March 2004) 26 769
Caenorhabditis briggsae (July 2002) 45 054
Caenorhabditis elegans (March 2004) 40 331
Canis familiaris (July 2004) 899 154
Danio rerio (June 2004) 906 234
Drosophila melanogaster (April 2004) 29 915
Drosophila mojavensis (August 2004) 181 843
Drosophila persimilis (October 2005) 99 895
Drosophila pseudoobscura (August 2003) 76 354
Drosophila yakuba (April 2004) 73 939
Escherichia coli (October 2001) 58
Fugu rubripes (August 2002) 112 902
Gallus gallus (February 2004) 136 691
Homo sapiens (March 2006) 947 696
Mus musculus (March 2006) 1 556 231
Oryza sativa (Build 4) 134 927
Pan troglodyte (November 2003) 726 005
Rattus norvegicus (June 2003) 1 363 390
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (October 2003) 2075
Tetraodon nigroviridis (February 2004) 66 600
Because of repeat reporting criteria in TRF, some duplication of repeat loci at
diffierent pattern sizes are included.
D2 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 00, Database issue
Figure 1. Repeat tables for the human genome (hg18 obtained from the UCSC genome browser website). Upper panel: TRF computed characteristics for repeats
from chromosome 1. Filters applied were pattern size> 25, copy number> 5.0. Note that the third and fourth repeats redundantly report the same locus because
of TRF reporting criteria (the larger pattern gives at least a 10% better alignment score). Note also that repeats with pattern sizes 25 and 26 are essentially AT
repeats with some slight variations. This can be inferred from the percentage nucleotide columns and quickly checked by clicking on the repeat indices which
opens an alignment window (see Figure 2 for an example). Middle panel: TRDB computed characteristics for repeats drawn from the entire genome. The repeats
in this table have the potential to cause frame shift mutations. They have periods of 4 or 5 (rather than a multiple of 3), are contained exclusively in exons,
and have a high percent matching which is typical of microsatellites that undergo replication slippage. The 4 unchecked repeats contain at least 14 exact copies in
a row (as determined by visual inspection of their alignments). Lower panel: The filter used to obtain the middle table.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 00, Database issue D3
human chromosome I. The first contains characteristics
primarily determined by TRF analysis and the second con-
tains characteristics primarily determined by additional pro-
cessing within TRDB. Users may select any combination of
characteristics to view in a table. A complete description of
all characteristics is given in the Supplementary Data.
 Sequence characteristics are based on the tandem array
and the consensus pattern. The array is the entire sequence
of the repeat. The consensus is estimated by TRDB to be
the best pattern to align to the tandem array. The consensus
pattern is not displayed in the repeats table, but may be
obtained through data download.
 Annotation characteristics are obtained from annotation
data which can be uploaded to TRDB. The characteristics
table contains an indicator (yes or no) for each feature class
(e.g. genes) indicating whether the repeat overlaps a
member of the class. For those that do overlap, a hyperlink
points to a description of the feature and a link to the
external source database. For those repeats that do not
overlap a member of the feature class, hyperlinks point to
descriptions of the nearest features upstream and down-
stream and these descriptions include the distance in
nucleotides from the repeat to the feature. This distance
may be used in filtering, permitting queries that can, e.g.
find all repeats within 10 000 nt of any gene.
 Tool generated characteristics are obtained from analysis
by TRDB tools.
 Identifier characteristics help identify the source of the
repeat and are useful when repeats from different sources
are mixed in a single set.
User data
Three components make up the persistent data stored by a
user: sequences, projects and reports. For TRF/TRDB anal-
ysis, a sequence must first be uploaded to the user workspace,
either (i) as a FASTA file, (ii) by entering a GenBank acces-
sion number (for direct upload from GenBank), or (iii) by
cutting and pasting. Multiple sequences in a single FASTA
file are permitted, as are sequences with masked characters
(Ns, upper case, lower case) or ambiguous characters (R, Y,
etc.). Once stored, the following operations can be performed
on a sequence:
 TRF processing. Repeats detected in the sequence are
stored as a new set in a user project.
 Annotations. Locations of other features within a sequence
may be uploaded as a file in General Feature Format
(GFF), or by cutting and pasting. Annotated features can be
used to filter a set of repeats by proximity to the features
(see Filtering, Sorting and Merging) and their locations can
be visualized in the browser tool (see Data visualization).
 Sequence download. The sequence or any single contig-
uous part of the sequence (specified by the starting and
ending positions) may be retrieved as a FASTA format file.
Repeats detected within the sequence can be masked (as
Ns, upper case or lower case).
 PCR primer selection. Flanking sequence bordering any set
of repeats may be retrieved for upload into primer selection
software. Additionally an interface to the Primer3 software
(23) is built directly into TRDB.
Every set of tandem repeats, whether detected in a user
supplied sequence or selected and saved from the public
data, is stored in a user project which forms the core for own-
ership and data sharing. TRDB produces a variety of visual
and tabular data and any of these may be stored as static
images in a report and supplemented with descriptive text.
As with projects, reports are owned and can be shared with
collaborators.
FILTERING, SORTING AND MERGING
A repeat set derived from a chromosome or other large
sequence will typically contain thousands of repeats. By
default, they are presented in order of occurrence along the
sequence but may be sorted on any single characteristic in
either ascending or descending order. To further tailor a set
to the specifics of the research problem, TRDB provides fil-
tering capabilities based on repeat characteristics. Using drop
down menus and a text box, the user creates a collection of
filter conditions and applies them to the set. Those repeats
that meet all the conditions pass through the filter and can
be saved as a new set. A distinctive property of TRDB is
its ability to filter by proximity to annotated sequence fea-
tures. This is accomplished by selecting a class of annotation
features and requiring that the repeats either overlap one of
the features or occur nearby, where nearby is expressed as
a user-selected nucleotide distance upstream, downstream
or in either direction (e.g. gene upstream within 10 000 nt).
Repeats can also be selected manually for inclusion or
exclusion in combination with other filters by checking or
Figure 2. View of a tandem array aligned with its consensus pattern. This
repeat is from human chromosome 5 (hg18, indices 720 890–721 608). The
pattern size is 48 and the array contains 14.9 copies. The top line is
the consensus. Dashes in the top line indicate an insertion relative to the
consensus in one or more of the copies. Remaining bars represent consecutive
copies in the tandem array. Only substitutions, insertions and deletions
relative to the consensus are displayed as separate characters. When the
repeat has a fractional copy, the final bar shows the point where the repeat
terminates. This repeat is predicted to be polymorphic. Note that there
are eight columns where repetitive point mutations occur and at least
three groupings of these mutations suggest that the repeat has undergone
multiple rounds of expansion. These are the A,T,G,G grouping that appears
four times (one of which is in copy 4), the related A,T grouping that appears
three times (one in copy 3) and the T,C,A grouping that appears twice (one
in copy 1).
D4 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 00, Database issue
unchecking repeat label boxes. Figure 1 (lower panel) shows
the expressions for a filter that finds short period repeats that
could cause frameshift mutations: they are located in exons,
have high percent matching which is typical of microsatellites
that undergo replication slippage, and their unit sizes are not
multiples of 3. The four repeats unchecked in the middle of
Figure 1 contain at least 14 exact copies in a row (as deter-
mined by visual inspection of their alignments).
A new set of repeats can be produced by merging existing
sets. For example, to create a set for the entire human gen-
ome, we merge the sets for the individual chromosomes
using a union operation (i.e. A [ B). Other allowed binary
operations are intersection (A \ B), complement of intersec-
tion [not(A \ B)] and set difference (A  B). Set merging is
possible in two modes. By default it is based on the repeat id,
an internal TRDB identifier. In this mode, equality of repeats
means equality of the identifiers, i.e. the repeats are actually
the same, from the same run of TRF. The alternative is to
merge based on tandem array position. In this case, two
repeats are considered the ‘same’ if their tandem arrays are
identical or they overlap by a user-specified percentage.
This is useful in cases where the repeats come from different
runs of TRF or the repeats are redundant. Associated with
each merged set is an interactive tree diagram called the
history which records and can display the merging conditions.
DATA VISUALIZATION
TRDB produces a variety of data visualizations, in .PNG
format, which may be stored as static images in a report.
Figure 2 shows TRDB’s visualization of the alignment of a
repeat to its consensus pattern. This view is accessed by
Figure 3. View of four related repeats found by the clustering tool, shown as a multiple alignment, from a cluster containing 19 repeats discovered in human
chromosome 1 (hg18). These repeats exhibit minor variations, including differences in copy number and are widely spaced along the chromosome (1: 25, 032,
377–25, 032, 662; 2: 63, 711, 700–63, 711, 975; 3: 112, 638, 002–112, 638, 328; 4: 147, 399, 764–147, 400, 090). Note that repeat 1 is present in a reverse
complement orientation (RC notation). The top repeat is considered the ‘‘master’’ and all alignments are to its consensus (top line). The master may be picked
manually, or TRDB will choose it as the repeat with the smallest combined alignment distance to the remaining repeats. For every other repeat, a consensus bar is
shown and the initial and final repeat bars show where the repeat starts and ends relative to the master consensus. Note that repeat 1 starts at a different position
than the other three.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 00, Database issue D5
clicking the repeat indices in a repeats table or a repeat image
in the browser. Figure 3 shows the multiple alignment of a set
of related repeats. Up to 20 repeats may be displayed in this
way. Mutiple alignments are appropriate for repeats related
by sequence similarity and can be accessed from the ‘view
repeats’ page.
For a repeat set, TRDB can produce a distribution his-
togram for any single numeric characteristic. The histogram
can be presented as a graph or a table. In the case of a
table, three values are returned per accumulation interval
(bucket), the low and high ends of the interval range and
the count for the interval. For any pair of characteristics,
TRDB can produce a scatterplot of the ordered data points.
Histograms and scatterplots can be accessed from the ‘sets’
page. Figure 4 shows two histograms produced by TRDB.
The TRDB browser visualizes the occurrence of repeats
along a source sequence in combination with the positions
of other annotated features contained in the sequence. It
was inspired by the UCSC Human Genome Browser but
has more limited capability. Repeats and annotation features
are displayed in separate horizontal strips. Within a strip,
features are stacked if they would otherwise overlap. Each
feature and repeat image contains a hyperlink. Resting the
cursor on the image brings up a small text box with the
feature name/id number. Clicking brings up a new window
containing the feature description and an additional hyperlink
for annotations to an external source database if available.
Figure 5 shows a typical browser image. The browser can
be accessed from the ‘sets’ page or from the entry for a single
repeat in a repeats table.
TRDB TOOLS
Data download
TRDB provides datafile output for repeat sets in several
formats. Each repeat is described by a collection of character-
istics which can be modified by the user. Additionally,
sequence information can be provided, including the tandem
array (subsequence), the consensus (pattern), the repeat
profile (24) (a summary of the alignment of the tandem
array to its consensus in terms of the A, C, G, T and indel
content of each alignment column) and flanking sequence on
either side of the repeat (in several prespecified lengths from
50 to 1000 bp). Repeats are sorted, ascending or descending,
based on any single numeric characteristic and may be
grouped by source sequence for a multi-sequence set. The
output format is one of four possibilities: (i) ASCII, either
tab or comma delimited, for use in spreadsheet programs;
(ii) XML; (iii) FASTA for sequence information only (subse-
quence, pattern, flanking sequence); and (iv) GFF or UCSC
custom track (see Supplementary Data for additional details).
Clustering
This tool clusters repeats by sequence similarity, thereby
identifying repeats that are evolutionarily related within a sin-
gle genome, or across genomes, or which may have common
functional or structural properties. The output is a partition of
the original repeat set into a group of clusters, each contain-
ing at least two related repeats. Those repeats unrelated to any
others are omitted from the partition. Clusters can be viewed
from the ‘partitions’ page, by selecting a partition and then
‘view clusters’. Clusters are numbered arbitrarily and a
table reports for each cluster the number of repeats it contains
and the range of their consensus sizes. Each cluster is treated
as a set and can be filtered, renamed and saved.
The clustering algorithm works with repeat profiles. Each
element of the profile is the nucleotide and indel composition
of one column in the alignment. Every pair of profiles is com-
pared using a cyclic alignment algorithm (25) to produce a
distance type alignment score for the pair. Several weighting
functions for composition-to-composition scoring are avail-
able (26) and are still being tested. Alignment distance is
Figure 4. Histograms illustrating distinctly different distributions of tandem
repeat pattern sizes in C.elegans (upper panel) and human (lower panel). Note
the significant overrepresentation in humans of microsatellite repeats with
periods 1, 2 and 4.
D6 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 00, Database issue
converted to a percent similarity through the formula
1  ðalignment distanceÞðmaximum possible alignment distanceÞ :
Connected components clustering is used to produce initial
clusters with a percent similarity cut-off value (default¼ 85%).
Clusters may be refined with the slower Partition Around
Medoids (PAM) algorithm (26,27) which is a k-means
approach. Figure 3 shows an example of related repeats
detected by clustering.
Polymorphism prediction
As discussed in the Introduction, polymorphic repeats are
useful as genomic markers and can cause differential gene
expression. The prediction method used in TRDB is based
on the method validated in (28). A minisatellite repeat is pre-
dicted to be polymorphic based on two factors, %G + %C >
0.48 and HistoryR > 0.54. The HistoryR value (a real num-
ber between 0 and 1) measures the levels of redundant muta-
tions in the repeat (mutations that appear in the same position
in several copies of the repeat) and redundant mutation
motifs (the same or similar sets of mutations that appear in
several copies of the repeat, see Figure 2). A larger number
means more redundancy. The HistoryR value is computed
by a parsimony-based duplication history reconstruction
algorithm (29).
In the validation study (28), various sequence characteris-
tics were tested as predictors of polymorphism and hetero-
zygosity in 127 repeats from human chromosomes 21 and
22. The highest predictive values were obtained with the
pair of factors stated above. Validation was done on mini-
satellites with the following characteristics (i) unit length
>17 bp, (ii) copy number >10, (iii) total length >350 bp
and (iv) percent matches >70%. No data on the effective-
ness of the prediction method for other repeats is currently
available.
The Polymorphism Prediction tool is run on a set of
repeats. Only the set owner can run this tool, as it modifies
some fields in the source repeats. Once complete, the results
are stored in the ‘HistoryR’ and ‘Predicted Polymorphism’
characteristics. These must be added to the repeat table
(with the ‘change columns’ button) in order to use them for
filtering or sorting.
FUTURE ENHANCEMENTS
In the coming months, we will add enhancements to TRDB.
These are expected to include the following:
 Pre-computed clusters of all repeats in the public database.
Clustering will be performed within and across genomes.
It is expected that a consensus or representative repeat will
be selected for each cluster so that newly deposited repeats
may be compared quickly to existing clusters.
 Inclusion of other repeat detection programs. These will
allow search for tandem repeats by alternate methods. One
program, mreps (30), is already available for detecting
longer repeats than are possible with TRF. Another, STAR
(31) will allow search for repeats with a particular motif.
A function ‘import a set’ in the tools section has been
implemented to allow external file upload of a repeat set
detected by any means. It will be given more flexibility in
terms of the allowed data file formats.
 Extended polymorphism prediction and annotation. Several
other methods for computational polymorphism prediction
have been published, both for microsatellites and mini-
satellites (32–34). We will add these methods to the
polymorphism prediction tool already available in TRDB.
In addition, we will cooperate with laboratory groups
conducting polymorphism typing to include annotation data
on known polymorphic tandem repeats.
CONCLUSION
TRDB is intended as a central resource for comprehensive
information on tandem repeats in sequenced genomes and
as a workspace providing essential computational tools for
Figure 5. A view from the browser. Here a single tandem repeat (hg 18, chromosome 1: 21, 678, 941–21, 682, 295), boxed, covers both introns and exons of a
gene. The repeat has 2.2 copies of a pattern of 1583 nt. The periodic nature of the introns and exons can be clearly seen. This repeat clusters with six others
on chromosome 1, some of which do not overlap any genes.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 00, Database issue D7
tandem repeat analysis. Our goal is to make TRDB an infor-
mative and innovative database. We thank those who have
helped in the past through their suggestions which have
improved the functionality of the database and we welcome
new suggestions, even wildly ambitious ones, that will sim-
plify or extend data analysis.
SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Supplementary Data are available at NAR online.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was partially supported by National Science
Foundation grants DBI-0090789, CCR-0073081, DBI-
0413462 and IIS-0612153. Funding to pay the Open Access
publication charges for this article was provided by Boston
University.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Kit,S. (1961) Equilibrium sedimentation in density gradients of
DNA preparations from animal tissues. J. Mol. Biol., 3, 711–716.
2. La Spada,A.R., Wilson,E.M., Lubahn,D.B., Harding,A.E. and
Fischbeck,K.H. (1991) Androgen receptor gene mutations in X-linked
spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy. Nature, 352, 77–79.
3. Huntington’s disease collaborative research group (1993) A novel
gene containing a trinucleotide repeat that is expanded and unstable
on Huntington’s disease chromosomes. Cell, 72, 971–983.
4. Verkerk,A.J., Pieretti,M., Sutcliffe,J.S., Fu,Y.H., Kuhl,D.P., Pizzuti,A.,
Reiner,O., Richards,S., Victoria,M.F., Zhang,F.P. et al. (1991)
Identification of a gene (FMR-1) containing a CGG repeat coincident
with a breakpoint cluster region exhibiting length variation in fragile
X syndrome. Cell, 65, 905–914.
5. Campuzano,V., Montermini,L., Molto,M.D., Pianese,L., Cossee,M.,
Cavalcanti,F., Monros,E., Rodius,F., Duclos,F., Monticelli,A. et al.
(1996) Friedreich’s ataxia: Autosomal recessive disease caused by an
intronic GAA triplet repeat expansion. Science, 271, 1423–1427.
6. Fu,Y.-H., Pizzuti,A., Fenwick,R.G.,Jr, King,J., Rajnarayan,S.,
Dunne,P.W., Dubel,J., Nasser,G.A., Ashizawa,T., DeJong,P. et al.
(1992) An unstable triplet repeat in a gene related to myotonic
muscular dystrophy. Science, 255, 1256–1258.
7. Koob,M.D., Moseley,M.L., Schut,L.J., Benzow,K.A., Bird,T.D.,
Day,J.W. and Ranum,L.P. (1999) An untranslated CTG expansion
causes a novel form of spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA8). Nature Genet.,
21, 379–384.
8. Holmes,S.E., O’Hearn,E.E., McInnis,M.G., Gorelick-Feldman,D.A.,
Kleiderlein,J.J., Callahan,C., Kwak,N.G., Ingersoll-Ashworth,R.G.,
Sherr,M., Sumner,A.J. et al. (1999) Expansion of a novel CAG
trinucleotide repeat in the 50 region of PPP2R2B is associated with
SCA12. Nature Genet., 23, 391–392.
9. Vandenbergh,D., Persico,A.M. and Uhl,G.R. (1992) A human
dopamine transporter cDNA predicts reduced glycosylation, displays a
novel repetitive element and provides racially-dimorphic TaqI RFLPs.
Mol. Brain Res., 15, 161–166.
10. Cook,E.H.,Jr, Stein,M.A., Krasowski,M.D., Cox,N.J., Olkon,D.M.,
Kieffer,J.E. and Leventhal,B.L. (1995) Association of attention-deficit
disorder and the dopamine transporter gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet., 56,
993–998.
11. Gilbert,D.L., Wang,Z., Sallee,F.R., Ridel,K.R., Merhar,S., Zhang,J.,
Lipps,T.D., White,C., Badreldin,N. and Wassermann,E.M. (2006)
Dopamine transporter genotype influences the physiological response
to medication in ADHD. Brain, 129, 2038–2046.
12. Lott,D., Kim,S.J., Cook,E.H.,Jr and de Wit,H. (2005) Dopamine
transporter gene associated with diminished subjective response to
amphetamine. Neuropsychopharmacology, 30, 602–609.
13. Guindalini,C., Howard,M., Haddley,K., Laranjeira,R., Collier,D.,
Ammar,N., Craig,I., O’Garag,C., Bubb,V.J., Greenwood,T. et al.
(2006) A dopamine transporter gene functional variant associated with
cocaine abuse in a Brazilian sample. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 103,
4552–4557.
14. Klenova,E., Scott,A.C., Roberts,J., Shamsuddin,S., Lovejoy,E.A.,
Bergmann,S., Bubb,V.J., Royer,H.-D. and Quinn,J.P. (2004) YB-1
and CTCF differentially regulate the 5-HTT polymorphic intron 2
enhancer which predisposes to a variety of neurological disorders.
J. Neurosci., 24, 5966–5973.
15. Cook,E.H.,Jr, Courchesne,R., Lord,C., Cox,N.J., Yan,S., Lincoln,A.,
Haas,R., Courchesne,E. and Leventhal,B.L. (1997) Evidence of
linkage between the serotonin transporter and autistic disorder.
Mol. Psychiatry, 2, 247–250.
16. Murphy,G.,Jr, Hollander,S.B., Rodrigues,H.E., Kremer,C. and
Schatzberg,A.F. (2004) Effects of the serotonin transporter gene
promoter polymorphism on mirtazapine and paroxetine efficacy and
adverse events in geriatric major depression. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry, 61,
1163–1169.
17. Owerbach,D. and Gabbay,K.H. (1993) Localization of a type 1 diabetes
susceptibility locus to the variable tandem repeat region flanking the
insulin gene. Diabetes, 42, 1708–1714.
18. Bennett,S.T., Lucassen,A.M., Gough,S.C., Powell,E.E., Undlien,D.E.,
Pritchard,L.E., Merriman,M.E., Kawaguchi,Y., Dronsfield,M.J.,
Pociot,F. et al. (1995) Susceptibility to human type 1 diabetes at
IDDM2 is determined by tandem repeat variation at the insulin gene
minisatellite locus. Nature Genetics, 9, 284–292.
19. Stam,M., Belele,C., Dorweiler,J.E. and Chandler,V.L. (2002)
Differential chromatin structure within a tandem array 100 kb upstream
of the maize b1 locus is associated with paramutation. Genes Dev., 16,
1906–1918.
20. Alleman,M., Sidorenko,L., McGinnis,K., Seshadri,V., Dorweiler,J.E.,
White,J., Sikkink,K. and Chandler,V.L. (2006) An RNA-dependent
RNA polymerase is required for paramutation in maize. Nature, 442,
295–298.
21. Fondon,J.W.,III and Garner,H.R. (2004) Molecular origins of rapid and
continuous morphological evolution. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 101,
18058–18063.
22. Benson,G. (1999) Tandem repeats finder: a program to analyze DNA
sequences. Nucleic Acids Res., 27, 573–580.
23. Rozen,S. and Skaletsky,H (2000) Primer3 on the WWW for general
users and for biologist programmers. In Krawetz,S. and Misener,S.
(eds), Bioinformatics Methods and Protocols: Methods in Molecular
Biology. Humana Press, pp. 365–386.
24. Gribskov,M., McLachlan,A.D. and Eisenberg,D. (1987) Profile
analysis: Detection of distantly related proteins. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA, 84, 4355–4358.
25. Maes,M. (1990) On a cyclic string-to-string correction problem.
Information Processing Letters, 35, 73–78.
26. Rao,S., Rodriguez,A. and Benson,G. (2005) Evaluating distance
functions for clustering tandem repeats. Genome Inform.,
16, 3–12.
27. Kaufman,L. and Rousseeuw,P.J. (1990) Finding Groups in Data:
An Introduction to Cluster Analysis. John Wiley and Sons, New York.
28. Denoeud,F., Vergnaud,G. and Benson,G. (2003) Predicting
human minisatellite polymorphism. Genome Res., 13, 856–867.
29. Benson,G. and Dong,L. (1999) Reconstructing the duplication history
of a tandem repeat. In Seventh International Conference on Intelligent
Systems for Molecular Biology—ISMB99, pp. 44–53.
30. Kolpakov,R., Bana,G. and Kucherov,G. (2003) mreps: efficient and
flexible detection of tandem repeats in DNA. Nucleic Acids Res.,
31, 3672–3678.
31. Delgrange,O. and Rivals,E. (2004) STAR: an algorithm to search for
tandem approximate repeats. Bioinformatics, 20, 2812–2820.
32. Naslund,K., Saetre,P., von Salome,J., Bergstrom,T.F., Jareborg,N. and
Jazin,E. (2005) Genome-wide prediction of human VNTRs. Genomics,
85, 24–35.
33. Wren,J., Forgacs,E., Fondon,J., Pertsemlidis,A., Cheng,S., Gallardo,T.,
Williams,R., Shohet,R., Minna,J. and Garner,H. (2000)
Repeat polymorphisms within gene regions: phenotypic and
evolutionary implications. Am. J. Hum. Genet., 67, 345–56.
34. Fondon,J.W.,III, Mele,G.M., Brezinschek,R.I., Cummings,D.,
Pande,A., Wren,J., O’Brien,K.M., Kupper,K.C., Wei,M.H., Lerman,M.
et al. (1998) Computerized polymorphic marker identification:
experimental validation and a predicted human polymorphism catalog.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 95, 7514–7519.
D8 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 00, Database issue
