Distinct transcriptional responses of RNA
polymerases I, II and III to aptamers that
bind TBP
Xiaochun Fan, Hua Shi and John T. Lis*
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
Received November 5, 2004; Revised and Accepted January 9, 2005
ABSTRACT
The TATA-binding protein (TBP) is a general factor
that is involved in transcription by all three types of
nuclear RNA polymerase. To delineate the roles
played by the DNA-binding surface of TBP in these
transcription reactions, we used a set of RNA apta-
mers directed against TBP and examined their ability
to perturb transcription in vitro by the different RNA
polymerases. Distinct responses to the TBP aptamers
were observed for transcription by different types of
polymerase at either the initiation, reinitiation or both
stages of the transcription cycle. We further probed
the TBP interactions in the TFIIIBDNA complex to
elucidate the mechanism for the different sensitivity
of Pol III dependent transcription before and after
preinitiationcomplex (PIC) formation.Lastly, theapta-
mers were employed to measure the time required for
Pol III PIC formation in vitro. This approach can be
generalized to define the involvement of a particular
region on the surface of a protein at particular stages
in a biological process.
INTRODUCTION
In the nucleus of eukaryotes, transcription is carried out by
three different RNA polymerases, RNA polymerase I, II and
III (Pol I, II and III) (1). Each of them is dedicated to the
transcription of distinct sets of genes, but none is able to
recognize its target promoters independently. Instead, general
transcription factors (GTFs) recognize the promoter
elements and recruit the correct RNA polymerase. The
TATA-binding protein (TBP) is an essential GTF involved
in transcription by all three eukaryotic RNA polymerases
(2,3). TBP was first identified as a subunit of TFIID, a
complex involved in transcription by Pol II (4–7), and
recognizes an important eukaryotic core promoter motif,
the TATA element (8). TBP is also present in two other
complexes that are involved in Pol II dependent transcription,
the B-TFIID complex and the TAC complex (9). Moreover,
TBP is a component of complexes required for Pol I (SL1
complex) and Pol III (TFIIIB complex) dependent trans-
cription (10–13).
Different RNA polymerases use diverse mechanisms to
control and regulate transcription initiation and reinitiation.
Pol I is reserved for the transcription of the large ribosomal
RNA genes. To initiate Pol I dependent transcription, the
polymerase interacts with promoters complexed with UBF
and SL1. TBP and the Pol I-specific TBP-associated factors
(TAFs) recruit Pol I directly to the promoter and remain bound
to the DNA to support multiple rounds of transcription (14). A
high density of Pol I molecules are loaded onto the rRNA gene
when the rDNA template is being transcribed. Polymerases
that read through from the upstream rDNA repeat can (in some
cases) bypass the requirement for preinitiation complex (PIC)
formation (15). These features contribute to the high transcrip-
tion efficiency by Pol I.
Pol II is responsible for the transcription of the protein-
coding genes and some small nuclear RNAs. Pol II depends
on the basal transcription factors TFIID, IIB, IIF, IIE and IIH,
and additional upstream activators for accurate and efficient
initiation at different promoters. After Pol II leaves the pro-
moter, TFIIB and TFIIF are released, whereas other factors
such as activators, TBP, Mediator, TFIIH and TFIIE remain
largely promoter-associated and form what is termed a reini-
tiation intermediate or scaffold, to facilitate subsequent rounds
of transcription (16).
Pol III transcribes some structural and catalytic RNAs,
including most small nuclear RNAs, tRNAs and 5S rRNA
(17). It requires TFIIIB and IIIC for most of its promoters,
and in addition, TFIIIA is essential for recognition of the 5S
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 607 255 2442; Fax: +1 607 255 6249; Email: jtl10@cornell.edu
Present address:
Xiaochun Fan, Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
ª The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
838–845 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 3
doi:10.1093/nar/gki212
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 4, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
gene promoter (18). Transcription of Pol III genes also begins
with the step-wise assembly of a PIC. When bound to the
upstream region of 5S and tRNA genes, yeast TFIIIB correctly
positions Pol III with respect to the promoter and supports
multiple rounds of transcription (19). Reinitiation has a higher
efficiency than does de novo initiation in Pol III dependent
transcription (20). The stable association of TFIIIB with pro-
moter, even after Pol III progresses into elongation, bypasses
the need for PIC formation, thus accelerating the process of
reinitiation.
TBP is a relatively small molecule with a divergent
N-terminal domain and a highly conserved C-terminal
domain. The C-terminal core domain of TBP is a pseudo-
symmetric, saddle-shaped molecule with a concave surface
that interacts primarily with the TATA element. This binding
event induces a sharp bend in the DNA that is thought to
be important for the juxtaposition of factors bound both
upstream and downstream of the TATA element (21,22). Its
convex side is recognized by many transcriptional activators
and suppressors (23). The importance of TBP and, in particu-
lar, its DNA-binding surface seems to be distinct in different
RNA polymerase systems. In an in vitro study, different types
of transcription showed different sensitivity to TATA-
containing DNA oligonucleotides (24), suggesting various
roles played by the DNA-binding surface of TBP. Neverthe-
less, the functions of this surface area of TBP cannot be
assessed accurately by using TATA-containing DNA, since
RNA polymerase is known to associate with the ends of these
DNA oligos non-specifically, thereby causing inhibition of
transcription (24).
Previously, we isolated and characterized a set of RNA
aptamers that bind TBP tightly (25). These aptamers are
well-characterized specific molecular probes: they all
appear to bind to the concave side of TBP based on their
ability to compete with TATA DNA for binding to TBP,
yet their modes of interaction with TBP are distinct (25).
Here, we describe the utility of these aptamers as novel
reagents to probe transcription by the three eukaryotic RNA
polymerases. The different RNA polymerases responded dis-
tinctively to these TBP aptamers. Pol I dependent transcription
was completely resistant to all of the TBP aptamers tested.
In contrast, Pol II dependent transcription was the most sens-
itive to TBP aptamers. In crude cell extracts, the aptamers
inhibited Pol II dependent transcription even after PICs
were formed. Although TBP aptamers inhibited Pol III
dependent transcription when they were present during PIC
formation, they failed to inhibit transcription after PIC forma-
tion. These results revealed that the DNA-binding surface of
TBP is involved to different extents in the transcription by
different RNA polymerases at both initiation and reinitiation
stages. It also revealed a fundamental difference between the
stability of the reinitiation intermediate in the Pol II system
and its counterpart in the Pol III system. The results not only
provide insights into the different involvement of TBP in
transcription initiation by these RNA polymerases, but they
also demonstrate the application of these aptamers for studies
of complicated reaction mechanisms as in our analysis of TBP
in Pol III transcription. Where aptamers are available, this
approach can be generalized to define the role of a particular
area on a protein molecule at particular stages of a biological
process.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
RNA polymerase I transcription reactions
Preparation of whole-cell extract was described previously
(25,26). Transcription reactions were carried out essentially
according to (26), with minor modifications. The yeast 35S
ribosomal gene promoter was used in 20 ml reaction mixtures
each containing 100 mg of yeast whole-cell extract (containing
about 20 nM of TBP). The buffer contained 20 mM
HEPES–KOH pH 7.9, 50 mM potassium chloride, 10 mM
magnesium chloride, 5 mM EGTA, 0.05 mM EDTA, 2.5 mM
DTT, 10% glycerol, 100 mM each ribonucleoside triphos-
phate, 10 mg/ml a-amanitin and template DNA at 10 mg/ml
(2 nM). The mixture without ribonucleoside triphosphates
(NTPs) was incubated at room temperature for 30 min to
allow PIC formation. Transcription was started by the addition
of NTPs and allowed to proceed for 30 min at room temper-
ature. To inhibit Pol II dependent transcription, 10 mg/ml
a-amanitin was included in the reaction. Reactions were
stopped by the addition of 180 ml 20 mM EDTA, 200 mM
sodium chloride, 10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.6. After phenol/
chloroform extraction, the products were precipitated together
with 3 mg of glyco-blue. The transcripts were assayed by either
S1 protection or primer extension assays.
S1 nuclease protection assays were performed essentially
according to (26), with a 50 nt DNA oligonucleotide probe
complementary to the template DNA from 15 to +35 (probe
35S). Correctly initiated transcripts yielded a 35 nt probe
fragment. Read-through transcription originated upstream of
the promoter yielded a 50 nt probe fragment. Probe 35S has
the sequence of 50-GGTCTTGACGAACTTGTCTTCAAC-
TGCTTTCGCATGAAGTACCTCCCAAC-30. The reaction
was shown to be resistant to a-amanitin up to 100 mg/ml,
thus confirming it as Pol I dependent transcription.
RNA polymerase II transcription reactions
Transcription was performed according to a previously
described protocol (25) except that a plasmid bearing the
yeast CYC1 promoter and a 390 nt G-less cassette was used
as the template. Aptamers or DNA oligos containing a TATA
box sequence were added to the mixture and incubated for 10
min before the addition of NTPs.
RNA polymerase III transcription reactions
Transcription reactions with the tRNA LEU3 template were
carried out essentially as described previously (26). A typical
20-ml reaction mixture contained 20 mg of yeast whole-cell
extract and 20 mM HEPES–KOH pH 7.9, 80 mM potassium
chloride, 5 mM magnesium chloride, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM
DTT, 10% glycerol, 10 mg/ml a-amanitin and template DNA
at 5 mg/ml. The mixture was incubated at room temperature for
30 min to let PIC form. Transcription was started by the
addition of 250 mM ATP, CTP, GTP, 25 mM UTP and
10 mCi [a-32P]UTP, and allowed to proceed for 30 min at
room temperature. Reactions were stopped by the addition
of 180 ml stop buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.6, 20 mM
EDTA, 0.2 M sodium chloride). After phenol/chloroform
extraction, the products were precipitated together with
3 mg of glyco-blue. The template used in the experiment
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 3 839
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 4, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
had wild-type tRNA LEU3 gene in the vector of pBlueScript
SK+, and the tRNA gene was derived from pGE2.wt (3,27).
Conditions for transcription reactions with the 5S rRNA
template were identical to those for tRNA LEU3 reactions,
except that 100 mg extract and 100 ng template were used in
the reaction. The template was pY5S that included the entire
yeast 5S gene (3).
Conditions for transcription reactions with the U6 snRNA
were also identical to those for tRNA LEU3 reactions, except
that 100 mg extract and 200 ng template were used in the
reaction. The template was pCH6 that contained the gene
of SNR6 from 120 to +629 (28).
The lengths and patterns of the transcripts from the three
promoters were confirmed to be consistent with those reported
in the literature (3), and the transcription was Pol III-specific
(insensitive to low concentration of a-amanitin). Different
strengths of transcription were observed for different pro-
moters. The amount of template and cell extracts used in
the experiment was determined empirically to give reasonable
signals.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA)
For TFIIIBDNA complex, the TATA-DNA used in the bind-
ing assays was produced by annealing deoxyoligonucleotides
bearing a 30 bp DNA segment derived from the yeast SNR6
promoter with the following sequence: 50-TTTTCGGCTAC-
TATAAATAAATGTTTTTTT-30. The TFIIIBDNA com-
plex was resolved on a 6% polyacrylamide gel run in 2·
TE (20 mM Tris–HCl pH 8, 2 mM EDTA) buffer. In the
competition experiment, DNA probe was incubated with dif-
ferent competitors before the addition of protein mixture con-
taining 10 nM of TBP, Brf1 and Bdp1. In the disruption
experiment, the TFIIIBDNA complexes were formed at
room temperature for 30 min before the addition of different
competitors, the mixtures were loaded onto a native gel after
another 30 min incubation.
RESULTS
Pol I dependent transcription is resistant to
TBP aptamers
The core Pol I promoter is located immediately upstream of
the initiation site, and is both necessary and sufficient for
initiation of basal transcription in most species (14). Pol I
promoters are less conserved than their counterparts in the
Pol II and Pol III systems. There is very little sequence sim-
ilarity between rRNA promoters from different species. The
ribosomal initiator is an AT-rich sequence surrounding the
initiation site, but it is not a binding site for TBP. Nonetheless,
TBP is a subunit of the SL1 complex, which is required for Pol
I dependent transcription (10), and in yeast, TBP itself has
been shown to be required for transcription by Pol I (2,3). To
assay the effects of TBP aptamers on Pol I dependent tran-
scription, a template containing the promoter of yeast 35S
rRNA gene was used in an in vitro transcription reaction
and the transcripts were quantified either by S1 protection
or primer extension assays (26). Control experiments showed
that the transcription is specific for Pol I and was both template
and extract dependent (see Materials and Methods).
We attempted to perturb Pol I dependent transcription using
three aptamers, named #4, #12 and #17, which bind tightly to
TBP, and a control RNA called #31, which does not bind TBP
(25). The effects of these aptamers were compared to those of a
DNA fragment containing the TATA element. As shown in
Figure 1A, no inhibition of transcription was observed when
160 nM RNA aptamers were added to cell extract simultan-
eously with the DNA template (RNA aptamers were incubated
with the DNA template before mixing with the whole-cell
extract). At this concentration, the RNA aptamers completely
abolished transcription by Pol II [Figure 1B and (25)]. An even
higher concentration of RNA aptamers (1.6 mM) also had no
detectable effect on Pol I dependent transcription (data not
shown). This result is consistent with a previous report that Pol
I dependent transcription is very resistant to DNA oligos con-
taining a TATA element (24) in a purified system. Based on
RT
+1
Figure 1. Pol I and Pol II dependent in vitro transcription. The procedure is
schematically represented at the top of each panel. The thin arrows indicate
when the different components of the assay were added, and the thick arrow
indicates when aptamers were added. The aptamers used are listed on the top of
the corresponding lanes. The numbers under the lane indicate the relative
intensity of the transcript signal, with the reaction without aptamer set at
100. TATA-DNA and the RNA #31 were used as controls. (A) Transcription
from the 35S rRNA promoter. Transcripts were quantified by the S1 nuclease
protection assay. The sign ‘+1’ indicates the transcripts starting from the correct
site, while ‘RT’ indicates the read-through products of transcription from
upstream (both products are Pol I dependent). (B) Transcription from the
CYC1 promoter.
840 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 3
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 4, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
this information and the fact that the TBP aptamers bind
tightly to TBP and block DNA binding (25), our results indic-
ate that the DNA-binding surface of TBP is not critical to
rDNA template recognition, nor is it likely to function in a
critical protein interaction associated with Pol I.
Pol II dependent transcription from the CYC1
promoter is sensitive to TBP aptamers
It has been proposed based on in vitro analysis that different
Pol II promoters might use different sets of basal transcription
factors (29). Previously, we showed that TBP aptamers #4, #12
and #17 were able to inhibit Pol II dependent transcription
efficiently from an Adenovirus major late (AdML) promoter
(25). To test the generality of the effect of TBP aptamers on the
Pol II dependent transcription, here we employed a native
yeast promoter, CYC1, which has distinct properties and
can support high levels of transcription in vitro (30,31).
In vivo, TBP has been shown to associate with the CYC1
promoter before gene activation (32–34). Unlike the AdML
promoter, which directs transcription from a single start site,
the CYC1 promoter directs transcription from multiple start
sites both in vitro and in vivo (35,36).
As shown in Figure 1B, when the DNA template containing
a CYC1 promoter was used in an in vitro transcription system,
all three TBP aptamers (present at 160 nM), inhibited tran-
scription efficiently even when they were added after the PIC
had formed, while the negative control, RNA #31, had little
effect. The same concentration of yeast tRNA also had no
effect on transcription. Apparently, the different features of
the CYC1 and AdML promoters did not cause detectable dif-
ference in their sensitivity to TBP aptamers. These results, and
the previous observation that these RNA aptamers inhibited
transcription from the AdML promoter before and after PIC
was formed (25), indicate that it is possible to use these TBP
aptamers as inhibitors for Pol II dependent transcription from
TATA-containing promoters. As observed previously with the
AdML promoter (25), here the TBP aptamers (and the TATA-
DNA) act even after PIC formation and appear to gain access
to the DNA-binding surface of TBP during rounds of reiniti-
ation (Figure 1B). Therefore, while TBP has been shown to
remain promoter-associated and part of a reinitiation scaffold
(16), the interaction of TBP with DNA is sufficiently dynamic
that these inhibitors are effective in blocking most Pol II
transcription from both CYC1 and AdML promoters.
Pol III dependent transcription shows different
sensitivity to TBP aptamers before and after
PIC formation
To test the effects of TBP aptamers on Pol III dependent tran-
scription, we used three different templates, representing each
category of genes transcribed by yeast Pol III. The promoter of
the 5S rRNA gene is a type I promoter that requires the internal
DNA sequence elements, the conserved A and C blocks, and
the transcription factors TFIIIA, IIIB and IIIC for efficient
transcription (14). Promoters of tRNA genes are type II pro-
moters that require two highly conserved sequence blocks, A
and B, within the transcribed region and transcription factors
TFIIIB and TFIIIC (14). Yeast U6 snRNA genes have func-
tional A and B blocks that are located in unusual positions and
a functional TATA box upstream of the gene (28).
When RNA aptamers were present at 160 nM during PIC
formation, transcription of all three Pol III genes was inhibited
efficiently by all three TBP aptamers (Figure 2A). However,
when we added the aptamers after incubating the template
with the extract to allow the PIC to form, Pol III dependent
transcription became resistant to the RNA aptamers
(Figure 2B). In some cases, TATA containing DNA oligos
had greater inhibitory effect than TBP RNA aptamers, even
though the RNA aptamers bind more tightly to TBP and are
more effective at disrupting TBP/DNA complexes (25). This
may be due to the effect of double-stranded DNA on RNA
polymerases—even double-stranded DNA without a TATA
element were found to inhibit in vitro transcription by Pol
II and Pol III (24). TBP aptamers are more specific inhibitors
of TBP than TATA element-containing DNA oligos, as the
RNA aptamers appear to act only on TBP but not on the RNA
polymerase (25). A higher concentration of RNA aptamers
(1.6 mM) also had no detectable inhibitory effect after PIC
was formed (data not shown).
To confirm that the inhibition of transcription by RNA
aptamers was solely through the inhibition of TBP function,
we tested the ability of TBP and additional different recom-
binant proteins to rescue the aptamer-inhibited transcription.
As expected, recombinant TBP rescued the tRNA LEU3 tran-
scription that was inhibited by aptamers (#12 is shown here,
similar data was obtained for #4 and #17—not shown), but
none of the other proteins tested were able to do so (Figure 2C).
Like the BSA and TFIIB controls shown, Brf1, TFIIA and
VP16 were also tested and had no ability to overcome the
aptamer inhibition (data not shown). Inhibition of 5S rRNA
and U6 snRNA by aptamer #12 can also be rescued by addition
of recombinant TBP (data not shown). These experiments
suggest that TBP was indeed the target and the only
transcription-dependent target that RNA aptamers bind in
this complex system.
TFIIIBpromoter interaction probed by
RNA aptamers
To probe the mechanism responsible for the difference in
sensitivity of Pol III dependent transcription to the aptamers
before and after the PIC formation, we examined directly the
effects of RNA aptamers on the TFIIIBpromoter DNA bind-
ing. A short DNA fragment bearing the TATA element of the
U6 promoter was used in EMSA experiments, and this frag-
ment has an affinity for TBP similar to that of the AdML
promoter-containing fragments. Two of our aptamers, #4
and #12, not only compete with TATA for forming TBP com-
plex, but they also actively disrupt preformed TBP-TATA
complexes formed with either AdML (25) or U6 promoters
(data not shown). In the Pol II system, these aptamers (espe-
cially #4) also disrupted higher order complexes that contain
TFIIA, or TFIIB, or both (25). In the TFIIIBpromoter system,
the aptamers behaved differently.
We examined the effects of the three different aptamers on
the formation and disruption of TFIIIB complexes. Functional
TFIIIB was reconstituted by mixing recombinant TBP, Brf1
and Bdp1 (37). Without Bdp1, the resulting Brf1TBPU6
TATA–DNA complexes could be formed but they were not
stable under the gel conditions established for the assay. Addi-
tion of Bdp1 to make full TFIIIB complexes produced a stable
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 3 841
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 4, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
complex (Figure 3A). When RNA aptamers were incubated
with the DNA probe before the addition of protein, RNA
aptamers prevented the formation of TBP-containing com-
plexes efficiently (Figure 3B), as was seen for the higher
order Pol II GTF complexes (25). This effect can also be
observed at a lower concentration of aptamers (40 nM, data
not shown). In contrast, the preformed TFIIIBU6 TATA–
DNA complex was very resistant to all three RNA aptamers
even when the aptamers were present at 320 nM (Figure 3C).
This indicates that the aptamer-binding surface of TBP in the
TFIIIBDNA complex is not accessible to any of the RNA
aptamers, or this surface of TBP is no longer critical for
the stability of the proteinDNA complex once TFIIIB is
associated with the promoter. This can explain why TBP
aptamers were able to inhibit Pol III dependent transcription
only prior to PIC formation; but they were not able to inhibit
the transcription after PIC formation.
The kinetics of PIC formation in Pol III dependent
transcription
The distinct responses of Pol III dependent transcription ini-
tiation and reinitiation to TBP aptamers allowed us to deter-
mine the duration of time required for Pol III transcription to
become resistant to TBP aptamers, which should be indicative
of the time required for PIC formation. Cell extracts were
incubated with DNA template for 30 min before the reaction
was started by the addition of NTPs. In each reaction, RNA
100 32 12 7 9 86
100 25 3 3 5 107
Figure 2. Pol III dependent transcription from different promoters. Sensitivity of transcription to the aptamers before (A) and after (B) PIC formation. The procedure
is schematically represented at the top. The aptamers used are listed on the top of the corresponding lanes. The genes assayed are denoted to the left of the gel.
(C) Rescuing aptamer inhibition of Pol III dependent transcription by excess TBP. In each reaction, 2 nM tRNA LEU3 template was incubated with 20 mg yeast
whole-cell extract (WCE) for 30 min to allow PIC formation. The transcription reaction was started by the addition of NTPs and allowed to proceed for 30 min. Where
indicated, 30 ng of different recombinant proteins, TBP, BSA or TFIIB (about 50 nM for TBP), were mixed with WCE before mixing with the DNA template; aptamer
#12 at final concentration of 20 nM was mixed with the DNA template before incubating with WCE.
842 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 3
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 4, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
aptamer #12 was added to the system at a time point before
transcription was started. As shown in Figure 4, during the first
minute of incubation of DNA template with cell extracts, the
transcription is very sensitive to the aptamer. As time elapsed,
the reaction becomes progressively resistant to the TBP apta-
mer. After a 10 min incubation, no difference can be discerned
between reactions with or without aptamer added. This time
course suggests that at least 5 min is required for forming an
aptamer-resistant complex for Pol III dependent transcription.
In a purified transcription system, adding aptamer at different
times could be used further to reveal the dynamics of the
interactions between DNA template and TFIIIC, TFIIIB and
Pol III.
DISCUSSION
Binding of RNA aptamers to a protein occludes a particular
area on the surface of that protein, and thereby interferes with
its normal interactions. Our RNA aptamers to TBP appear to
bind to the concave, DNA-binding surface of TBP (25).
Here, we test the ability of these aptamers to interfere with
transcription of six different promoters. The results are sum-
marized in Table 1. It is clear that different types of transcrip-
tion responded distinctly to the TBP aptamers, whereas
various promoters used by the same type of polymerase,
but having distinct features, showed the same type of response.
Consequently, like a-amanitin, these aptamers can be utilized
to distinguish transcription by different polymerases.
The different sensitivities of Pol I, II and III to RNA apta-
mers provide insights to the role of the concave surface of TBP
in the processes of both PIC formation and the reinitiation of
transcription. The resistance of Pol I transcription to aptamers
supports the hypothesis that the DNA-binding surface of TBP
is not involved in either DNA binding, complex assembly, or
reinitiation. Alternatively, and less likely, it is also possible
that the DNA-binding surface is buried and inaccessible to
RNA aptamers in the SL1 complex, but if so, it must remain so
both before and after SL1 binding to DNA. The sensitivity of
Pol III dependent initiation and the resistance of Pol III reini-
tiation to aptamers are mirrored at the level of TFIIIBDNA
complex formation. These complementary experiments sug-
gest that the concave surface of TBP is required to set up the
Pol III PIC, but is either unnecessary or inaccessible to apta-
mers after the PIC formation. The resilience of a Pol III rein-
itation platform demonstrated here is reminiscent of work by
Geiduschek and colleagues, who showed that 5S and tRNA
gene promoters that contained a heparin-resistant TFIIIB
Figure 3. TFIIIBDNA interactions perturbed by aptamers. In the binding reaction, a DNA probe containing the TATA box and its flanking region of the yeast SNR6
gene was radiolabeled by kinase and used to form the TFIIIBDNA complex (Bdp1Brf1TBPTATA complex). (A) Assembly of the TFIIIBDNA complex. The
components of the various complexes are given to the left of the gel. (B) Prevention of the formation of the TFIIIBDNA complex by aptamers present during
assembly. In the binding reaction, 320 nM of the aptamers or TATA containing DNA oligos were included. (C) Resistance of the preformed TFIIIBDNA complex to
aptamers. The TFIIIBDNA complex was formed as in (A), then a fraction of the mixture was taken out and mixed with 320 nM of different aptamers or TATA-DNA
and incubated for 30 min at room temperature before being loaded onto a native gel.
Figure 4. Kinetics of PIC formation in Pol III dependent transcription.
Transcription reactions were performed as in Figure 3, except that at
different time points; 160 nM of aptamer #12 was added to the template
and whole-cell extract mixture. Transcription of tRNA LEU3 gradually
becomes resistant to the aptamer after the PIC is allowed to form.
Table 1. Responses of transcription to TBP aptamers
RNA
polymerase
Promoter Stage(s) of
transcription
Sensitivity to
aptamers
Pol I 35S rRNA Initiation and reinitiation No
Pol II CYC1 Initiation and reinitiation Yes
AdML Initiation and reinitiation Yes
Pol III tRNA LEU3 Initiation Yes
Reinitiation No
5S Initiation Yes
Reinitiation No
U6 Initiation Yes
Reinitiation No
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 3 843
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 4, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
complex is sufficient to allow reinitiation (19). In contrast,
both Pol II PIC formation and reinitiation are sensitive to
aptamers. The dynamic association of transcription factors
with rounds of Pol II transcription, which is revealed by
this susceptibility to aptamer inhibition, may allow the
reinitiation process to serve as a checkpoint for transcription
regulation.
While TBP is a subunit of the general transcription factor
TFIIIB that is essential for Pol III dependent transcription,
most Pol III promoter regions contain no TATA box or
TATA-like DNA element. The binding of aptamers to TBP
may block Brf1 from associating with TBP, thus prevent the
assembly of TFIIIB, as Brf1 has been shown to contact
both stirrups of TBP (38,39) and induce TBP dimer dissoci-
ation (40). Taking into account the fact that TBP uses over-
lapping surfaces for dimerization and DNA binding (41,42), it
is possible that the binding of Brf1 to TBP needs the DNA-
binding surface of TBP. After the slow step of PIC formation,
which is susceptible to aptamer inhibition, and the first round
of transcription, TFIIIB remains associated with the promoter
and functions during the following reinitiation events, in
which Pol III is the only factor that is recycled (15,20).
This mechanism of reinitiation bypasses steps required for
the initial transcription cycle, and potentially facilitates highly
efficient RNA production. TFIIIB may also become more
stable when it is associated with DNA, thus resisting challenge
by the aptamers.
The RNA aptamers used here could also be used to study
gene activation or repression in the context of a chromatin-
based transcription system. Furthermore, we have demon-
strated that RNA aptamers can be produced in living
organisms as protein antagonists (43); however, studying tran-
scription mechanisms using aptamers in vivo requires further
refinement of the techniques for delivering active aptamers to
cells with sufficient temporal resolution.
The binding sites of all three aptamers used in this study
have been proposed to map to the concave side of TBP (25).
If this submolecular specificity can be attained for different
patches on the surface of the same protein, it would be possible
to mechanistically dissect the roles played by these different
surfaces. We have developed general methods to isolate apta-
mers to different sites on a single target molecule (44) and
have recently isolated aptamers that bind to the convex side of
TBP at a site overlapping with that recognized by TFIIA (to be
documented elsewhere). As demonstrated here with three dis-
tinct functional assays, these reagents should allow the func-
tion of multiple sites on a protein molecule to be assessed in
well-defined stages of a biological process.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are very grateful to Drs E.P. Geiduscheck and G. Kassavetis
for kindly providing recombinant TBP, Brf1 and Bdp1; to
Drs J. Fu and M.H. Suh for purified TFIIB; to A. Sevilimedu
for help with purification of TFIIA; to Dr K. Adelman for help
with in vitro transcription assays; and to Drs S. Hahn, A. Berk,
M.C. Schultz, D. Brow, Z.S. Juo and J.A. Jaehning for kindly
providing strains and plasmids. This work was supported by
an NIH grant GM40918 to JTL. Funding to pay the Open
Access publication charges for this article was provided
by NIH.
REFERENCES
1. Sentenac,A. (1985) Eukaryotic RNA polymerases. CRC Crit. Rev.
Biochem., 18, 31–90.
2. Cormack,B.P. and Struhl,K. (1992) The TATA-binding protein is
required for transcription by all three nuclear RNA polymerases in
yeast cells. Cell, 69, 685–696.
3. Schultz,M.C., Reeder,R.H. and Hahn,S. (1992) Variants of the TATA-
binding protein can distinguish subsets of RNA polymerase I, II, and III
promoters. Cell, 69, 697–702.
4. Cavallini,B., Huet,J., Plassat,J.L., Sentenac,A., Egly,J.M. and
Chambon,P. (1988) A yeast activity can substitute for the HeLa cell
TATA box factor. Nature, 334, 77–80.
5. Hahn,S., Buratowski,S., Sharp,P.A. and Guarente,L. (1989) Isolation of
the gene encoding the yeast TATA binding protein TFIID: a gene
identical to the SPT15 suppressor of Ty element insertions. Cell, 58,
1173–1181..
6. Horikoshi,M., Wang,C.K., Fujii,H., Cromlish,J.A., Weil,P.A. and
Roeder,R.G. (1989) Cloning and structure of a yeast gene encoding a
general transcription initiation factor TFIID that binds to the TATA box.
Nature, 341, 299–303.
7. Schmidt,M.C., Kao,C.C., Pei,R. and Berk,A.J. (1989) Yeast TATA-box
transcription factor gene. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 86, 7785–7789.
8. Butler,J.E. and Kadonaga,J.T. (2002) The RNA polymerase II core
promoter: a key component in the regulation of gene expression. Genes
Dev., 16, 2583–2592.
9. Mitsiou,D.J. and Stunnenberg,H.G. (2000) TAC, a TBP-sans-TAFs
complex containing the unprocessed TFIIAalphabeta precursor and the
TFIIAgamma subunit. Mol. Cell, 6, 527–537.
10. Comai,L., Tanese,N. and Tjian,R. (1992) The TATA-binding protein and
associated factors are integral components of the RNA polymerase I
transcription factor, SL1. Cell, 68, 965–976.
11. Kassavetis,G.A., Joazeiro,C.A., Pisano,M., Geiduschek,E.P., Colbert,T.,
Hahn,S. and Blanco,J.A. (1992) The role of the TATA-binding protein in
the assembly and function of the multisubunit yeast RNA polymerase III
transcription factor, TFIIIB. Cell, 71, 1055–1064.
12. Taggart,A.K., Fisher,T.S. and Pugh,B.F. (1992) The TATA-binding
protein and associated factors are components of pol III transcription
factor TFIIIB. Cell, 71, 1015–1028.
13. White,R.J. and Jackson,S.P. (1992) Mechanism of TATA-binding
protein recruitment to a TATA-less class III promoter. Cell, 71,
1041–1053.
14. Paule,M.R. and White,R.J. (2000) Survey and summary: transcription by
RNA polymerases I and III. Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 1283–1298.
15. Dieci,G. and Sentenac,A. (2003) Detours and shortcuts to transcription
reinitiation. Trends Biochem. Sci., 28, 202–209.
16. Yudkovsky,N., Ranish,J.A. and Hahn,S. (2000) A transcription
reinitiation intermediate that is stabilized by activator. Nature, 408,
225–229.
17. Hernandez,N. (1993) TBP, a universal eukaryotic transcription factor?
Genes Dev., 7, 1291–1308.
18. Schramm,L. and Hernandez,N. (2002) Recruitment of RNA polymerase
III to its target promoters. Genes Dev., 16, 2593–2620.
19. Kassavetis,G.A., Braun,B.R., Nguyen,L.H. and Geiduschek,E.P. (1990)
S. cerevisiae TFIIIB is the transcription initiation factor proper of RNA
polymerase III, while TFIIIA and TFIIIC are assembly factors. Cell,
60, 235–245.
20. Dieci,G. and Sentenac,A. (1996) Facilitated recycling pathway for RNA
polymerase III. Cell, 84, 245–252.
21. Nikolov,D.B., Hu,S.H., Lin,J., Gasch,A., Hoffmann,A., Horikoshi,M.,
Chua,N.H., Roeder,R.G. and Burley,S.K. (1992) Crystal structure of
TFIID TATA-box binding protein [see comments]. Nature, 360, 40–46.
22. Chasman,D.I., Flaherty,K.M., Sharp,P.A. and Kornberg,R.D. (1993)
Crystal structure of yeast TATA-binding protein and model for inter-
action with DNA. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 90, 8174–8178.
23. Burley,S.K. and Roeder,R.G. (1996) Biochemistry and structural biology
of transcription factor IID (TFIID). Annu. Rev. Biochem., 65,
769–799.
24. Radebaugh,C.A., Matthews,J.L., Geiss,G.K., Liu,F., Wong,J.M.,
Bateman,E., Camier,S., Sentenac,A. and Paule,M.R. (1994) TATA box-
binding protein (TBP) is a constituent of the polymerase I-specific
transcription initiation factor TIF-IB (SL1) bound to the rRNA promoter
and shows differential sensitivity to TBP-directed reagents in polymerase
I, II, and III transcription factors. Mol. Cell. Biol., 14, 597–605.
844 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 3
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 4, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
25. Fan,X., Shi,H., Adelman,K. and Lis,J.T. (2004) Probing TBP interactions
in transcription initiation and reinitiation with RNA aptamers that act in
distinct modes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 101, 6934–6939.
26. Schultz,M.C., Choe,S.Y. and Reeder,R.H. (1991) Specific initiation by
RNA polymerase I in a whole-cell extract from yeast. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA, 88, 1004–1008.
27. Baker,R.E., Camier,S., Sentenac,A. and Hall,B.D. (1987) Gene size
differentially affects the binding of yeast transcription factor tau to two
intragenic regions. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 84, 8768–8772.
28. Brow,D.A. and Guthrie,C. (1990) Transcription of a yeast U6 snRNA
gene requires a polymerase III promoter element in a novel position.
Genes Dev., 4, 1345–1356.
29. Parvin,J.D., Shykind,B.M., Meyers,R.E., Kim,J. and Sharp,P.A. (1994)
Multiple sets of basal factors initiate transcription by RNA polymerase II.
J. Biol. Chem., 269, 18414–18421.
30. Lue,N.F. and Kornberg,R.D. (1987) Accurate initiation at RNA
polymerase II promoters in extracts from Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 84, 8839–8843.
31. Woontner,M. and Jaehning,J.A. (1990) Accurate initiation by RNA
polymerase II in a whole cell extract from Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
J. Biol. Chem., 265, 8979–8982.
32. Chen,J., Ding,M. and Pederson,D.S. (1994) Binding of TFIID to the
CYC1 TATA boxes in yeast occurs independently of upstream activating
sequences. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 91, 11909–11913.
33. Kuras,L. and Struhl,K. (1999) Binding of TBP to promoters in vivo is
stimulated by activators and requires Pol II holoenzyme. Nature, 399,
609–613.
34. Li,X.Y., Virbasius,A., Zhu,X. and Green,M.R. (1999) Enhancement of
TBP binding by activators and general transcription factors. Nature,
399, 605–609.
35. Hahn,S., Hoar,E.T. and Guarente,L. (1985) Each of three ‘TATA
elements’ specifies a subset of the transcription initiation sites at the
CYC-1 promoter of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA, 82, 8562–8566.
36. Li,W.Z. and Sherman,F. (1991) Two types of TATA elements for the
CYC1 gene of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol. Cell. Biol.,
11, 666–676.
37. Kassavetis,G.A., Kumar,A., Letts,G.A. and Geiduschek,E.P. (1998) A
post-recruitment function for the RNA polymerase III transcription-
initiation factor IIIB. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 95, 9196–9201.
38. Kassavetis,G.A., Han,S., Naji,S. and Geiduschek,E.P. (2003) The role of
transcription initiation factor IIIB subunits in promoteropeningprobedby
photochemical cross-linking. J. Biol. Chem., 278, 17912–17917.
39. Juo,Z.S., Kassavetis,G.A., Wang,J., Geiduschek,E.P. and Sigler,P.B.
(2003) Crystal structure of a transcription factor IIIB core interface
ternary complex. Nature, 422, 534–539.
40. Alexander,D.E., Kaczorowski,D.J., Jackson-Fisher,A.J., Lowery,D.M.,
Zanton,S.J. and Pugh,B.F. (2004) Inhibition of TBP dimerization by RNA
polymerase III transcription initiation factor Brf1. J. Biol. Chem., 9, 9.
41. Kim,Y.,Geiger,J.H., Hahn,S. and Sigler,P.B. (1993) Crystal structure of a
yeast TBP/TATA-box complex. Nature, 365, 512–520.
42. Kim,J.L., Nikolov,D.B. and Burley,S.K. (1993) Co-crystal structure of
TBP recognizing the minor groove of a TATA element. Nature, 365,
520–527.
43. Shi,H., Hoffman,B.E. and Lis,J.T. (1999) RNA aptamers as effective
protein antagonists in a multicellular organism. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA, 96, 10033–10038.
44. Shi,H., Fan,X., Ni,Z. and Lis,J.T. (2002) Evolutionary dynamics and
population control during in vitro selection and amplification with
multiple targets. RNA, 8, 1461–1470.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 3 845
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 4, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
