Human Protein Meta-Interaction Database (HPMD)
Potentiates Integration for Meta-Analysis
Gil Alterovitz1, Dmitriy Patek2, Isaac S. Kohane2,3, and Marco F. Ramoni2,3
1 Health Science and Technology/Electrical Engineering & Computer Science,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 02139, USA.
2 Children’s Hospital Informatics Program, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 02115, USA.
3 Harvard Partners Center for Genetics and Genomics, Boston, 02115, USA.
Abstract— Difficulties in integration of biological databases has
been a long standing issue [1]. Problems in combining databases
include different identification schemes, redundancies, and vary-
ing levels of information cataloged within each database. This
work seeks to address these concerns and design a corresponding
implementation. Analysis via Monte-Carlo samples the shortest
distances between pairs of proteins.
The result of this work is the creation of the largest human
protein-protein interaction database, containing over 103,000
interactions from over half a dozen databases/sources. For pairs
of proteins within the same component (graph), the Monte Carlo
simulation suggested the minimum separation distance was 4.3
interactions.
An implemented version that can dynamically integrate
standard Proteomics Standards Initiative- Molecular In-
teraction (PSI-MI)-formatted databases (e.g. DIP, IntAct,
MINT, cPath, HPRD) is available via web site request:
http://chocolate.chip.org/∼protcoop/bap req.html
I. INTRODUCTION
As the human genome project draws to a close, recent work
has decreased the estimate of the number of genes to between
20-25 thousand, not far from the number of genes in a simple
worm (i.e. C. elegans) [2]. Thus, the complexity of humans
must be derived from other sources such as the interactions
of the genes’ products, or proteins [3]. A number of different
databases and standards have emerged for cataloging protein-
protein interactions [4]. Each contains different types of data
sources. For example, some databases exclusively store in-
teractions inferred from orthologs that have been shown to
interact- while others contain direct human protein interac-
tions. Even when directly measured, there can be a differences
in quality and quantity based on whether the experiment was
done in automated manner versus manually.
What is needed is a standard. One relatively new standard is
the PSI-MI format [5]. While that initiative seeks to standard-
ize the structure of databases, the actual content is left rather
ambiguous. Plus, data in these fields can vary somewhat across
databases. So, for those databases that actually support PSI-MI
format, even the actual proteins can be referred to by different
identifiers ranging from Uniprot, NCBI GI numbers, Ensembl,
and International Protein Index (IPI) references. Also, virtually
no database contains all of the PSI-MI format fields. Both
inter- and intra-database redundancies of cataloged interactions
is a common problem. What is needed is a way to establish a
Fig. 1. 3-D visualization of the Human Protein Meta-Interaction Database
common language between these databases so they can be
integrated (and without redundancies)- not just a common
structured format as exists with PSI-MI.
II. METHODS
In this paper, an automated protocol was designed and im-
plemented in Matlab. Using this, seven protein interaction
databases were integrated into the Human Protein Meta-
Interaction Database (HPMD). These include: DIP [6], IntAct
[7], MINT [8], BIND [9], cPath, HPRD [10], and the Sanger
Institute Interaction Map [11].
First, the XML/flat files of databases were parsed. Then,
the different protein identification numbers were converted
to NCBI Entrez Protein GI numbers. This was done by
sequentially querying SeqHound [12] via remote Java Appli-
cation Protocol Interface and AliasServer [13] through Simple
Fig. 2. Pairwise Dijkstra shortest distances
Object Access Protocol (SOAP). Also, the IPI cross-reference
indexes, Ensembl cross-reference indexes, and Entrez Protein
database were queried to match the disparate ID’s with ap-
propriate NCBI GI numbers. Next, SeqHound was used to
find redundant GI numbers. The best annotated version of the
protein (from a group of database entries referring to the same
protein sequence) was then used. With a common identifier, the
databases could then be merged- with duplicates with removed
from the new collection.
The meta-database was then saved into several formats for
graph analysis and visualization including Pajek, dot, and
GraphML. Once the protein interactions were in the form of
a graph, a Monte-Carlo simulation was done to analyze the
network connectivity. Here, a pair of proteins is selected at
random from HPMD. The pairwise Dijkstra shortest distances
were then calculated between these proteins.
III. RESULTS
The Human Protein Meta-Interaction Database integrates
seven major protein-protein interaction databases for a total
of 103,657 interactions (edges), 16,683 proteins (vertices),
and 5,733 components (separate graphs)- making it by far the
largest human protein-protein interaction database.
A 3-D version Fruchterman-Reingold Force-directed Place-
ment algorithm [14] was used to plot HPMD within the Pajek
environment [15]. This visualization is shown in Figure 1. The
outer ‘cortex’ potion of the cube contains the proteins vertices,
while the inner ‘medulla’ contains interaction edges.
Figure 2 shows the results of the Monte-Carlo simulation.
Each slice is proportional to the percent (see labels) that a
randomly chosen protein pair was connected by a minimum
of n edges. If the proteins were in unconnected graphs, then
the distance was classified as infinity. For protein pairs within
the same component (graph), the average pairwise Dijkstra
shortest distance was just over 4 (i.e. 4.3 edges).
IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
This paper approaches the first step in database integration
via establishing a common language for some crucial database
fields. More work can be done on formalizing these notions
and developing standards that allow translation and migration
between databases- rather than centralized integration as was
done here.
In order to fully leverage the knowledge contained in this
database, information from proteins and their interactions
will need to be examined within the context of existing
gene expression and regulation networks. Additional work
in this area could potentially integrate such knowledge by
connecting protein interaction network information with DNA-
binding proteins and other elements that bridge genomics and
proteomics.
V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported in part by a fellowship from the
Whitaker Foundation.
REFERENCES
[1] L. D. Stein, “Integrating biological databases,“ Nature Reviews Genetics,
vol. 4, pp. 337-45, 2003.
[2] I. Human Genome Sequencing Consortium, “Finishing the euchromatic
sequence of the human genome,“ Nature, vol. 431, pp. 931-945, 2004.
[3] G. Alterovitz, E. Afkhami, and M. Ramoni, “Robotics, Automation, and
Statistical Learning for Proteomics,“ in Focus on Robotics and Intelligent
Systems Research, vol. 1, F. Columbus, Ed. New York: Nova Science
Publishers, Inc., 2005 (In press).
[4] I. Xenarios and D. Eisenberg, “Protein interaction databases,“ Current
Opinion in Biotechnology, vol. 12, pp. 334-9, 2001.
[5] H. Hermjakob, L. Montecchi-Palazzi, G. Bader, et al., “The HUPO PSI’s
molecular interaction format–a community standard for the represen-
tation of protein interaction data,“ Nature Biotechnology, vol. 22, pp.
177-83, 2004.
[6] I. Xenarios, L. Salwinski, X. J. Duan, et al., ”DIP, the Database of
Interacting Proteins: a research tool for studying cellular networks of
protein interactions,” Nucleic Acids Res, vol. 30, pp. 303-5, 2002.
[7] H. Hermjakob, L. Montecchi-Palazzi, C. Lewington, et al., ”IntAct: an
open source molecular interaction database,” Nucleic Acids Res, vol. 32
Database issue, pp. D452-5, 2004.
[8] A. Zanzoni, L. Montecchi-Palazzi, M. Quondam, et al., ”MINT: a
Molecular INTeraction database,” FEBS Letters, vol. 513, pp. 135-140,
2002. [9] G. D. Bader,
[9] D. Betel, and C. W. Hogue, ”BIND: the Biomolecular Interaction
Network Database,” Nucleic Acids Res, vol. 31, pp. 248-50, 2003.
[10] S. Peri, J. D. Navarro, R. Amanchy, et al., ”Development of human
protein reference database as an initial platform for approaching systems
biology in humans,” Genome Res, vol. 13, pp. 2363-71, 2003.
[11] B. Lehner and A. G. Fraser, ”A first-draft human protein-interaction
map,” Genome Biology, vol. 5, pp. R63, 2004.
[12] K. Michalickova, G. D. Bader, M. Dumontier, et al., “SeqHound: bio-
logical sequence and structure database as a platform for bioinformatics
research,“ BMC Bioinformatics, vol. 3, pp. 32, 2002.
[13] F. Iragne, A. Barre, N. Goffard, et al., “AliasServer: a web server to
handle multiple aliases used to refer to proteins,“ Bioinformatics, vol.
20, pp. 2331-2, 2004.
[14] T. M. J. Fruchterman and E. M. Reingold, “Graph Drawing by Force-
directed Placement,“ Software: Practice and Experience, vol. 21, pp.
1129 - 1164, 1991.
[15] V. Batagelj and A. Mrvar, “Pajek - Program for Large Network Analy-
sis,“ Connections, vol. 21, pp. 47-57, 1998.
