Method for simultaneous determination of sorption    
isotherms and diffusivity of cement based materials 
A. Anderberg, M. Sc. Civ. Eng., 
Lund University, Div. Building Materials, Box 118, 221 00 Lund, Sweden 
anders.anderberg@byggtek.lth.se, http://www.byggnadsmaterial.lth.se 
L. Wadsö, Dr., 
Lund University, Div. Building Materials, Box 118, 221 00 Lund, Sweden 
lars.wadso@byggtek.lth.se, http://www.byggnadsmaterial.lth.se 
KEYWORDS: sorption, diffusion, moisture, sorption balance. 
SUMMARY:  
A method for simultaneous determination of diffusion and sorption properties has been developed. The 
method is based on measurements of sorption kinetics in a sorption balance. The test specimen is exposed 
to step changes in the ambient environment and the response is measured as a weight change. The sorption 
isotherm is evaluated from the final equilibrium mass and given that the weight change is continuously 
measured and the test specimen has a well-defined geometry, the diffusivity can be calculated from the 
sorption kinetics.  
1. Introduction 
Moisture in materials is an important issue in building science. Moist or damp buildings have in several 
studies been related to negative health effects (Bornehag et al., 2001). Most cementitious materials contain 
excess water when mixed and this water must be removed to prevent damage to a building and 
deterioration of the indoor air quality due to biological growth (Fennema, 1985, Fog Nielsen, 2002) or 
alkaline degradation of polymers in flooring adhesives (Sjöberg, 2001).  
 
Knowing moisture properties of materials is essential for calculating drying times and moisture loads as 
well as for predicting biological growth, chemical reactions and transport of other substances, such as ions. 
Traditional methods to determine diffusion coefficients and sorption isotherms are, however, time-
consuming and require a lot of test specimens. Since moisture properties are moisture dependent several 
test specimens have to be prepared to cover a whole measurement range. 
  
Different models are used in other fields of science to determine diffusion and sorption properties in one 
measurement. In gravimetric methods, see for example Marais et al. (2000) and Muoi et al. (2004), a 
material with known geometry is exposed to step changes or continuous changes of a certain gas or liquid. 
The change in mass of the test specimen is continuously measured, giving the sorption isotherm at 
equilibrium, and out of the kinetics of the mass change and the known geometry of the specimen, it is 
possible to calculate the diffusion coefficient. A similar gravimetric method used for determining diffusion 
coefficients for building materials have previously been presented by Arfvidsson and Cunningham (2000). 
However, this model requires a known sorption isotherm. In the time-lag method, see for example Taveira 
et al. (2003), a difference in partial pressure is applied over a test specimen. The pressure is stepwise kept 
constant at one side and the change of pressure on the other side is measured. Sorption and diffusion 
properties are later calculated out of the measured values.  
2. Method 
The method, which is a gravimetric method, is based on mass determination under step-wise changing 
relative humidity (RH) conditions. A small specimen of known geometry is exposed to step-wise changes 
in RH. From the kinetics of the mass change the diffusivity can be calculated and from the final equilibrium 
mass value the sorption isotherm can be evaluated. To get a well-defined geometry of our samples of 
cement based flooring compounds, we have cast the materials in short pieces of stain-less steel tubes with a 
length of 5 mm and an inner diameter of 5.5 mm. In this way we get a well-defined geometry with one-
dimensional moisture flow. For other materials that cannot be casted, one has use a sealing to get a one-
dimensional flow. 
 
To generate the RH steps we have placed our samples in a sorption balance (DVS-1000, Surface 
Measurement Systems Ltd.), Fig 1. They have been freely suspended in the gas flow line, attached to the 
balance by a stainless steel hook that holds the stainless steel tube with the sample. The reference holder is 
built up in the same way as the sample holder, except that the stainless steel tube is empty. The gas flow 
velocity is 0.8 cm/s. The influence of the surface resistance is negligible as the diffusivity of the 
investigated material is low. This has been checked by calculation of the influence of surface resistance 
(eqn. 4.53 in Crank 1975).  
 
RwS
Rd
dry
nitrogen
exhaust
balance purge gas
exhaust
sample
holder
reference
holder
balance
 
Figure 1– Schematic picture of the DVS 1000 sorption balance. 
A flow of dry nitrogen gas is divided into two gas streams of which one is saturated with water vapour and 
the other left dry. The flow rates are controlled by two mass flow regulators (Rw and Rd in Figure 1). By 
mixing different proportions of the gases, RH between 0 and 100% can be generated, although practical 
limits are 0-98% RH. The trueness of RH is 1.0% and the balance resolution 0.1 µg. 
 
An example of a full test cycle, measuring both desorption and absorption is shown in Figure 2. The full 
cycle last about 9 days. Measurements reported in this study used half the cycle, the desorption part, and 
lasted about 5 days. 
 
Figure 2 Example of a full test cycle. Measurements started and ended at 97% RH. 
 
2.1 Diffusion coefficient 
 
As is principally shown in Figure 3, each step in RH gives an initial mass change that is essentially linear 
when drawn on a square root of time scale. This first initial part can be used to calculate the diffusivity 
(Crank, 1975): 
 
22
16 ÷
÷
ø
ö
çç
è
æ D
=
¥m
m
t
L
D
p
          (1) 
 
Here, D (m/s) is the diffusivity, L (m) is the thickness of the sample and Dm (g) and m¥ (g) are the mass of 
the sample at time t (s) and at infinite time, respectively. The diffusion coefficient with vapour content as 
gradient can be calculated by: 
 
dv
dc
DDv =              (2) 
 
where Dv (m2/s) is the diffusion coefficient as a function of vapour content, D (m2/s) is the diffusivity from 
Eqn. 1, and dc/dv is the change in moisture content (g/m3) per change in vapour content (g/m3), i.e. 
essentially the slope of the sorption isotherm. Note the difference between Dv and D, although their units 
appear to be the same.  
 
 
Figure 3 – Typical measurement step where the mass is plotted as a function of the square root of time. The 
first linear part of the measurement is used to calculate the diffusivity.  
2.2 Sorption isotherm 
Figure 3 shows a typical mass response to a step in RH. It is seen that there is an initial linear part, but also 
that there is a long and slow attainment of sorption equilibrium typical of cementitious materials. 
 
Each measurement step was made until the specimen had almost reached equilibrium. The final part of the 
curve was then curve-fitted and extrapolated with the equation,  
 
)(
00
0)( ttkemmmm --¥ -+=D          (3)  
 
where ? m is the mass at time t, m0 is the initial mass at the start of the curve-fitting, m8  is the final mass, k 
is a constant and t0 is the initial time at the start of the curve-fitting. The curve fitting was done in 
MATLAB 6.5 with a least square method. The correction never corresponded to more than 12% of the total 
mass change in each time step. For more details, see Anderberg and Wadsö (2005b). The final extrapolated 
value was used when evaluating the sorption isotherm. 
 
As chemically bound water will be lost, partly irreversible, when drying the cement based flooring 
compounds used in this study to 0% RH, the material in this study was not dried further than 10% RH. 
3. Materials 
The tested product was a commercial self-levelling flooring compound (SLC) based on calcium aluminate 
cement, calcium sulphate, Portland cement and small amount of silica fume. A typical composition of the 
mineral part of such an SLC is shown in Table 1. The product was a normal SLC with water to binder ratio 
of about 1.0. This product is generally used in non-industrial constructions. We have previously measured 
diffusion coefficient on this product with the cup method (Anderberg and Wadsö 2005a) 
 
Table 1 – Typical composition of the mineral part (excluding admixtures) of an SLC, partly adapted from 
(Scrivener et al., 1997) 
Portland cement around 3 % 
Calcium aluminate cement around 17 % 
Calcium sulphate around 7 % 
Limestone filler (calcite) around 30 % 
Sand (siliceous) 40-50 % 
Silica fume less than 3 % 
 
The products were mixed according to the manufacturers guidelines, casted into the steel cylinders and left 
to hydrate, the first hour in open air, approximately 20 ºC and 50% RH, and after that in an exiccator with 
100% RH and no air exchange.  
 
SLC are suitable for these kinds of measurements as the maximum aggregate size is small, normally around 
1 mm.  
4. Results 
Tables 2 and 3 give the calculated diffusion coefficients and sorption isotherm and data from previous 
measurements on the same material. A good agreement can be seen for the diffusion coefficients. However, 
it must be noted that the material used for the cup measurements had hydrated for about 8 weeks when 
starting the measurements and material used in the new method had hydrated 1 week when starting the 
measurements.  
 
Table 2 – Diffusion coefficients measured with the cup method and new method. Note the difference in RH-
interval. 
New method Cup method 
  
RH [%] Diffusion coeff. 
10-6 m2/s 
RH [%] Diffusion coeff. 
10-6 m2/s 
98.8 – 96.6 3.16 97-95 3.88 
96.6 – 93.7 1.84 95-90 2.60 
93.7 – 84.5  0.97 90-80 1.32 
84.5 – 75.1 0.78 80-70 0.80 
75.1 – 55 0.67 70-50 0.41 
  50-30 0.36 
  30-10 0.16 
     
Table 3 gives the sorption isotherm from previous measurements in the sorption balance and from 
measurements where the specimen was casted in a steel cylinder. These measurements were performed in 
the same way, except for that in the previous measurements were the test specimens cut out from the centre 
of a larger specimen and in the new measurements were the test specimens directly casted into a cylinder.  
 
Table 3 – Sorption isotherm measured in sorption balance in previous measurements and with the new 
method where specimens are cast in a steel cylinder. 
RH Previous measurements New method 
97 3.56 3.78 
95 3.00 3.28 
90 2.43 2.61 
80 1.80 1.92 
70 1.28 1.39 
50 0.40 0.51 
30 0.17 0.19 
10 0 0 
5. Discussion 
As can be seen in Tables 2 and 3 there is a good agreement between the results obtained with the combined 
method and those obtained previously in separate measurements. The difference in age between test 
specimens used for diffusion coefficients may partly explain the higher obtained values in the new method. 
Still only few measurements have been performed with the new method, why more measurements are 
needed to validate the method and reduce the uncertainties. 
 
As the previous measurements of diffusion coefficients took about 8 weeks and the measurements with the 
present method takes only 9 days, including the sorption isotherm, the present method is very efficient and 
it also requires less laboratory work. However, the equipment used for the present measurements is more 
expensive than the one used to do cup measurements of diffusion coefficients. It is also only possible to run 
one test specimen at the time in each device with the new method, which limits the possibility of having 
several replicates.  
 
The size of the specimen may be a limiting factor in the new method. In the equipment used in this 
investigation, the maximum weight of each test specimen is 1.5 g, which means that the maximum size of 
most cementitious materials will be less than 1 cm3.  
 
An advantage with this method is that it is possible to decide the precise intervals you want to measure the 
diffusivity and sorption properties and that more measurement intervals will not involve more test 
specimens. Measurements in both desorption and absorption mode will also give results on the influence of 
hysteresis on both sorption and diffusion properties. 
 
Cementitious materials usually show a quick initial response to changes in RH, but later a slow attainment 
of equilibrium. Compared to many other types of materials (textiles, pharmaceutics etc.) measurements of 
sorption isotherms may take very long time. To shorten the time of a measurement one can stop before 
equilibrium is attained and extrapolate the measured curve to become the final equilibrium value. 
 
The present method can of course also be used for other materials of well-defined geometry. 
6. References 
Anderberg, A. and Wadsö, L. (2005a). Moisture in Self-levelling Flooring Compounds. Part I Diffusion 
Coefficients, Nordic Concrete Research. accepted for publication. 
Anderberg, A. and Wadsö, L. (2005b). Moisture in Self-levelling Flooring Compounds. Part II. Sorption 
Isotherms, Nordic Concrete Research. accepted for publication. 
Arfvidsson, J. and Cunningham, M. J. (2000). A transient technique for determining diffusion coefficients 
in hygroscopic materials, Building and Environment, 35, 239-249. 
Bornehag, C.-G., Blomquist, G., Gyntelberg, F., Järvholm, B., Malmberg, P., Nordvall, L., Nielsen, A., 
Pershagen, G. and Sundell, J. (2001). Dampness in Building and Health Nordic Interdisciplinary 
Review of the Scientific Evidence on Associations between Exposure to "Dampness" in Buildings 
and Health Effects (NORDDAMP), Indoor Air, 11, 72-86. 
Crank, J. (1975) The mathematics of diffusion, Oxford University Press. 
Fennema, O. R. (1985). Water and Ice, In Food Chemistry (Ed, Fennema, O. R.) Marcel Dekker Inc., New 
York, pp. 23-67. 
Fog Nielsen, K. (2002). Mould growth on building materials Secondary metabolites, mycotoxines and 
biomarkers, The Mycology group, Biocentrum-DTU, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, 
pp. 80. 
Marais, S., Métayer, M., Nguyen, T. Q., Labbé, M., Perrin, L. and Saiter, J. M. (2000). Permeametric and 
microgravimetric studies of sorption and diffusion of water vapor in an unsaturated polyester, 
Polymer, 41, 2667-2676. 
Muoi, T., Yi-Ching, H. and Yan-Ping, C. (2004). Sorption and Diffusion of Supercritical Carbon Dioxide 
into Polysulfone, Journal of Applied Polymer Science, 94, 474-482. 
Scrivener, K. L., Rettel, A., Beal, T. and Bier, T. (1997) In Ibausil, Vol. 1 Weimar, Germany, pp. 745-752. 
Sjöberg, A. (2001). Secondary emissions from concrete floors with bonded flooring materials - effects of 
alkaline hydrolysis and stored decomposition products, Department of Building Materials, 
Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg, pp. 188. 
Taveira, P., Mendes, A. and Costa, C. (2003). On the determination of diffusivity and sorption coefficients 
using different time-lag models, Journal of Membrane Science, 221, 123-133. 
 
