 10.1101/gr.080184.108Access the most recent version at doi:
 published online Oct 2, 2008; Genome Res.
  
Cory McLean and Gill Bejerano 
  
 Dispensability of mammalian DNA
 
 
 P<P Published online October 2, 2008 in advance of the print journal. 
 Open Access Freely available online through the Genome Research Open Access option. 
 service
Email alerting
 click heretop right corner of the article or 
Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box at the
object identifier (DOIs) and date of initial publication. 
by PubMed from initial publication. Citations to Advance online articles must include the digital 
publication). Advance online articles are citable and establish publication priority; they are indexed
appeared in the paper journal (edited, typeset versions may be posted when available prior to final 
Advance online articles have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet
 http://genome.cshlp.org/subscriptions/
 go to: Genome ResearchTo subscribe to 
© 2008 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press 
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 2, 2008 - Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
Dispensability of mammalian DNA
Cory McLean1 and Gill Bejerano1,2,3
1Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA; 2Department of Developmental Biology,
Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA
In the lab, the cis-regulatory network seems to exhibit great functional redundancy. Many experiments testing
enhancer activity of neighboring cis-regulatory elements show largely overlapping expression domains. Of recent
interest, mice in which cis-regulatory ultraconserved elements were knocked out showed no obvious phenotype,
further suggesting functional redundancy. Here, we present a global evolutionary analysis of mammalian conserved
nonexonic elements (CNEs), and find strong evidence to the contrary. Given a set of CNEs conserved between
several mammals, we characterize functional dispensability as the propensity for the ancestral element to be lost in
mammalian species internal to the spanned species tree. We show that ultraconserved-like elements are over 300-fold
less likely than neutral DNA to have been lost during rodent evolution. In fact, many thousands of noncoding loci
under purifying selection display near uniform indispensability during mammalian evolution, largely irrespective of
nucleotide conservation level. These findings suggest that many genomic noncoding elements possess functions that
contribute noticeably to organism fitness in naturally evolving populations.
[Supplemental material is available online at www.genome.org.]
Comparison to other mammals finds at least 5% of the human
genome evolving under purifying selection (Waterston et al.
2002). Two-thirds of this genomic mass does not code for protein
(Cooper et al. 2004). Strong sequence conservation among mam-
mals and conservation to other vertebrates have repeatedly
proven good indicators of gene cis-regulatory function (Pennac-
chio et al. 2006). Ultraconserved elements are some of the geno-
mic regions most strongly conserved during mammalian evolu-
tion, having resisted all changes between human, mouse, and rat,
along contiguous stretches 200 base pairs (bp) (Bejerano et al.
2004). Point mutations in these regions are under extreme puri-
fying selection in the human population (Katzman et al. 2007).
And yet, transgenic mice homozygous for four independent de-
letions of cis-regulatory ultraconserved elements are viable and
fertile in the lab, and display no obvious phenotypic abnormali-
ties (Ahituv et al. 2007).
There are two compatible hypotheses that may explain this
lack of phenotype. One suggests that ultraconserved element de-
letions do not affect organism viability because of functional
redundancy among the large number of mammalian cis-
regulatory loci (Visel et al. 2008). The other posits that ultracon-
served element deletions most likely lead to a selective disadvan-
tage that either does not manifest itself under lab conditions
(Barbaric et al. 2007), or is too subtle to be observed in the lab but
is large enough that evolutionary pressures eliminate the muta-
tion from the population (Garcia-Dorado et al. 2003). We set out
to investigate the extent to which the loss of nonexonic sequence
under purifying selection is tolerated in natural populations on
an evolutionary timescale. While elements with complete func-
tional redundancy may be dispensable, the loss of elements that
provide unique functions may be deleterious and will not fix in
natural populations.
By surveying genomic losses during the last 100 million
years of eutherian (placental mammal) evolution, we calculate
evolutionary loss rate as a function of conservation. We find that
ultraconserved-like elements, along with many thousands of ad-
ditional noncoding loci under purifying selection, are hundreds
of fold less likely to be lost than neutrally evolving DNA. These
results suggest that the vast majority of cis-regulatory sequences
possess one or more unique functions whose loss is deleterious.
Furthermore, a very weak relationship between sequence conser-
vation and evolutionary loss rate indicates that conservation %id
(percentage of identical alignment columns) is a poor measure of
the relative importance of conserved nonexonic elements
(CNEs).
Results
Ultraconserved-like element loss rates
To analyze the evolutionary pressures against CNE losses, we
quantify the extent to which rodents have discarded sequences
strongly conserved in multiple mammalian species. The compu-
tational pipeline to discover rodent-specific losses of mammalian
conserved DNA is divided into three conceptual steps: discovery
of strongly conserved mammalian sequence, identification of
conserved sequence absent in rodents, and removal of assembly,
alignment, and structural RNA migration artifacts (Supplemental
Fig. S1). We use whole genome sequences of two rodents (mouse
and rat), two primates (human and macaque), and a close carni-
vore outgroup species (dog). By examining sequences conserved
between human, macaque, and dog, with no orthologous DNA
in either mouse or rat, we infer by parsimony that the sequence
losses were fixed in the rodent lineage prior to the mouse/rat split
(Supplemental Fig. S2). Forty-six percent (1327 Mb) of the hu-
man genome aligns at 50%id or greater to macaque and dog. To
avoid assembly and alignment artifacts, we examine only the
38.4% (1108 Mb) of the human genome alignable to macaque
and dog that possesses unique orthologous sequence in both ro-
dents. We rely on the UCSC chaining and netting algorithm to
infer orthologous rodent sequences (Kent et al. 2003), and ignore
regions where the chains and nets do not provide an unambigu-
ous ortholog in both rodents. By excluding these regions from
3Corresponding author.
E-mail bejerano@stanford.edu; fax (650) 725-2923.
Article published online before print. Article and publication date are at http://
www.genome.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gr.080184.108. Freely available online
through the Genome Research Open Access option.
Letter
18:000–000 ©2008 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; ISSN 1088-9051/08; www.genome.org Genome Research 1
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 2, 2008 - Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
consideration we slightly bias against regions with paralogs,
though the total effect on our analysis is small (Supplemental
Methods S1).
By sliding a 100 bp window over the alignment, we compute
the overall level of primate-dog sequence conservation in the
form of percentage of identical alignment columns (%id). The
choice of 100 bp as the sliding window size provides enough
resolution to identify distal functional elements and has proven
effective in previous functional studies (Stone et al. 2005). We
then find all such windows that are completely lost in both ro-
dents. By requiring complete window losses, we focus the study
on losses of longer functional units, to directly compare to the
ultraconserved element knockout experiments (Ahituv et al.
2007). Smaller losses would eventually fall in the realm of indi-
vidual binding site turnover, and potentially be subject to gap
placement artifacts. In total, 261 Mb of pan-eutherian sequence
have no orthologous rodent DNA. We divide this set into coding
and nonexonic (neither coding nor untranslated region [UTR])
windows, and compute the fraction of eutherian conserved bases
lost in rodents per %id conservation bin.
The nonexonic alignment, capturing 95.1% of all alignable
bases, includes virtually all mammalian cis-regulatory elements
characterized to date. We define ultraconserved-like sequences as
contiguous regions of 100 bp or more perfectly conserved be-
tween the primates and dog. The nonexonic ultraconserved-like
sequences encompass 1,691,090 bp of the human genome in
regions up to 1016 bp in length. Of these regions, only 1447 bp
are identified as lost in rodents, in stretches no longer than 184
bp (Supplemental Fig. S3). Thus, the rodent loss rate of nonex-
onic ultraconserved-like elements is 1447/1,691,090 ≈ 0.086%.
At 50%id–65%id, most aligning sequences are expected to
be neutrally evolving (Margulies et al. 2005). Roughly a quarter of
all neutrally evolving primate-dog nonexonic sequence
(135,415,463 of 515,843,585 bp at 60%id) is lost in rodents (Fig.
1A,E), making nonexonic ultraconserved-like elements over 300-
fold more indispensable than neutral sequence.
Dispensability of neutral DNA
While we expect the neutrally evolving sequence loss rate to be
essentially uniform, we observe a rodent tendency to retain more
such sequences the less conserved they are (50%id–65%id range
in Fig. 1E). We show that this phenomenon stems from an en-
richment of less conserved sequences immediately adjacent to
coding exons. We annotate each 100 bp window of the least
conserved alignable sequence (50%id–65%id) with its distance to
the nearest exon, rounded up to the nearest kilobase. We then
compute the fraction of all nonexonic sequences aligned at
50%id–65%id for each distance (truncated at 20 kb). We repeat
the analysis for highly-conserved sequences (85%id–100%id).
The results (Fig. 2A) show that poorly-conserved sequences are
over-represented near exons. Elements within 1 kb of the nearest
exon are markedly less likely to be lost in rodents (Fig. 2B), sug-
gesting that exons do shield flanking DNA from many deletions
that result in gene structure disruption. In line with theoretical
predictions (Petrov 2002), larger deletions are biased away from
gene structures, and consequently away from the least conserved
alignable sequence. Loss rates for sequences of decreasing maxi-
mum size show a monotonic decrease in slope magnitude (Fig.
2C) as the probability to disrupt gene structures is lessened. A
restriction to losses of at most 1000 bp shows a nearly constant
rodent-specific neutral sequence loss rate (Fig. 2D).
Rodent dispensability under extended branch lengths
As we move from 100% identical primate-dog sequences into less
conserved alignments, we expect the mixing of two populations:
DNA under purifying selection, and the slowly mutating tail of
neutrally evolving sequence (Fig. 1C). This mixing, first observed
genome-wide in the seminal mouse genome paper (Fig. 28 in
Waterston et al. 2002), must at least partially account for the
increase in rodent loss rate we observe the further we move from
100% primate-dog identity (Fig. 1E). Interestingly, intronic and
intergenic sequences face similar evolutionary pressures against
rodent-specific loss (Supplemental Fig. S4).
To separate the loss rate of DNA under purifying selection
from slowly-mutating neutrally evolving loci, we search for eu-
therian tree topologies that will increase the cumulative branch
lengths between the three aligning species. The cumulative
branch lengths of a human-dog-horse alignment are longer than
the branch lengths of a human-macaque-dog alignment (Supple-
mental Fig. S2a), which suggests that neutrally-evolving se-
quence will align at a lower conservation %id in the human-dog-
horse alignment.
Forty-one percent (1182 Mb) of the human genome aligns at
50% or more to dog and horse; 35% (1009 Mb) has a unique
homolog in both mouse and rat. Nested elements lost in rodents
comprise 7.25% (209 Mb) of the human genome.
The abundance of nonexonic sequence in the human-dog-
horse alignment (Supplemental Fig. S5B) shows a moderate shift
in neutrally-evolving sequence toward lower conservation %id
values when compared to its human-macaque-dog counterpart
(Supplemental Fig. S5A). The rodent-specific loss rates of highly-
conserved sequence are lower in the human-dog-horse align-
ment (compare Supplemental Fig. S5D,E), indicating that the ra-
tio of functional sequence to highly-conserved neutral sequence
is larger in the human-dog-horse alignment than in the human-
macaque-dog alignment. However, the slowly evolving tail of
neutral sequences may still contribute to correlate loss events
with sequence conservation in Supplemental Figure S5E.
Dispensability of DNA under purifying selection
To investigate whether a correlation exists between conservation
%id and dispensability for noncoding sequence under purifying
selection, we must ensure the neutral rate of evolution is suffi-
ciently large to separate sequence under purifying selection from
the slowly mutating tail of neutrally evolving sequence (Waters-
ton et al. 2002). To increase the neutral rate sufficiently we focus
on mouse-rat-dog conserved elements deleted in the primate lin-
eage. While the divergence time between human and macaque is
comparable to that of mouse and rat, the two lineages exhibit
markedly different substitution rates (Supplemental Fig. S2). Ro-
dents have evolved much faster than primates, both prior to and
following their respective splits (Gaffney and Keightley 2006).
Consequently, only 22.3% of the mouse genome (573 Mb) is
spanned by regions alignable to rat and dog, and 20.5% (527 Mb)
has a unique homolog in both human and macaque. Only
0.598% (15.3 Mb) of 100 bp alignment windows is additionally
lost in both primates.
By nearly doubling the neutral branch lengths of the three
genomes we align, we expect the dominant curve of neutrally
evolving eutherian DNA to shift dramatically toward lower con-
servation values. Indeed, the peak of the nonexonic abundance
curve shifts from 65%id for primate-dog to well below the 50%id
marker of reliable alignability for rodent-dog (Fig. 1A–D).
McLean and Bejerano
2 Genome Research
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 2, 2008 - Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
Based on the hypothesis that most losses of functional ele-
ments will not fix, we expect the curve of sequences under pu-
rifying selection to roughly retain its overall volume under in-
creased branch lengths. Furthermore, the mass of sequence
should remain at similar conservation values, as most tolerated
mutations are the relative few that confer little to no fitness
change. To test these predictions we examine the preservation of
coding exons, the largest well-annotated genomic functional set,
between our three tree configurations. With increasing branch
lengths, we observe both the predicted volume preservation and
mild skew (Fig. 3).
Thus, we conclude that most of the nonexonic 42.8 Mb at
80%id–100%id between rodents and dog in Figure 1B are under
purifying selection. Of the 195,163 genomic loci in this set, only
301 (0.154%) are lost in the primate lineage (Fig. 1F). By analyz-
ing the relationship between conservation %id and loss rate, we
see that the loss rate (nonexonic bp lost in primates/nonexonic
bp conserved in rodent-dog) at 100%id is 0, at 80%id is 0.00122,
and the least-squares best-fit line of the data has a slope magni-
tude of only 0.00006 (Fig. 4A). The minuscule slope magnitude
suggests pan-mammalian indispensability of nearly all nonex-
onic DNA under purifying selection, largely irrespective of sub-
stitution rate. Though we are restricted to sequence of 80%id or
greater when examining the loss rate of nonexonic DNA under
purifying selection to ensure the elements are functional, coding
exon sequences conserved at lower %id can be analyzed. The
primate loss rate of nonexonic sequence is also comparable to the
primate loss rate of coding regions (0 at 100%id, 0.0000861 at
Figure 1. Indispensability of mammalian DNA under purifying selection. (A,B) Abundance of primate-dog, rodent-dog nonexonic DNA, respectively.
(C,D) Suggested decomposition of above curves. Color scheme after Waterston et al. (2002). (E) Fraction of primate-dog nonexonic DNA lost in rodents,
where ultraconserved-like elements are over 300-fold more indispensable than neutral DNA. (F) Fraction of rodent-dog nonexonic DNA lost in primates.
Dispensability of mammalian DNA
Genome Research 3
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 2, 2008 - Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
80%id, 0.00276 at 50%id), though the latter seems even more
extreme (Fig. 4B), probably, as above, because an exon loss will
often lead to gene function loss.
Deep sequence conservation and dispensability
By searching each eutherian element in our abundance curves
(Fig. 1A,B) in opossum, platypus, chicken, frog, and teleost fish,
we trace the most ancient species divergence within the Eutel-
eostomi (bony vertebrate) clade at which sequence homology of
the element is retained (Miller et al. 2007). By tracing the depth
of sequence conservation in the loss curves a clear dispensability
ranking emerges (Fig. 5). Namely, the more deeply in the verte-
brate tree a nonexonic element possesses sequence conservation,
the less likely it is to be lost in either primates or rodents, at all
levels of high conservation. Thus, depth of sequence conserva-
tion provides a stronger measure of indispensability than conser-
vation %id alone. This finding reinforces the utility in sequenc-
ing additional nonmammalian species (Editorial 2007).
Figure 2. Relationship of neutrally-evolving mammalian DNA loss rates to mammalian genome structure. (A) Fraction of conserved nonexonic
primate-dog elements as a function of distance from nearest exon. (B) Rodent-specific loss rate of nonexonic elements as a function of distance from
the nearest exon. Elements within 1 kb of the nearest exon are markedly less likely to be lost at all conservation levels. (C) Rodent-specific loss rate of
low-conservation nonexonic regions as a function of lost region size. (D) Rodent-specific loss rate of nonexonic regions at most 1000 bp in size.
Figure 3. Abundance of coding exon sequences for all three alignment topologies. (A) Abundance of primate-dog coding exon DNA. (B) Abundance
of human-dog-horse coding exon DNA. (C) Abundance of rodent-dog coding exon DNA.
McLean and Bejerano
4 Genome Research
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 2, 2008 - Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
Interestingly, the rodent-dog conserved regions, which at
83%id–100%id are presumably all functional, are dominated by
regions aligning to chicken (amniote node, Supplemental Fig.
S6). The primate-dog conserved regions are qualitatively similar
for conservation thresholds of 90%id–100%id. In both cases, the
less-conserved sequence is predominantly conserved only to dog,
further supporting the notion that the bulk of moderately con-
served sequences is neutrally evolving (Waterston et al. 2002,
Prabhakar et al. 2006).
Repeating the analysis adding the lizard genome draft (ano-
Car1) at the amniote node yields qualitatively similar results
(data not shown).
Functional annotations of rodent losses
By assigning coding exons to the genes in which they reside, and
highly conserved nonexonic elements to the nearest gene locus
they may regulate, we calculate gene ontology annotation en-
richments for rodent-specific losses (Ashburner et al. 2000). En-
richment analysis of coding losses do not yield statistically sig-
nificant associations (Supplemental Table S1), while the analysis
of nonexonic losses at different conservation thresholds suggest
mild enrichments for genes involved in DNA binding, transcrip-
tion regulation, and various aspects of development (Supplemen-
tal Table S2, S3). The larger set of all eutherian conserved non-
exonic elements is known to preferentially congregate near genes
having these same annotations (Lindblad-Toh et al. 2005). Inter-
estingly, rodent deletions show further preference for these func-
tional categories even against the background of all such euthe-
rian elements. Similar enrichment tests applied to primate losses
yield no significant associations for either coding or functional
nonexonic sequence (data not shown).
Robustness of loss event predictions
Mutational hotspots and positive selection can cause ortholo-
gous regions to be mislabeled as lost sequence. It is currently hard
to estimate the magnitude of this phenomenon in nonexonic
Figure 5. Deep sequence conservation and indispensability of mammalian DNA. (A) Fraction of primate-dog nonexonic DNA lost in rodents decom-
posed by conservation depth. (B) Fraction of rodent-dog nonexonic DNA lost in primates decomposed by conservation depth. Note the scale change
on the y-axis.
Figure 4. Functional DNA loss rates. (A) Fraction of rodent-dog nonexonic DNA lost in primates. (B) Fraction of rodent-dog coding exon DNA lost in
primates. Total base pairs lost at 100%id, 95%id, 90%id, 85%id, and 80%id displayed above corresponding loss rate points. Note the scale change on
the x-axis.
Dispensability of mammalian DNA
Genome Research 5
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 2, 2008 - Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
sequences, as functional nonexonic elements are identified
largely via comparative methods. Coding sequences, the largest
well-annotated set of functional elements in the genome, are
much better characterized. Consequently, we examine misla-
beled coding exon losses to estimate the false positive rate.
Rodent exons that preserve gene structure but are unalign-
able to their human ortholog cause mislabeled coding exon
losses (e.g., Supplemental Fig. S7). For each element labeled as a
coding exon loss we examine the orthologous genomic region in
both mouse and rat for evidence of an exon annotated by the
UCSC Genome Browser knownGene table of the species. Only
4.8% (27/567) of rodent-specific coding exon losses possess an
unalignable rodent exon that preserves gene structure. Interest-
ingly, nearly half (12/25) of the genes harboring these exons
have been associated with recent positive selection in human or
rodents (Supplemental Table S4).
Discussion
Recent lab experiments in mice (Nobrega et al. 2004; Ahituv et al.
2007; Werner et al. 2007; Cretekos et al. 2008) and early theo-
retical predictions (Zuckerkandl 1992) suggest great redundancy
and flux among regulatory genomic elements. We examined dis-
pensability on an evolutionary timescale to assess the impor-
tance of regulatory elements in a manner much more sensitive to
small fitness effects not measurable in the lab. Sequences per-
fectly conserved in multiple species show a strong selective pres-
sure against being lost in rodents. We conclude that in all likeli-
hood the four ultraconserved element knockouts (Ahituv et al.
2007) also suffer an evolutionarily noticeable fitness loss that
either is too small to be detected (e.g., 1% change), or does not
manifest itself under lab conditions (where air is filtered, preda-
tors are absent, and water, food, and mate are served).
The regions immediately flanking exons are enriched for
poorly-conserved sequence. Though cis-regulatory modules have
been shown to cluster preferentially near transcription start sites
(Blanchette et al. 2006), it is possible that distal regulatory ele-
ments preferentially occur away from exons to provide modular-
ity and flexibility for regulatory elements and exons to evolve
under their different evolutionary pressures. Alternatively, the
presence of nearby strongly-conserved exons may encourage a
disproportionate fraction of poorly-conserved sequence to align
(Pollard et al. 2004).
The failure to identify a measurable phenotype in the ultra-
conserved knockout mice (Ahituv et al. 2007) is unexpected,
given that the deleted ultraconserved elements are verified en-
hancer elements near ancient genes (DMRT1, DMRT2, DMRT3,
PAX6, ARX, SOX3, all conserved to teleost fish) that produce
marked phenotypes when inactivated or expression levels are
significantly altered (Ahituv et al. 2007). However, these results
do have an experimental analog in coding sequences. Our lim-
ited ability to assay for phenotypic changes in the lab can allow
many deleterious effects to go unreported. A significant percent-
age (6.7%) of publicly documented mouse gene knockouts fail to
produce measurable phenotypes, including knockouts of very
ancient genes (Supplemental Methods S2). These numbers also
constitute an (potentially large) underestimate, as many journal
editors hesitate to publish lack of phenotype results. Estimates of
the fraction of genes in which knockout experiments fail to iden-
tify a measurable phenotype run as high as 20% of all genes
(Barbaric et al. 2007). Complete functional redundancy may be
quite rare, however, as a study in yeast recently showed a quan-
tifiable mutant phenotype in some environment for nearly all
genes that produce no phenotypic consequences in rich medium
(Hillenmeyer et al. 2008). Similarly, multiple regulatory elements
with an experimentally-verified overlap in functionality (Gött-
gens et al. 2004) or overlapping expression domains during a
particular developmental stage (Uemura et al. 2005; Bejerano et
al. 2006) suggest some functional redundancy exists among cis-
regulatory elements, but does not imply that these elements are
completely redundant. The demonstrated resistance of nonex-
onic sequences under purifying selection to deletion on an evo-
lutionary timescale suggests in fact that complete functional re-
dundancy of cis-regulatory elements is rare. In this context of
partial redundancy, small fitness losses undetectable by conven-
tional lab assays may be expected.
An initial functional exploration of both more and less
highly conserved cis-regulatory elements under purifying selec-
tion shows that many drive expression in similar precise pat-
terns, irrespective of exact conservation level (Visel et al. 2008).
Our evolutionary analysis corroborates the notion of importance
of cis-regulatory elements under purifying selection, regardless of
conservation %id. By looking beyond rodent losses of primate-
dog sequence to three mammalian configurations of differing
total branch lengths (Fig. 3; Supplemental Fig. S5), and by intro-
ducing a cumulative loss rate plot overlaying all three configu-
rations (Supplemental Fig. S8), we observe a correlation shared
between rodent and primate losses that strongly suggests the
mixing of loci under purifying selection with neutrally evolving
ones is mostly responsible for higher loss rates as the conserva-
tion %id is lowered. This observation suggests that deletion of
the majority of DNA elements under purifying selection leads to
an evolutionary noticeable fitness loss. If so, most such deletions,
at a wide range of fitness effects, will be swept out of the popu-
lation over time (Garcia-Dorado et al. 2003). Indeed, our evolu-
tionary analysis shows that when mammalian DNA under puri-
fying selection is isolated using sufficient branch lengths, most
loci in this set (of many thousands) are nearly equally indispens-
able over millions of years of evolution.
In 1977, Allan Wilson and colleagues (Wilson et al. 1977)
proposed that the rate of protein evolution depends on a com-
bination of the probability that a substitution will be compatible
with protein function and on the dispensability of the protein to
the organism. A rich body of protein literature in several organ-
isms has since validated Wilson’s claim by showing that loss rate
correlates with essentiality more than substitution rate does (Pal
et al. 2006) (irrespective of sophistication level used to quantify
substitution rate). Our evolutionary analysis suggests a similar
scenario in cis-regulatory elements under purifying selection. In
further analogy to proteins, the dispensability of cis-regulatory
elements under purifying selection increases minimally as con-
servation across species is lowered. Nearly all cis-regulatory ele-
ments under purifying selection that make any meaningful con-
tribution toward organism fitness (large or small) are indispens-
able, regardless of exact inter-species conservation level. No
primate losses occur in nonexonic sequences conserved at 97%id
or higher in rodents and dog, which precludes analysis of the
exact relationship between conservation %id and dispensability
of these sequences. However, the relationship observed in the
other species configurations (Supplemental Fig. S5) indicate this
is probably a consequence of the small loss rate of primates in
general, rather than a unique property of perfectly conserved
sequences.
McLean and Bejerano
6 Genome Research
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 2, 2008 - Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
In this study, we rely on sequence similarity methods to
identify functional homologs across species. Sequences that pos-
sess redundant functionality but lack sequence homology may
not be quantified using these methods. In particular, the ability
of vertebrate cis-regulatory sequences to shuffle individual bind-
ing sites (Sanges et al. 2006) and our inability to align many
orthologous noncoding RNAs (Torarinsson et al. 2006) may be
contributors to false positive losses of nonexonic sequences, and
thus may partially account for differences in the loss rates of
nonexonic and coding sequences. Since this phenomenon would
increase our estimates of the loss rates of nonexonic elements,
the small loss rates of nonexonic sequences we report may even
be slightly conservative.
By including sequence conservation depth information in
the analysis of mammalian cis-regulatory elements under purify-
ing selection, we achieve additional predictive power of the dis-
pensability of an element. Regulatory elements that possess se-
quence homology in distant species are less dispensable than
those that are only found in close species, at all levels of conser-
vation %id. While low coverage genomes are useful for extending
branch-lengths of individual elements, the forthcoming avail-
ability of over a dozen high coverage mammalian genomes
(Green 2007) will allow us to deploy the presence/absence mea-
sure genome-wide to more accurately highlight indispensable ge-
nomic regions evolving at a range of rates.
Our work serves to provide the evolutionary record of mam-
malian ultraconserved and highly conserved element indispens-
ability. Additional work will be needed to better understand the
extremes at which some genomic loci are conserved, as well as
the manifested irreducibility of the noncoding portions of our
genome.
Methods
Identifying rodent-specific losses of mammalian conserved DNA
The procedure we next describe is summarized in Supplemental
Figure S1. Five UCSC genome assemblies were used throughout
this study: human (hg18), macaque (rheMac2), mouse (mm8),
rat (rn4), and dog (canFam2). The phylogenetic relationships and
evolutionary distances between the species are shown in Supple-
mental Figure S2.
To identify primate-dog conserved DNA, we created a mul-
tiple alignment of human, macaque, and dog using MULTIZ
(Blanchette et al. 2004) on syntenic human-macaque and hu-
man-dog pairwise alignments generated by running the BLASTZ
(Schwartz et al. 2003) and UCSC chaining and netting tools (Kent
et al. 2003). Each 100 bp window within the multiple alignment
was annotated for conservation %id (the number of bases per-
fectly conserved between the three species), recorded in human
coordinates. Overlapping windows of the same conservation %id
were merged into single genomic intervals. Alignment reliability
concerns limited the set to three-way alignments of 50%id or
more. Roughly 46.0% (1327 Mb) of the human genome was cat-
egorized as alignable at this threshold.
The pairwise alignment files from human to mouse and
from human to rat identified conserved elements potentially lost
in the rodent lineage. To guarantee loss of orthologous rodent
DNA, we required losses only from pairwise alignments that were
one-to-one mappings, based on the UCSC chains and nets (Kent
et al. 2003), leaving 1108 Mb of human, macaque, and dog con-
served sequence as candidates for rodent loss. We identified ro-
dent losses as the intersection of gaps from human to mouse and
from human to rat within the conserved regions defined above.
Only elements of 50 bp or larger (corresponding to indel medi-
ated alignment windows of 100 bp at 50%id) were retained.
Rodent sequence assembly gaps have similar signatures to
true rodent-specific losses, as they appear in pairwise alignments
to human as stretches of human sequence that have no rodent
orthologs. We removed all rodent assembly gaps from further
consideration.
We ran BLAT (Kent 2002) on all remaining candidate losses
to discover and remove false positives arising from alignment
artifacts and structural RNA migration since the rodent–primate
split. To further ensure that the elements were truly missing from
the rodent lineage, we ran the more sensitive BLASTN (Pearson et
al. 1997) of the human sequence within candidate rodent-
specific losses against a database of rodents that included mouse
NCBI Build 36.1, the Celera Genomics whole-genome mouse
shotgun assembly, the mouse MGSC v3 assembly, and the rat
RGSC v3.4 assembly. We removed elements with significant
similarity (E-score  1010) found in any of the four databases
scanned. The stringent BLAST significance threshold identifies a
very limited amount of additional sequence (0.25%) beyond that
discovered by the conservative BLAT screening. Further relaxing
the significance level used to exclude sequences runs the risk of
preferentially excluding sequences that have diverged paralogs
elsewhere in the genome. The resultant elements were classified
as lost in rodents, and comprised 9.04% (261 Mb) of the human
genome.
We annotated portions of both the primate-dog conserved
DNA and the subset lost in rodents as nonexonic. Nonexonic
elements at a particular conservation %id c were identified by
taking the union of all 100 bp windows of conservation %id c
that do not overlap any portion of the reference genome anno-
tated as coding exons or UTRs. Other regions of primate-dog
conservation and rodent loss were labeled as coding exon ele-
ments. Coding exon elements at a particular conservation %id c
consist of the union of all 100 bp windows of conservation %id
c that overlap at least 50 bp of a coding exon. All gene annota-
tions used to identify both coding exon and nonexonic elements
were based upon the UCSC Genome Browser knownGene table
(Hsu et al. 2006) of the human genome assembly.
The loss rate at a particular conservation %id c was calcu-
lated as the total number of base pairs in rodent-specific loss
elements of conservation %id c divided by the total number of
base pairs in primate-dog conserved elements of conservation
%id c. Nonexonic and coding exon loss rates were calculated
using only elements in the appropriate classes in both the nu-
merator and denominator of the equation.
Repeating our entire analysis using both smaller and larger
window sizes of 75 bp and 150 bp yields very similar results
(Supplemental Fig. S9).
Losses within the rodent lineage of elements conserved be-
tween human, dog, and horse were processed in an identical
manner to the primate-dog elements, using the UCSC horse
(equCab1) genome assembly in place of macaque.
Identifying primate-specific losses of mammalian conserved
DNA
Losses within the primate lineage of elements conserved between
mouse, rat, and dog (Supplemental Fig. S2) were processed in a
manner analogous to rodent-specific losses. Elements were iden-
tified in mouse coordinates. The BLASTN step was run against a
database of primates that included the human NCBI Build 36.1,
the Celera Genomics whole-genome human shotgun assembly,
and the chimpanzee CSAC Build 2 v1.
Dispensability of mammalian DNA
Genome Research 7
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 2, 2008 - Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
Deep sequence conservation and dispensability
Pairwise syntenic genome alignments of human sequence con-
served in macaque and dog with the following UCSC genomes
were generated: opossum (monDom4), platypus (ornAna1),
chicken (galGal3), frog (xenTro2), zebrafish (danRer4), tetraodon
(tetNig1), fugu (fr2), and stickleback (gasAcu1).
Each nonexonic 100 bp window within a primate-dog con-
served region was tested for overlap of 50 bp or more with each
pairwise alignment. Window conservation depth was assigned as
the most distant species/clade for which the overlap criteria was
fulfilled; the distance metric has teleost fish most distant (bony
vertebrate ancestry), followed by frog (tetrapod), chicken (amni-
ote), platypus (base of the mammalian lineage), opossum (theri-
an–marsupial and placental–mammals), and dog (placental
mammal specific). Windows satisfying the overlap criteria for
one or more of the pairwise alignments to zebrafish, tetraodon,
fugu, or stickleback were labeled with teleost fish conservation
depth. Windows that did not satisfy the overlap criteria for any
of the pairwise alignments were labeled with dog (eutherian)
conservation depth. All 100 bp windows of the same conserva-
tion %id and conservation depth were merged into nonoverlap-
ping elements, and the total abundance of sequence plotted
(Supplemental Fig. S6A).
The conservation depth of rodent-dog conserved regions
(Supplemental Fig. S6b) was determined using pairwise syntenic
alignments from mouse to the same species mentioned above,
using the same overlap criteria.
Loss rates (Fig. 5) were calculated by dividing the number of
bases lost of a particular conservation depth and conservation
%id by the total number of bases of that conservation depth and
conservation %id.
Statistical enrichment analyses
Enrichment analyses are based on the hypergeometric test as
described in Lowe et al. (2007), and are performed against the
Gene Ontology (GO) database (Ashburner et al. 2000). Briefly, for
each coding exon element conserved between human, macaque,
and dog, if the gene whose exon is conserved has any informative
GO annotations, the gene is included in the background set.
Each of those coding exon elements that is additionally lost in
mouse and rat has its gene included in the foreground set. Inde-
pendent tests are performed for each GO annotation , and it is
asked whether the number of genes in the foreground set with
annotation , k, picked from all foreground genes, n, is signifi-
cantly enriched for  when compared to the total number of
genes in the background set with annotation , K, picked from
the background set, N.
The nonexonic enrichment analyses are performed in a
similar manner. Each nonexonic element is mapped to the GO-
annotated gene whose transcription start site (TSS) is nearest the
element. If no GO-annotated gene has its TSS within 1 Mb of the
element, the element is ignored. The sets of genes chosen are
used in a similar hypergeometric test.
Acknowledgments
We thank David Haussler, Jim Kent, Hiram Clawson, Mark
Diekhans, and Craig Lowe for technical help; Dmitri Petrov and
members of the Bejerano lab for insightful manuscript com-
ments; David Kingsley and Craig Lowe for valuable discussions;
and Nadav Ahituv and Ivan Ovcharenko for sharing results pre-
publication. C.M. is supported by a Stanford Bio-X graduate fel-
lowship. G.B. is a Sloan research fellow and a Searle scholar.
Research partially supported by an Edward Mallinckrodt, Jr.
Foundation junior faculty grant.
References
Ahituv, N., Zhu, Y., Visel, A., Holt, A., Afzal, V., Pennachio, L., and
Rubin, E. 2007. Deletion of ultraconserved elements yields viable
mice. PLoS Biol. 5: e234. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0050234.
Ashburner, M., Ball, C.A., Blake, J.A., Botstein, D., Butler, H., Cherry,
J.M., Davis, A.P., Dolinski, K., Dwight, S.S., Eppig, J.T., et al. 2000.
Gene Ontology: Tool for the unification of biology. Nat. Genet.
25: 25–29.
Barbaric, I., Miller, G., and Dear, T. 2007. Appearances can be deceiving:
Phenotypes of knockout mice. Brief. Funct. Genomic. Proteomic.
6: 91–103.
Bejerano, G., Pheasant, M., Makunin, I., Stephen, S., Kent, W.J., Mattick,
J.S., and Haussler, D. 2004. Ultraconserved elements in the human
genome. Science 304: 1321–1325.
Bejerano, G., Lowe, C.B., Ahituv, N., King, B., Siepel, A., Salama, S.R.,
Rubin, E.M., Kent, W.J., and Haussler, D. 2006. A distal enhancer
and an ultraconserved exon are derived from a novel retroposon.
Nature 441: 87–90.
Blanchette, M., Kent, W., Riemer, C., Elnitski, L., Smit, A., Roskin, K.,
Baertsch, R., Rosenbloom, K., Clawson, H., Green, E., et al. 2004.
Aligning multiple genomic sequences with the threaded blockset
aligner. Genome Res. 14: 708–715.
Blanchette, M., Bataille, A., Chen, X., Poitras, C., Laganire, J., Lefbvre,
C., Deblois, G., Gigure, V., Ferretti, V., Bergeron, D., et al. 2006.
Genome-wide computational prediction of transcriptional regulatory
modules reveals new insights into human gene expression. Genome
Res. 16: 656–668.
Cooper, G.M., Brudno, M., Stone, E.A., Dubchak, I., Batzoglou, S., and
Sidow, A. 2004. Characterization of evolutionary rates and
constraints in three mammalian genomes. Genome Res. 14: 539–548.
Cretekos, C., Wang, Y., Green, E., Martin, J., Rasweiler, J., and
Behringer, R. 2008. Regulatory divergence modifies limb length
between mammals. Genes & Dev. 22: 141–151.
Editorial. 2007. Life as we know it. Nature 449: 1.
Gaffney, D.J. and Keightley, P.D. 2006. Genomic selective constraints in
murid noncoding DNA. PLoS Genet. 2: e204. doi:
10.1371/journal.pgen.0020204.
Garcia-Dorado, A., Caballero, A., and Crow, J.F. 2003. On the
persistence and pervasiveness of a new mutation. Evolution Int. J.
Org. Evolution 57: 2644–2646.
Göttgens, B., Broccardo, C., Sanchez, M., Deveaux, S., Murphy, G.,
Gthert, J., Kotsopoulou, E., Kinston, S., Delaney, L., Piltz, S., et al.
2004. The scl +18/19 stem cell enhancer is not required for
hematopoiesis: Identification of a 5 bifunctional
hematopoietic-endothelial enhancer bound by Fli-1 and Elf-1. Mol.
Cell. Biol. 24: 1870–1883.
Green, P. 2007. 2 genomes—Does depth matter? Genome Res.
17: 1547–1549.
Hillenmeyer, M., Fung, E., Wildenhain, J., Pierce, S., Hoon, S., Lee, W.,
Proctor, M., St. Onge, R., Tyers, M., Koller, D., et al. 2008. The
chemical genomic portrait of yeast: Uncovering a phenotype for all
genes. Science 320: 362–365.
Hsu, F., Kent, W.J., Clawson, H., Kuhn, R.M., Diekhans, M., and
Haussler, D. 2006. The UCSC known genes. Bioinformatics
22: 1036–1046.
Katzman, S., Kern, A.D., Bejerano, G., Fewell, G., Fulton, L., Wilson,
R.K., Salama, S.R., and Haussler, D. 2007. Human genome
ultraconserved elements are ultraselected. Science 317: 915.
Kent, W.J. 2002. BLAT—The BLAST-like alignment tool. Genome Res.
12: 656–664.
Kent, W.J., Baertsch, R., Hinrichs, A., Miller, W., and Haussler, D. 2003.
Evolution’s cauldron: Duplication, deletion, and rearrangement in
the mouse and human genomes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
100: 11484–11489.
Lindblad-Toh, K., Wade, C., Mikkelsen, T., Karlsson, E., Jaffe, D., Kamal,
M., Clamp, M., Chang, J., Kulbokas, E., Zody, M., et al. 2005.
Genome sequence, comparative analysis and haplotype structure of
the domestic dog. Nature 438: 803–819.
Lowe, C.B., Bejerano, G., and Haussler, D. 2007. Thousands of human
mobile element fragments undergo strong purifying selection near
developmental genes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 104: 8005–8010.
Margulies, E.H., Maduro, V.V.B., Thomas, P.J., Tomkins, J.P., Amemiya,
C.T., Luo, M., and Green, E.D. 2005. Comparative sequencing
provides insights about the structure and conservation of marsupial
and monotreme genomes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 102: 3354–3359.
McLean and Bejerano
8 Genome Research
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 2, 2008 - Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
Miller, W., Rosenbloom, K., Hardison, R., Hou, M., Taylor, J., Raney, B.,
Burhans, R., King, D., Baertsch, R., Blankenberg, D., et al. 2007.
28-Way vertebrate alignment and conservation track in the UCSC
Genome Browser. Genome Res. 17: 1797–1808.
Nobrega, M.A., Zhu, Y., Plajzer-Frick, I., Afzal, V., and Rubin, E.M. 2004.
Megabase deletions of gene deserts result in viable mice. Nature
431: 988–993.
Pal, C., Papp, B., and Lercher, M. 2006. An integrated view of protein
evolution. Nat. Rev. Genet. 7: 337–348.
Pearson, W.R., Wood, T., Zhang, Z., and Miller, W. 1997. Comparison of
DNA sequences with protein sequences. Genomics 46: 24–36.
Pennacchio, L.A., Ahituv, N., Moses, A.M., Prabhakar, S., Nobrega, M.A.,
Shoukry, M., Minovitsky, S., Dubchak, I., Holt, A., Lewis, K.D., et al.
2006. In vivo enhancer analysis of human conserved non-coding
sequences. Nature 444: 499–502.
Petrov, D. 2002. Mutational equilibrium model of genome size
evolution. Theor. Popul. Biol. 61: 531–544.
Pollard, D., Bergman, C., Stoye, J., Celniker, S., and Eisen, M. 2004.
Benchmarking tools for the alignment of functional noncoding
DNA. BMC Bioinformatics 5: 6. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-5-6.
Prabhakar, S., Poulin, F., Shoukry, M., Afzal, V., Rubin, E.M., Couronne,
O., and Pennacchio, L.A. 2006. Close sequence comparisons are
sufficient to identify human cis-regulatory elements. Genome Res.
16: 855–863.
Sanges, R., Kalmar, E., Claudiani, P., D’Amato, M., Muller, F., and
Stupka, E. 2006. Shuffling of cis-regulatory elements is a pervasive
feature of the vertebrate lineage. Genome Biol. 7: R56. doi:
10.1186/gb-2006-7-7-r56.
Schwartz, S., Kent, W., Smit, A., Zhang, Z., Baertsch, R., Hardison, R.,
Haussler, D., and Miller, W. 2003. Human–mouse alignments with
BLASTZ. Genome Res. 13: 103–107.
Stone, E., Cooper, G., and Sidow, A. 2005. Trade-offs in detecting
evolutionarily constrained sequence by comparative genomics.
Annu. Rev. Genomics Hum. Genet. 6: 143–164.
Torarinsson, E., Sawera, M., Havgaard, J., Fredholm, M., and Gorodkin,
J. 2006. Thousands of corresponding human and mouse genomic
regions unalignable in primary sequence contain common RNA
structure. Genome Res. 16: 885–889.
Uemura, O., Okada, Y., Ando, H., Guedj, M., Higashijima, S.-I.,
Shimazaki, T., Chino, N., Okano, H., and Okamoto, H. 2005.
Comparative functional genomics revealed conservation and
diversification of three enhancers of the isl1 gene for motor and
sensory neuron-specific expression. Dev. Biol. 278: 587–606.
Visel, A., Prabhakar, S., Akiyama, J., Shoukry, M., Lewis, K., Holt, A.,
Plajzer-Frick, I., Afzal, V., Rubin, E., Pennacchio, L., et al. 2008.
Ultraconservation identifies a small subset of extremely constrained
developmental enhancers. Nat. Genet. 40: 158–160.
Waterston, R., Lindblad-Toh, K., Birney, E., Rogers, J., Abril, J., Agarwal,
P., Agarwala, R., Ainscough, R., Alexandersson, M., An, P., et al.
2002. Initial sequencing and comparative analysis of the mouse
genome. Nature 420: 520–562.
Werner, T., Hammer, A., Wahlbuhl, M., Bosl, M.R., and Wegner, M.
2007. Multiple conserved regulatory elements with overlapping
functions determine Sox10 expression in mouse embryogenesis.
Nucleic Acids Res. 35: 6526–6538.
Wilson, A., Carlson, S., and White, T. 1977. Biochemical evolution.
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 46: 573–639.
Zuckerkandl, E. 1992. Revisiting junk DNA. J. Mol. Evol. 34: 259–271.
Received April 28, 2008; accepted in revised form August 13, 2008.
Dispensability of mammalian DNA
Genome Research 9
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 2, 2008 - Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
