Finding Intermediates in the O2
Activation Pathways of
Non-Heme Iron Oxygenases
E. G. KOVALEVA, M. B. NEIBERGALL,
S. CHAKRABARTY, AND J. D. LIPSCOMB*
Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and
Biophysics, University of Minnesota, 6-155 Jackson Hall,
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455
Received March 4, 2007
ABSTRACT
Intermediates in the reaction cycle of an oxygenase are usually very
informative with respect to the chemical mechanism of O2 activa-
tion and insertion. However, detection of these intermediates is
often complicated by their short lifetime and the regulatory
mechanism of the enzyme designed to ensure specificity. Here, the
methods used to detect the intermediates in an extradiol dioxy-
genase, a Rieske cis-dihydrodiol dioxygenase, and soluble methane
monooxygenase are discussed. The methods include the use of
alternative, chromophoric substrates, mutagenesis of active site
catalytic residues, forced changes in substrate binding order,
control of reaction rates using regulatory proteins, and initialization
of catalysis in crystallo.
Introduction
Oxygen is activated by enzymes in a tightly controlled
manner to ensure that the subsequent reactions occur
with high specificity. Loss of this control often leads to
devastating results for the enzyme and the organism in
which it is found. One consequence of this control is that
intermediates in the oxygen activation reaction are often
short lived, thereby lessening the chance that the overall
metabolic reaction will deviate from its prescribed course.
This presents a problem for the chemist interested in
biological oxygen activation strategies in that the most
useful intermediates in understanding this chemistry are
those most difficult to detect, trap, and study. The
challenge considered in this Account is to develop strate-
gies for finding the fleeting species that nature goes to
the greatest lengths to hide from view. Here, the strategies
for detection of the reactive oxygen species of three non-
heme iron-containing families of enzymes are described.
Extradiol Aromatic Ring-Cleaving Dioxygenases
Overview of the Structure and Mechanism. Complex
aromatic compounds are converted in bacteria to simple
single- or double-ring compounds, generally containing
ortho- or para-oriented hydroxyl functions.1 The rings of
these compounds are opened by dioxygenases, most of
which contain mononuclear Fe(II) or Fe(III) in the active
site.2 Those that contain Fe(II) cleave catecholic substrates
adjacent to the vicinal hydroxyl groups by incorporating
both atoms from O2 to yield muconic semialdehyde
derivatives. The X-ray crystal structures of these extradiol
dioxygenases show that the iron is bound by two His side
chains and one Glu or Asp side chain occupying one face
of the iron coordination.3,4 The opposing face is occupied
by up to three solvent molecules. This so called “2-His-
1-carboxylate facial triad” (2H-D/E) binding motif was first
recognized in the extradiol dioxygenase family, but it is
now known to be utilized by many types of enzymes that
bind Fe(II) and activate O2.
5 Although the reactions
catalyzed by the 2H-D/E family are very diverse, the
oxygen activation process begins in a similar manner in
most cases, and it can be appreciated by studying the
extradiol dioxygenase mechanism.
Numerous spectroscopic and X-ray crystallographic
studies have shown that catecholic substrates bind directly
to the active site Fe(II) as an asymmetric chelate in which
only one of the two OH functions is deprotonated.2,4,6–9
This directly displaces two solvents from the “catalytic”
face of the facial triad. The third solvent bond to the iron
(if present) is weakened or broken by the donation of
charge from the anionic catecholic ligand. In our proposed
mechanism6,7 (Figure 1), the binding of the aromatic
substrate and O2 to the Fe(II) in adjacent sites is important
for two reasons. First, it serves to juxtapose the substrates
properly so that the oxygen is positioned adjacent to the
substrate bond that will be cleaved. Second, the iron
provides a conduit for a shift in electron density from the
aromatic substrate to the bound oxygen. This simulta-
neously activates both substrates by giving them radical
character so that the subsequent attack of oxygen on the
aromatic substrate is spin allowed. The resulting Fe–alkyl-
peroxo intermediate might undergo ring cleavage by a
variety of mechanisms, but our initial proposal was for a
Criegee rearrangement.6 In this process, the O–O bond
of O2 breaks simultaneously with the insertion of one O
atom into the ring to yield a lactone. This is subsequently
hydrolyzed to yield the bound, ring-open product by the
second O atom from the original O2. The rearrangement
would be facilitated by active site catalysts that push
* Corresponding author. Telephone: (612) 625-6454. Fax: (612) 624-
5121. E-mail: lipsc001@umn.edu.
Elena G. Kovaleva was born in Moscow, Russia, and received her B.S. degree
from the University of Maryland (1998) and her Ph.D. from the University of Iowa
(2004). She is currently a postdoctoral associate at the University of Minnesota
interested in kinetic and in crystallo approaches to enzyme mechanism.
Matthew B. Neibergall was born in Council Bluffs, IA, and received his B.S.
degree from Bethel University (1998) and his Ph.D. from the University of
Minnesota (2006). He is currently a postdoctoral associate at the University of
Minnesota interested in spectroscopic characterization of reactive intermediates
and the regulation of catalysis by metalloenzymes.
Sarmistha Chakrabarty was born in Rishra, India, and received her B.S. (1997)
and M.S. (1999) degrees from Visva Bharati University (Shantiniketan, India). She
is currently a graduate student at the University of Minnesota studying the
mechanism of Rieske dioxygenases.
John D. Lipscomb was born in Wilmington, DE, and received his B.A. in chemistry
from Amherst College (1969) and M.S. (1971) and Ph.D. (1974) degrees in
Biochemistry from the University of Illinois. He completed postdoctoral studies
at the Gray Freshwater Biological Institute in 1977 and assumed a position in
the Biochemistry Department of the University of Minnesota where he now has
the rank of Professor. He studies the mechanisms of oxygen activation by
metalloenzymes.
Acc. Chem. Res. 2007, 40, 475–483
10.1021/ar700052v CCC: $37.00  2007 American Chemical Society VOL. 40, NO. 7, 2007 / ACCOUNTS OF CHEMICAL RESEARCH 475
Published on Web 06/14/2007
electron density into the ring or draw density out of the
proximal oxygen of O2.
Kinetic Approaches to the Identification of Interme-
diates. The mechanistic proposal for the extradiol dioxy-
genase family predicts the existence of many intermedi-
ates, but their discovery was slowed by the lack of an
optical spectrum from Fe(II) in the 2H-D/E motif. One
way to address this problem was to shift the focus from
the iron to the substrate so that intermediates could be
detected by changes in a substrate chromophore. The
natural substrates for these enzymes are colorless in the
visible, but the alternative substrate 4-nitrocatechol (4NC)
has a chromophore that shifts dramatically depending
upon its state of ionization, its environment, and whether
the ring is intact.
In our search for intermediates, we have used the
homotetrameric enzyme homoprotocatechuate 2,3-dioxy-
genase (HPCD), which cleaves 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetate
(HPCA) between carbons 2 and 3. 4NC is cleaved in the
same position at 4% of the HPCA rate. Upon rapid
anaerobic mixing of 4NC with HPCD, three kinetically
resolvable substrate binding steps were observed as shown
in Figure 2.10 Nominally, these are (i) rapid binding of 4NC
monoanion (solution state at pH 7) in the active site,
resulting in small spectral intensity changes, (ii) binding
4NC to the Fe(II) and simultaneous deprotonation to
cause a substantial spectral shift, and (iii) a further
structural reorganization to yield a species termed E-4NC(3).
The second half of the reaction cycle was investigated by
rapidly mixing preformed E-4NC(3) with O2. Two reaction
steps could be directly observed. (i) An intermediate with
the ring intact was first converted to the ring-open
product, and (ii) the product was then released in the
overall rate-limiting step. These steps correlate with the
final two steps of the postulated cycle shown in Figure 1.
Although the observation of two new intermediates
prior to product release was very exciting, the fact that
the rate constants for these steps were not dependent on
O2 concentration suggested that the true O2 binding and
activation steps occurred too rapidly to be observed. This
was addressed by mutating active site residues with
potential to be catalysts for these steps.11 In particular,
mutation of His200 (Figure 4 below shows the position of
His200) to residues that cannot catalyze acid–base reac-
tions proved to dramatically slow the rates of all the
reactions after 4NC is bound. The H200N mutant permit-
ted the observation of two additional steps in the second
half of the reaction cycle (Figure 2), both of which
exhibited O2 concentration dependence. The rate constant
FIGURE 1. Proposed extradiol dioxygenase mechanism. R )
-CH2COOH (HPCA) or –NO2 (4NC) for the studies described here.
Single-hydroxyl deprotonation during binding results in a bound
monoanion in the case of HPCA (shown) and a bound dianion for
4NC. FIGURE 2. Intermediates discovered in the reaction cycle of the
H200N mutant of HPCD when using 4NC as the substrate (rate
constants at 4 °C and pH 7.5). The substrate binding steps occur at
similar rates for the wild-type enzyme. The H200N reaction diverges
from the normal cycle after the alkylperoxo intermediate to yield a
quinone rather than a ring-open product. When using HPCA, the
normal ring-open product is obtained (see refs 10 and 11 for
experimental conditions).
FIGURE 3. Oxy intermediate formation by the H200N mutant of HPCD
using HPCA as the substrate. The inset shows the O2 concentration
dependence of intermediate formation.11
O2 Activation Pathways of Non-Heme Iron Oxygenases Kovaleva et al.
476 ACCOUNTS OF CHEMICAL RESEARCH / VOL. 40, NO. 7, 2007
of the faster of these steps had a linear O2 dependence,
showing that it is the true O2 association step. The
following step was very slow, suggesting that it might be
possible to detect the initial oxy complex of the reaction
cycle.
Model compounds for Fe–superoxo and –peroxo spe-
cies typically exhibit weak optical spectra due to oxygen-
to-iron charge transfer.12 To search for such a spectro-
scopic signature, the experiments with the H200N mutant
were repeated using the colorless HPCA instead of 4NC.
Although faster than the reactions using 4NC, the O2
binding reactions using HPCA could still be observed as
shown in Figure 3, now manifested as the rapid formation
of a new intermediate absorbing at 610 nm.11 Thus, the
first oxy intermediate of the extradiol dioxygenase family
was discovered by the combined use of a slow chro-
mophoric substrate to map the kinetic behavior of the
cycle, and then a site-directed mutant to stabilize the
target species.
In Crystallo Approach. A quite different approach to
the discovery of intermediates was suggested by the
observation that enzymatic reactions often progress more
slowly in a crystal.13 A crystal of HPCD was soaked in 4NC
and exposed to a very low concentration of O2 prior to
being flash-frozen.14 Remarkably, as illustrated in Figure
4, the 1.9 Å crystal structure showed that three of the four
subunits contained different intermediates of the catalytic
cycle, allowing them to be structurally characterized.
In the first subunit, 4NC was chelated to the iron as
expected, but a new elliptically shaped electron density
was observed in the small molecule binding site of the
iron. A molecule of O2 fit the density well, whereas
solvent(s) present at full or partial occupancy did not.
However, the best evidence that the new ligand is O2
stemmed from examination of the structure of the bound
4NC. This aromatic molecule is expected to be planar, but
the structure in the enzyme active site was distinctly
buckled with the C2-hydroxyl group moving out of plane
(Figure 4, inset). A likely explanation for this is that the
4NC gives up an electron to become a semiquinone. The
only diatomic molecule present that can bind to Fe(II) and
accept the electron from 4NC is O2. The bond length of
each oxygen–Fe(II) bond was the same (∼2.4 Å), showing
that the oxygen binds in an unusual side-on configuration.
The Fe–O bond lengths were longer than those observed
for the side-on bound Fe(III)–(hydro)peroxo complex of
naphthalene 1,2-dioxygenase (NDO) (1.99 and 1.74 Å,
respectively)15 (discussed below), consistent with the
formation of an Fe(II)–superoxo species in HPCD.
The structure in the second subunit exhibited continu-
ous electron density from the iron through the oxygen to
FIGURE 4. X-ray crystal structure of the intermediates of the HPCD reaction cycle. PDB entries 1F1X for E, 1Q0C for ES, and 2IGA for other
intermediates. The inset shows that the aromatic ring of 4NC becomes progressively less planar as the E–semiquinone–superoxo and alkylperoxo
intermediates form.14 The right-most structure is the oxidized H200E mutant complex (unpublished data).
O2 Activation Pathways of Non-Heme Iron Oxygenases Kovaleva et al.
VOL. 40, NO. 7, 2007 / ACCOUNTS OF CHEMICAL RESEARCH 477
carbon 2 of 4NC. The oxygen had shifted toward the 4NC
so that only the proximal oxygen remained bound to the
iron, while the distal oxygen assumed the proper orienta-
tion for a bond to a tetrahedral carbon. These structural
features are consistent with those expected for the alkyl-
peroxo intermediate of the reaction cycle.
The third unique subunit contained the ring-cleaved
product complex. Strong electron density near the iron
showed the formation of the diagnostic carboxylate func-
tion of the product that rotates out of the former plane of
the ring to optimize the bond with the iron. In contrast
to the iron-bound portions of the product, little electron
density was observed for some of the distal atoms. This
was expected because of the large increase in flexibility
gained after the ring opens.
The observation of different structures in nominally
identical subunits apparently derives from both the great
decrease in rate caused by reaction in a crystal and crystal
packing forces that cause the subunits to take on slightly
different structures. These differences are very subtle,
suggesting that the enzyme can exert exquisite control
over the key oxygen binding, activation, and insertion
steps of the catalytic cycle.
Implications for Oxygen Activation. The kinetic and
in crystallo studies show that oxygen activation occurs in
a stepwise fashion. The ability to bind O2 follows from
substrate-initiated solvent release and the transfer of an
electron from the substrate to oxygen. The structural
studies show that the attacking species is likely to be this
Fe(II)–superoxo moiety, yielding an alkylperoxo interme-
diate. Thus, the attack occurs before the O–O bond is
broken. The chemical nature of the O–O bond cleavage
and insertion reaction(s) that follows the observed inter-
mediates remains unknown, although the important
participation of the perfectly aligned His200 as an active
site acid and the inhibitory effects of the electron-
withdrawing nitro substituent of 4NC are consistent with
the Criegee rearrangement chemistry originally proposed.
Rieske cis-Dihydrodiol-Forming Dioxygenases
Overview of the Structure and Reaction. Like the
extradiol dioxygenases, the Rieske cis-dihydrodiol-forming
dioxygenases utilize aromatic compounds as substrates
and incorporate both atoms of oxygen from O2.
16 How-
ever, the reaction differs in that no ring cleavage occurs
and the reaction requires two electrons supplied by a
NAD(P)H-coupled reductase. There are several subclasses
of Rieske dioxygenases differing in the number of electron
transfer components and the subunit structure of the
oxygenase component. However, all have an oxygenase
component that has a Rieske Fe2S2 cluster and a 2H-D/
E-type mononuclear iron center in the R-subunit. At least
three R-subunits compose the complete oxygenase com-
ponent, and they are spatially arranged to juxtapose the
Rieske cluster of one subunit with the mononuclear iron
site of the next subunit.17 It is believed these pairs of metal
centers form the functional active site. X-ray crystal-
lographic studies show that the substrate binds near the
mononuclear iron center, and thus, this is the likely site
of oxygen activation and insertion.18
Kinetic Approaches to the Identification of Interme-
diates. Although the overall stoichiometry of the reaction
is two electrons per cis-dihydrodiol formed, there has been
debate over the source of these electrons during catalysis
and the timing of their delivery. Under one scenario, the
Rieske cluster and the mononuclear iron together donate
two electrons to O2 bound to the latter. Then, either the
resulting Fe(III)–(hydro)peroxo species or the equivalent
Fe(V)–oxo–hydroxo species formed by O–O bond cleavage
attacks the aromatic substrate.19 A second possibility is
that the reductase directly or indirectly donates another
electron before the attack on the substrate to yield either
an Fe(II)–(hydro)peroxo or an Fe(IV)–oxo–hydroxo spe-
cies.20
One way to evaluate the timing of electron donation
was to carry out a single-turnover reaction (Figure 5).19
Using NDO, it was found that the fully reduced oxygenase
component alone could produce the cis-dihydrodiol prod-
uct in stoichiometric yield. At the end of the reaction, each
of the metal centers was oxidized by one electron; thus,
it appears that two rather than three electrons are required
to activate oxygen. It was found that the enzyme had to
be denatured to release the product, fostering the proposal
that reduction of the mononuclear iron is required for
rapid product release. Thus, the role of the “third electron”
is to reduce the mononuclear iron at the end of the
reaction to release product and establish the starting state
for the next cycle.
There are several other indications that the reaction is
tightly regulated by conformational changes that respond
to substrate or product binding and the oxidation state
of the metal centers. For example, when the Rieske cluster
of NDO is oxidized, NO binds to the reduced mononuclear
iron site to give a characteristic S ) 3/2 EPR spectrum.19
In contrast, the equivalent O2 complex apparently does
not form since the Mössbauer spectra of aerobic Rieske
dioxygenase samples show no evidence for oxidation or
FIGURE 5. Single-turnover (STO) and peroxide shunt reaction cycles
of NDO.19 Reprinted with permission from ref 26. Copyright 2003
American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.
O2 Activation Pathways of Non-Heme Iron Oxygenases Kovaleva et al.
478 ACCOUNTS OF CHEMICAL RESEARCH / VOL. 40, NO. 7, 2007
an oxygen complex.21 Reduction of the Rieske cluster
causes a different result in that neither NO nor O2 can
bind to the mononuclear iron.19 Addition of substrate
allows both small molecules to bind and, in the case of
O2, product formation. These results suggested that the
redox state of the Rieske cluster caused a cross-subunit
boundary effect that alters the access of small molecules
to the mononuclear iron. The presence of substrate
appears to make the binding site available. Three different
types of experiments suggest how this might occur. MCD
studies of the mononuclear iron site in phthalate dioxy-
genase showed that the binding of substrate near the iron
caused the coordination number to change from 6 to 5,
presumably opening a site for small molecules.22,23 We
showed using pulsed ENDOR techniques, that the distance
between the bound substrate and the iron changes when
the oxidation state of the Rieske cluster is changed.24
Finally, the recently determined crystal structure of 2-oxo-
quinoline 8-monooxygenase showed that when the oxida-
tion state of the Rieske cluster changes, a space for O2 or
NO is opened near the mononuclear iron.25
The role of substrate in the O2 activation process was
examined using benzoate 1,2-dioxygenase (BZDO). The
effect of substrate on the oxidation rate of the Rieske
cluster was observed after the fully reduced BZDO oxy-
genase was rapidly mixed with O2.
21 The rate of return of
the chromophore of the oxidized cluster showed the
apparent rate of transfer of an electron to the mono-
nuclear iron site. The electron transfer reaction was very
slow in the absence of substrate, and its rate increased to
a rate significantly faster than the enzyme turnover
number when substrate was added. It is likely that the
electron transfer process itself over the 12 Å separating
the metal centers occurs much faster than the reaction
monitored by stopped flow. This suggests that the oxygen
binding or activation occurs as part of the electron transfer
process and is rate-limiting. Intriguingly, it was found that
changes in the ring substituents of substrate dramatically
changed the rate constant for electron transfer. One way
to interpret these results is to postulate that substrate
directly participates in the oxygen activation process in
some manner.
The observation that the two-electron reduced oxyge-
nase component can carry out a single turnover when
exposed to O2 suggests that H2O2 might be able to provide
both the electrons and the oxygen in a “peroxide shunt”
reaction. As shown in Figure 5, central pathway, this is
the case for NDO.26 At the end of the reaction, both metal
centers were oxidized and product was tightly bound in
the active site, effectively limiting the reaction to one
turnover. Use of 18O-labeled peroxide showed that both
oxygens in the product derived from the peroxide. NDO,
as isolated, has an oxidized Rieske cluster, but the mono-
nuclear iron is reduced. Since the mononuclear site was
oxidized during turnover, a third electron was consumed,
opening the possibility that the peroxide shunt utilizes a
newmechanism. However, BZDO can be isolated with the
mononuclear site in the Fe(III) state21 and gives similar
peroxide shunt results, suggesting that peroxide causes
adventitious oxidation of the mononuclear iron of NDO.27
The peroxide shunt reaction of BZDO is similar to that
of NDO in yield and specificity, but it is notably slower.
Even at high H2O2 concentrations, the formation of
product in near-stoichiometric yield requires 1 h.27 We
believe that this is due to the redox-coupled regulatory
system of the Rieske dioxygenases described above.
Substrate used to stabilize BZDO during purification is
trapped in the active site due to the Fe(III) oxidation state.
Moreover, substrate is in the wrong position in the fully
oxidized enzyme to allow small molecule binding. Thus,
substrate (or product after a turnover cycle) must slowly
dissociate before peroxide can bind to form the activated
enzyme (Figure 6).
The slow turnover of the BZDO peroxide shunt was
exploited in monitoring the EPR and Mössbauer spectra
of the Fe(III) site during the reaction. As shown in Figure
7, it was found that the intense g ) 7.7 resonance from
the S ) 5/2 Fe(III) site disappeared within 2 min of
addition of H2O2, but the g ) 8.5 signal characteristic of
the product complex appeared slowly over the next hour.27
The Mössbauer spectra revealed only Fe(III) throughout
the reaction. Further investigation showed that the ap-
parently EPR silent intermediate had an unusual inverted
zero-field splitting causing the ground state to have
vanishingly low EPR intensity. Interestingly, EPR and
Mössbauer spectra with similar parameters and negative
zero-field splitting have been observed for Fe(III)–peroxo
model complexes.12,28 Thus, it seems likely that the
activated oxygen species of the Rieske dioxygenases is a
similar peroxo adduct, although the slightly smaller isomer
shift (δ ) 0.5 mm/s vs 0.64 mm/s in the models) suggests
that it is protonated. It was detected by forcing the
formation of the species in a form of the enzyme that does
not readily exchange small molecules or substrates in the
normal cycle.
FIGURE 6. Peroxide shunt reaction of BZDO slowed by a combina-
tion of substrates with incorrect forms of the enzyme.27
O2 Activation Pathways of Non-Heme Iron Oxygenases Kovaleva et al.
VOL. 40, NO. 7, 2007 / ACCOUNTS OF CHEMICAL RESEARCH 479
In Crystallo Approach. The first X-ray crystal structure
of a Rieske dioxygenase was of NDO by Ramaswamy and
his collaborators.17 It was subsequently found by this
group that incubation of the crystal of the fully reduced
enzyme with substrate and O2 in a cryosolvent mixture
slightly below 0 °C resulted in the formation of an oxy
complex that could be flash-frozen and structurally char-
acterized (Figure 8).15 This was the first such complex for
the 2H-D/E family, and like that described above for
HPCD, the oxygen bound side-on. On the basis of the
Fe–O bond lengths, the complex is likely to be an
Fe(III)–(hydro)peroxo species like that subsequently found
in the BZDO peroxide shunt reaction. Thus, the approach
of slowing the reaction by conducting it in a crystal
allowed a key activated oxygen species to be trapped.
Implications for Oxygen Activation. Although both the
extradiol dioxygenases and the Rieske dioxygenases form
peroxy intermediates, their mechanisms of oxygen activa-
tion are clearly different. The requirement for the input
of two external electrons in the Rieske dioxygenase case
suggests an activation mechanism more akin to those of
cytochrome P450 (P450) or methane monooxygenase
(MMO).29 These enzymes activate O2 by forming an
Fe(III)–hydroperoxy intermediate that subsequently un-
dergoes heterolytic O–O bond cleavage before reacting
with substrates. The kinetic and structural studies of the
Rieske dioxygenases show that a similar Fe(III)–(hydro)-
peroxy species is formed, but it remains unclear whether
the O–O bond must break before reaction with aromatic
substrates. The Rieske dioxygenases have been shown to
carry out many of the reactions of P450 and MMO,30,31
implying O–O bond cleavage before attack. On the other
hand, the apparent dependence of the oxygen activation
reaction on substrate type described above suggests that
a direct attack on substrate by the peroxy adduct as it is
formed must also be considered.
Methane Monooxygenase
Overview of the Structure and Mechanism. Methan-
otrophic bacteria catalyze the oxidation of methane to
methanol with the incorporation of one atom from O2.
This is the first step in a pathway leading to complete
oxidation of CH4 to CO2 that satisfies the carbon and
energy needs of the bacterium. Although all methano-
trophs can elaborate a membrane-bound, copper-con-
taining form of MMO, many type II and X methanotrophs
produce exclusively a soluble, iron-containing form (sMMO)
in a low-copper environment. The sMMO consists of three
protein components: a reductase (MMOR), a regulatory
protein (MMOB), and an oxygenase (MMOH). MMOH has
an (Rγ)2 subunit structure with a bis-µ-hydroxo dinuclear
Fe(III) cluster in the active site in the R-subunit. Kinetic
and spectroscopic studies have shown that the oxygen
activation and substrate hydroxylation reactions occur at
this site.29,32 The O2 is activated through a reductive
process that results in O–O bond cleavage and generation
of a high-valent iron–oxo reactive species prior to the
binding of substrate. Thus, the mechanism of this non-
FIGURE 7. EPR (top) spectra of intermediates in the peroxide shunt
of BZDO reacting with benzoate. Mössbauer (bottom) spectrum and
simulation (red) of the nearly EPR silent intermediate after 4 min of
reaction. Adapted from ref 27.
FIGURE 8. X-ray crystal structure of the oxy intermediate of NDO
(PDB entry 1O7N).15
O2 Activation Pathways of Non-Heme Iron Oxygenases Kovaleva et al.
480 ACCOUNTS OF CHEMICAL RESEARCH / VOL. 40, NO. 7, 2007
heme enzyme is similar to that of heme-containing P450
in terms of the steps in O2 activation but differs in the
timing of substrate association. This appears to be a
manifestation of the overarching need for specificity in
methanotrophs.
Kinetic Approaches to the Identification of Interme-
diates. Early experiments showed that the two-electron
reduced form of MMOH in the absence of MMOR and
MMOB could turn over once to yield methanol from
methane with incorporation of oxygen from O2, directly
demonstrating that the diiron cluster is sufficient to
activate O2.
29,33 The binding of O2 with the reduced diiron
cluster of MMOH was found to be accelerated 1000-fold
by the addition of MMOB.29 This shifted the rate-limiting
step of the single-turnover cycle from O2 association to
product release, thereby allowing many intermediates in
theoxygenactivationprocesstobedetectedandcharacterized.
For the sMMO fromMethylosinus trichosporium OB3b,
analysis of the O2 concentration dependence of the
transient kinetic phases detected in the O2 binding process
showed that two intermediates must occur as illustrated
in Figure 9.29 Initially, O2 binds rapidly and effectively
irreversibly to the diferrous enzyme (but not the cluster)
to yield an intermediate termed O in which both irons
remain Fe(II). Then, the oxygen complex with the diiron
cluster forms, resulting in oxidation of the irons to yield
an Fe(III)Fe(III)–peroxo (or possibly superoxo) intermedi-
ate termed P*. Donation of a proton yields the Fe(III)-
Fe(III)–hydroperoxo species P.34 Finally, donation of a
second proton results in O–O bond cleavage which yields
the unique Fe(IV)Fe(IV)–bis-µ-oxo species Q.33 Each step
in this process occurs more slowly than the last, allowing
each intermediate to accumulate. P and Q have been
trapped, allowing the oxidation state of their diiron cluster
and their overall structure (Figure 10) to be studied using
spectroscopic approaches.29,32,35 Each has an optical
chromophore that allows their reaction with substrates
to be monitored.
Q decay is linearly accelerated by increasing concen-
trations of nearly all substrates, in particular methane,
confirming it as the reactive species.33,36 The ability of Q
to directly oxidize substrates was further indicated by two
experiments. First, the reaction with nitrobenzene resulted
in the formation of nitrophenol in the active site (inter-
mediate T) at the same rate as Q decay.33 Second, a
deuterium kinetic isotope effect (KIE) of 50 was observed
for the Q decay reaction with methane.29
Analysis of the temperature dependence of the Q decay
reaction with substrates suggested that it occurs in two
steps, nominally, substrate binding (QS) followed by
transfer of oxygen to form bound product.36 Significantly,
the binding reaction appears to occur slowly in compari-
son to that typically observed for enzyme reactions. This
makes the binding reaction rate-limiting for all saturated
hydrocarbon substrates except methane (Figure 11, left).
Consequently, methane is the only one of these substrates
that exhibits a deuterium KIE in the Q decay reaction. As
expected, the similarly small and stable fluoromethanes
also exhibit a large KIE for this reaction. 37 The binding
rate is affected by the formation of a complex between
MMOH and MMOB.29,36,38 Mutations in the MMOB
surface were found to significantly increase the apparent
binding rate of large substrates and the dissociation rate
of large products (Figure 11, right).39 Thus, it was possible
to unmask the deuterium KIE for the Q reaction with
ethane using an MMOBmutant in which four key surface
residues were simultaneously changed.40
Q is one of the most powerful oxidizing species in
nature on the basis of its ability to break the C–H bond of
methane. Nevertheless, it appears to react rather slowly
FIGURE 9. Intermediates in the reaction cycle of sMMO.
FIGURE 10. Proposed structure of sMMO P and Q from spectro-
scopic studies. Although P is clearly a peroxy adduct, its precise
structure has not been definitively established.
O2 Activation Pathways of Non-Heme Iron Oxygenases Kovaleva et al.
VOL. 40, NO. 7, 2007 / ACCOUNTS OF CHEMICAL RESEARCH 481
due to the encapsulating enzyme structure, which severely
restricts access of substrate to the activated oxygen. We
speculate that this complex system has been established
to allow the enzyme to selectively oxidize methane, the
only growth substrate for the methanotroph.39,41 The size
restriction into the active site gives a kinetic advantage to
methane. Moreover, the large KIE found for methane (and
not other substrates even when the access restrictions are
eased) suggests that quantum tunneling is also enhanced
for methane C–H bond cleavage to further increase its
kinetic advantage.36,40–42
Implications for Oxygen Activation. The discovery of
Q and the ease with which its kinetic behavior can be
monitored have allowed the study of the O2 activation
process in unprecedented detail. The stepwise nature of
the process leading to the breaking of the O–O bond after
protonation is very clear from the intermediates observed
during the formation of Q. The chemical nature of the
subsequent oxygen insertion process is less clear, but the
ability to experimentally and computationally approach
it has fostered many new ideas and theories. Our original
proposal for this reaction followed from that for P450 in
which Q would abstract a hydrogen atom from the
substrate to yield a substrate radical and an Fe(III)-
Fe(IV)–OH enzyme intermediate (R).29 Other proposals32
based on computations and the difficulty of observing
rearranged products from diagnostic radical clock sub-
strates include (i) formation of a methane carbon–iron
bond intermediate, (ii) concerted oxygen insertion, and
(iii) formation of a bound radical intermediate with a very
short lifetime. Although the nature of the reaction remains
controversial, one experiment that derives from the need
for the enzyme to protect the reactive oxygen of Q gives
some additional insight. The MMOB surface mutant T111Y
appears to remove most restrictions to entry of methane
and ethane into the MMOH active site. Moreover, the large
deuterium KIE characteristic of tunneling is lost in the
methane reaction. As a result, the reaction of Q with
normal and deuterated forms of these substrates was
observed without the usual protective effects of the
enzyme structure. In this experiment, the resulting Polanyi
plot relating bond energy to reaction rate is similar to that
expected for reactions known to occur by hydrogen atom
abstraction as proposed for P450 and in our original
proposal for MMO.41
Conclusions
Oxygen activation by the three non-heme iron-containing
oxygenases described here proceeds along distinctly dif-
ferent mechanistic paths. Accordingly, quite different
strategies were required in each case to seek out and
characterize the intermediates carrying the activated form
of oxygen. For extradiol dioxygenases, a combination of
mutagenesis and a slow substrate was sufficient to stabi-
lize the oxy intermediate. Knowledge of the regulatory
mechanism of Rieske dioxygenases was required to define
a method to approach the oxy intermediate in a way that
forced the structure of the enzyme itself to stabilize the
species. Finally, an understanding of the requirement to
protect the reactive oxygen species of sMMO and the role
of MMOB in this process allowed this key intermediate
to be trapped and characterized. In each case, some form
of peroxo adduct was an intermediate in the activation
process. However, the means by which these species are
formed and their fate lead to the diversity of reaction
outcomes represented in this set of enzymes. Finally, the
studies described here show that use of enzyme crystals
to slow and then visualize activated oxygen species is a
powerful new approach with potential applications
throughout this exciting field.
This work was supported by NIH Grants GM24689 and GM40466.
References
(1) Dagley, S. Biochemistry of Aromatic Hydrocarbon Degradation in
Pseudomonads. In The Bacteria; Sokatch, J. R., Ed.; Academic
Press: New York, 1986; Vol. 10, pp 527–556.
(2) Lipscomb, J. D.; Orville, A. M. Mechanistic Aspects of Dihydroxy-
benzoate Dioxygenases. In Metal Ions in Biological Systems; Sigel,
H., Sigel, I., Eds.; Marcel Dekker: New York, 1992; Vol. 28, pp 243–
298.
(3) Han, S.; Eltis, L. D.; Timmis, K. N.; Muchmore, S. W.; Bolin, J. T.
Crystal Structure of the Biphenyl-Cleaving Extradiol Dioxygenase
from a PCB-Degrading Pseudomonad. Science 1995, 270, 976–980.
(4) Senda, T.; Sugiyama, K.; Narita, H.; Yamamoto, T.; Kimbara, K.;
Fukuda, M.; Sato, M.; Yano, K.; Mitsui, Y. Three-Dimensional
Structures of Free Form and Two Substrate Complexes of an
Extradiol Ring-Cleavage Type Dioxygenase, the BphC Enzyme from
Pseudomonas sp. Strain KKS102. J. Mol. Biol. 1996, 255, 735–752.
(5) Hegg, E. L.; Que, L., Jr. The 2-His-1-Carboxylate Facial Triad. An
Emerging Structural Motif in Mononuclear Non-Heme Iron(II)
Enzymes. Eur. J. Biochem. 1997, 250, 625–629.
(6) Arciero, D. M.; Lipscomb, J. D. Binding of 17O-Labeled Substrate
and Inhibitors to Protocatechuate 4,5-Dioxygenase-Nitrosyl Com-
plex. Evidence for Direct Substrate Binding to the Active Site Fe2+
of Extradiol Dioxygenases. J. Biol. Chem. 1986, 261, 2170–2178.
(7) Shu, L.; Chiou, Y.-M.; Orville, A. M.; Miller, M. A.; Lipscomb, J. D.;
Que, L. X-Ray Absorption Spectroscopic Studies of the Fe(II) Active
Site of Catechol 2,3-Dioxygenase. Implications for the Extradiol
Cleavage Mechanism. Biochemistry 1995, 34, 6649–6659.
(8) Vetting, M. W.; Wackett, L. P.; Que, L., Jr.; Lipscomb, J. D.;
Ohlendorf, D. H. Crystallographic Comparison of Manganese- and
Iron-Dependent Homoprotocatechuate 2,3-Dioxygenases. J. Bac-
teriol. 2004, 186, 1945–1958.
(9) Vaillancourt, F. H.; Barbosa, C. J.; Spiro, T. G.; Bolin, J. T.; Blades,
M. W.; Turner, R. F. B.; Eltis, L. D. Definitive Evidence for Monoan-
ionic Binding of 2,3-Dihydroxybiphenyl to 2,3-Dihydroxybiphenyl
1,2-Dioxygenase from UV Resonance Raman Spectroscopy, UV/
Vis Absorption Spectroscopy, and Crystallography. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 2002, 124, 2485–2496.
FIGURE 11. Molecular sieve model for the methane selectivity of
MMOH. Adapted from ref 42.
O2 Activation Pathways of Non-Heme Iron Oxygenases Kovaleva et al.
482 ACCOUNTS OF CHEMICAL RESEARCH / VOL. 40, NO. 7, 2007
(10) Groce, S. L.; Miller-Rodeberg, M. A.; Lipscomb, J. D. Single-
Turnover Kinetics of Homoprotocatechuate 2,3-Dioxygenase. Bio-
chemistry 2004, 43, 15141–15153.
(11) Groce, S. L.; Lipscomb, J. D. Aromatic Ring Cleavage by Homopro-
tocatechuate 2,3-Dioxygenase: Role of His200 in the Kinetics of
Interconversion of Reaction Cycle Intermediates. Biochemistry
2005, 44, 7175–7188.
(12) Roelfes, G.; Vrajmasu, V.; Chen, K.; Ho, R. Y. N.; Rohde, J.-U.;
Zondervan, C.; La Crois, R. M.; Schudde, E. P.; Lutz, M.; Spek, A. L.;
Hage, R.; Feringa, B. L.; Münck, E.; Que, L., Jr. End-on and Side-
on Peroxo Derivatives of Non-Heme Iron Complexes with Penta-
dentate Ligands: Models for Putative Intermediates in Biological
Iron/Dioxygen Chemistry. Inorg. Chem. 2003, 42, 2639–2653.
(13) Hajdu, J.; Neutze, R.; Sjogren, T.; Edman, K.; Szoke, A.; Wilmouth,
R.; Wilmot, C. M. Analyzing Protein Functions in Four Dimensions.
Nat. Struct. Biol. 2000, 7, 1006–1012.
(14) Kovaleva, E. G.; Lipscomb, J. D. Crystal Structures of Fe2+
Dioxygenase Superoxo, Alkylperoxo, and Bound Product Interme-
diates. Science 2007, 316, 453–457.
(15) Karlsson, A.; Parales, J. V.; Parales, R. E.; Gibson, D. T.; Eklund,
H.; Ramaswamy, S. Crystal Structure of Naphthalene Dioxygenase:
Side-on Binding of Dioxygen to Iron. Science 2003, 299, 1039–1042.
(16) Gibson, D. T. Microbial Metabolism of Aromatic Hydrocarbons and
the Carbon Cycle. In Microbial Metabolism and the Carbon Cycle;
Hagedorn, S. R., Hanson, R. S., Kunz, D. A., Eds.; Harwood
Academic Publishers: Chur, Switzerland, 1988; pp 33–58.
(17) Kauppi, B.; Lee, K.; Carredano, E.; Parales, R. E.; Gibson, D. T.;
Eklund, H.; Ramaswamy, S. Structure of an Aromatic-Ring-Hy-
droxylating Dioxygenase-Naphthalene 1,2-Dioxygenase. Structure
1998, 6, 571–586.
(18) Carredano, E.; Karlsson, A.; Kauppi, B.; Choudhury, D.; Parales,
R. E.; Parales, J. V.; Lee, K.; Gibson, D. T.; Eklund, H.; Ramaswamy,
S. Substrate Binding Site of Naphthalene 1,2-Dioxygenase: Func-
tional Implications of Indole Binding. J. Mol. Biol. 2000, 296, 701–
712.
(19) Wolfe, M. D.; Parales, J. V.; Gibson, D. T.; Lipscomb, J. D. Single
Turnover Chemistry and Regulation of O2 Activation by the
Oxygenase Component of Naphthalene 1,2-Dioxygenase. J. Biol.
Chem. 2001, 276, 1945–1953.
(20) Tarasev, M.; Ballou, D. P. Chemistry of the Catalytic Conversion
of Phthalate into Its cis-Dihydrodiol During the Reaction of Oxygen
with the Reduced Form of Phthalate Dioxygenase. Biochemistry
2005, 44, 6197–6207.
(21) Wolfe, M. D.; Altier, D. J.; Stubna, A.; Popescu, C. V.; Münck, E.;
Lipscomb, J. D. Benzoate 1,2-Dioxygenase from Pseudomonas
putida: Single Turnover Kinetics and Regulation of a Two-
Component Rieske Dioxygenase. Biochemistry 2002, 41, 9611–
9626.
(22) Gassner, G. T.; Ballou, D. P.; Landrum, G. A.; Whittaker, J. W.
Magnetic Circular Dichroism Studies on the Mononuclear Ferrous
Active Site of Phthalate Dioxygenase from Pseudomonas cepacia
Show a Change of Ligation State on Substrate Binding. Biochem-
istry 1993, 32, 4820–4825.
(23) Pavel, E. G.; Martins, L. J.; Ellis, W. R., Jr.; Solomon, E. I. Magnetic
Circular Dichroism Studies of Exogenous Ligand and Substrate
Binding to the Non-Heme Ferrous Active Site in Phthalate Dioxy-
genase. Chem. Biol. 1994, 1, 173–183.
(24) Yang, T.-C.; Wolfe, M. D.; Neibergall, M. B.; Mekmouche, Y.;
Lipscomb, J. D.; Hoffman, B. M. Substrate Binding to NO-Ferro-
Naphthalene 1,2-Dioxygenase Studied by High-Resolution Q-Band
Pulsed 2H-ENDOR Spectroscopy. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2003, 125,
7056–7066.
(25) Martins, B. M.; Svetlitchnaia, T.; Dobbek, H. 2-Oxoquinoline 8-Mo-
nooxygenase Oxygenase Component: Active Site Modulation by
Rieske-[2Fe-2S] Center Oxidation/Reduction. Structure 2005, 13,
817–824.
(26) Wolfe, M. D.; Lipscomb, J. D. Hydrogen Peroxide-Coupled cis-Diol
Formation Catalyzed by Naphthalene 1,2-Dioxygenase. J. Biol.
Chem. 2003, 278, 829–835.
(27) Neibergall, M. B.; Stubna, A.; Mekmouche, Y.; Münck, E.; Lipscomb,
J. D. Hydrogen Peroxide Dependent cis-Dihydroxylation of Ben-
zoate by Fully Oxidized Benzoate 1,2-Dioxygenase. Biochemistry
2007, 46, in press.
(28) Neese, F.; Solomon, E. I. Detailed Spectroscopic and Theoretical
Studies on [Fe(EDTA)(O2)]
3-: Electronic Structure of the Side-on
Ferric-Peroxide Bond and Its Relevance to Reactivity. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 1998, 120, 12829–12848.
(29) Wallar, B. J.; Lipscomb, J. D. Dioxygen Activation by Enzymes
Containing Binuclear Non-Heme Iron Clusters. Chem. Rev. 1996,
96, 2625–2657.
(30) Resnick, S. M.; Lee, K.; Gibson, D. T. Diverse Reactions Catalyzed
by Naphthalene Dioxygenase from Pseudomonas sp. Strain NCIB
9816. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 1996, 17, 438–457.
(31) Chakrabarty, S.; Austin, R. N.; Deng, D.; Groves, J. T.; Lipscomb,
J. D. Radical Intermediates in Monooxygenase Reactions of Rieske
Dioxygenases. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2007, 129, 3514–3515.
(32) Baik, M.-H.; Newcomb, M.; Friesner, R. A.; Lippard, S. J. Mecha-
nistic Studies on the Hydroxylation of Methane by Methane
Monooxygenase. Chem. Rev. 2003, 103, 2385–2419.
(33) Lee, S.-K.; Nesheim, J. C.; Lipscomb, J. D. Transient Intermediates
of the Methane Monooxygenase Catalytic Cycle. J. Biol. Chem.
1993, 268, 21569–21577.
(34) Lee, S.-K.; Lipscomb, J. D. Oxygen Activation Catalyzed by Methane
Monooxygenase Hydroxylase Component: Proton Delivery During
the O–O Bond Cleavage Steps. Biochemistry 1999, 38, 4423–4432.
(35) Shu, L.; Nesheim, J. C.; Kauffmann, K.; Münck, E.; Lipscomb, J. D.;
Que, L., Jr. An Fe(IV)2O2 Diamond Core Structure for the Key
Intermediate Q of Methane Monooxygenase. Science 1997, 275,
515–518.
(36) Brazeau, B. J.; Lipscomb, J. D. Kinetics and Activation Thermody-
namics of Methane Monooxygenase Compound Q Formation and
Reaction with Substrates. Biochemistry 2000, 39, 13503–13515.
(37) Beauvais, L. G.; Lippard, S. J. Reactions of the Diiron(IV) Intermedi-
ate Q in Soluble Methane Monooxygenase with Fluoromethanes.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2005, 338, 262–266.
(38) Zhang, J.; Wallar, B. J.; Popescu, C. V.; Renner, D. B.; Thomas,
D. D.; Lipscomb, J. D. Methane Monooxygenase Hydroxylase and
B Component Interactions. Biochemistry 2006, 45, 2913–2926.
(39) Wallar, B. J.; Lipscomb, J. D. Methane Monooxygenase Component
B Mutants Alter the Kinetics of Steps Throughout the Catalytic
Cycle. Biochemistry 2001, 40, 2220–2233.
(40) Brazeau, B. J.; Wallar, B. J.; Lipscomb, J. D. Unmasking of
Deuterium Kinetic Isotope Effects on the Methane Monooxygenase
Compound Q Reaction by Site-Directed Mutagenesis of Compo-
nent B. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2001, 123, 10421–10422.
(41) Brazeau, B. J.; Lipscomb, J. D. Key Amino Acid Residues in the
Regulation of Soluble Methane Monooxygenase Catalysis by
Component B. Biochemistry 2003, 42, 5618–5631.
(42) Zheng, H.; Lipscomb, J. D. Regulation of Methane Monooxygenase
Catalysis Based on Size Exclusion and Quantum Tunneling. Bio-
chemistry 2006, 45, 1685–1692.
AR700052V
O2 Activation Pathways of Non-Heme Iron Oxygenases Kovaleva et al.
VOL. 40, NO. 7, 2007 / ACCOUNTS OF CHEMICAL RESEARCH 483
