ORI GI N AL A R T IC L E
Cognitive Reactivity, Suicidal Ideation and Future
Fluency: Preliminary Investigation of a Differential
Activation Theory of Hopelessness/Suicidality
J. M. G. Williams Æ A. J. W. Van der Does Æ T. Barnhofer Æ
C. Crane Æ Z. S. Segal
Published online: 10 April 2007
 Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2007
Abstract The authors investigated whether the re-emergence of hopeless/suicidal
cognitions over time can be explained within a differential activation framework.
Studies 1 (N = 146) and 2 (N = 136) showed that individuals who reported suicidal
ideation when depressed in the past had higher scores on the hopelessness/suicidality
subscale of a measure assessing cognitive reactivity to low mood, the LEIDS. Study 3
(N = 32) demonstrated that self-reports on this subscale predicted changes in gener-
ativity for positive future events, an experimental measure of processes underlying
hopelessness/suicidality, following sad mood induction. The results provide preliminary
evidence that history of suicidal ideation is related to a specific cognitive response
pattern, which may be reactivated by mild fluctuations in mood.
Keywords Depression  Suicide  Recurrence 
Cognitive reactivity  Rumination  Hopelessness 
Future thinking  Vulnerability  Differential activation theory
Introduction
Long-term follow-up studies have shown that recovered depressed patients are at high
risk for recurrences (Mueller et al., 1999). Furthermore, evidence suggests that later
episodes of depression require less activation from negative life events than earlier
J. M. G. Williams (&)  T. Barnhofer  C. Crane
Department of Psychiatry,
Oxford University, Warneford Hospital, Warneford Lane, Oxford OX3 7JX, UK
e-mail: mark.williams@psych.ox.ac.uk
A. J. W. Van der Does
Department of Psychology, Leiden University, Leiden, Netherlands
Z. S. Segal
Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
Cogn Ther Res (2008) 32:83–104
DOI 10.1007/s10608-006-9105-y
123
episodes - in other words, sensitization may occur (Kendler, Thornton & Gardner, 2000;
Post, 1992; Mitchell, Parker, Gladstone, Wilhelm, & Austin, 2003). From a cognitive
science perspective, it has been suggested that sensitization (and increased risk of
relapse and recurrence) is brought about by increased cognitive reactivity to small
changes in depressed mood (Segal, Williams, Teasdale & Gemar, 1996). Cognitive
reactivity has been defined as the relative ease with which maladaptive cognitions or
cognitive styles are triggered by mild (non-pathological) mood fluctuations (see Ingram,
Miranda & Segal, 1998; Segal & Ingram, 1994). Such reactivity is assumed to be the
observable result of an underlying differential activation process that has occurred over
the learning history of the individual.
This article investigates whether the same mechanisms that underlie vulnerability to
relapse and recurrence in depression in general may extend to hopelessness and
suicidality in particular. Of all the symptoms of depression, hopelessness and suicidal
ideation are characterized by some of the most negative global self-referent cognitions
(Orbach, Mikulincer, Sirota, & Gilboa-Schechtman, 2003). As such, hopeless and
suicidal cognitions are prototypical for the kind of thinking patterns shown to be subject
to differential activation. We are interested in this question because suicidal ideation is
one of the most serious symptoms of depression. Epidemiological surveys suggest that
around 25% of people who meet criteria for current depression in the community
experience suicidal ideation as part of their depression (Goldney, Wilson, Del Grande,
Fisher & McFarlane, 2000), and the rate of suicide ideation in depressed in-patients is
around 50% (Mann, Waternaux, Haas & Malone, 1999).
Several factors have been found to increase risk for suicidal ideation and behavior:
gender (being male increases risk for completed suicide, being female increases risk for
attempted suicide), lower socio-economic status, previous psychiatric disorder, the
number of different psychiatric diagnoses and presence of previous suicide attempts
(Kessler, Borges, & Walters, 1999; see Joiner & Rudd, 2000a, and Hawton & van
Heeringen, 2000 for reviews). However, knowledge of these risk factors is inadequate
for predicting suicidal ideation and behavior in the individual case (Beautrais, 2004;
Pokorny, 1993). Further, for the purposes of developing treatments to reduce risk of
suicide, each of these factors is largely irrelevant, since they are either historical or
sociodemographic, and so cannot be modified by treatment. The development of better
treatment strategies is dependent upon better knowledge of the risk mechanisms; that is
how these historical or demographic factors act on the individual in the present to
produce suicidal reactions to current crises.
A recent study comparing formerly depressed patients with and without a history of
suicidal ideation during past episodes of depression (Williams, Barnhofer, Crane &
Beck, 2005), found that previously suicidal participants showed significant decreases in
interpersonal problem-solving ability following induction of sad mood. By contrast,
problem-solving performance in those without a history of suicidal ideation remained
relatively unchanged. These data suggest that small changes in mood may reinstate
cognitive deficits that are thought to contribute to escalation of suicidal crises. This
article is concerned with whether hopelessness, another established vulnerability factor
which very frequently co-occurs with suicidal ideation, is subject to similar processes of
reactivation.
Previous research has found that hopelessness is a critical factor in increasing the risk
of suicidal behavior (Salter & Platt, 1990; Wetzel, Margulies, Davis, & Karam, 1980).
Hopelessness is closely associated with whether individuals feel they have any reasons
for living (Linehan, Goodstein, Nielsen, & Chiles, 1983; Malone, Oquendo, Haas, Ellis,
123
84 Cogn Ther Res (2008) 32:83–104
Li, & Mann, 2000; Mann et al., 1999) and predicts both repetition of suicide attempts
(Mann et al., 1999; Petrie, Chamberlain, & Clarke, 1988; Scott, House, Yates, &
Harrington, 1997; Sidley, Calam, Wells, Hughes, & Whitaker, 1999; Szanto, Reynolds,
Conwell, Begley, & Houck, 1998) and completed suicides up to 10 years later (Beck &
Steer, 1989; Beck, Brown, Berchick, Stewart, & Steer, 1990; Fawcett et al., 1990).
However, the stability of hopelessness over time remains unclear. Although it is
established that those with a history of self harm have higher hopelessness levels before
and after episodes of acute psychiatric illness (Mann et al., 1999; Young, Fogg,
Scheftner, Fawcett, Akiskal, & Maser, 1996), there is evidence that hopelessness levels
increase during the acute episode and diminish over the next few days (Schotte, Cools &
Payvar, 1990; Young et al., 1996). The question is whether such increases in
hopelessness are simply a reaction to the negative life events that are almost always
present in the recent history of those who attempt suicide (Hawton, Fagg, Simkin, Bale,
& Bond, 1997; Paykel, Prusoff, & Myers, 1975), or whether there is an underlying factor
that reflects a latent predisposition to react with hopeless cognitions to even relatively
mild changes in mood. While the finding that problem-solving deteriorates following
mild mood changes in formerly suicidal individuals is consistent with the idea of latent
vulnerability, this might not necessarily be the case for hopelessness. Doubts are raised
by a study from Young et al. (1996), who found that suicidal behavior was predicted by
levels of hopelessness during remission, but not by hopelessness sensitivity, which was
defined as the rate of increase from baseline levels during relapse into a full episode of
depression. However, their study was focused on predicting suicide attempts by changes
in hopelessness in a clinically referred sample of depressed patients. We are interested
in whether hopelessness and suicidality are subject to differential activation in a less
severe population with a history of previous depression with or without a history of
suicidal ideation.
The differential activation model of cognitive reactivity suggests that hopelessness
and suicidal ideation originally arise as features of negative thinking during early
episodes of depression. During these episodes an association is formed between
depressed mood and hopelessness/suicidal ideation such that future depressed mood,
however caused, will activate these patterns of thinking (Joiner, 2002; Joiner & Rudd,
2000b). In this way, hopelessness/suicidality becomes part of a ‘configuration’ of
associations and feedback loops within the information-processing system: it enters the
‘rehearsal pool’ that is activated with each subsequent episode of depression. After
several such episodes, the subsequent return of mood acts as the ‘re-instatement’ of a
context, similar to the processes observed in renewal of CS-CR links in animal
conditioning studies (Bouton, 2002).
In summary, the differential activation model suggests that it is not the resting level of
hopeless/suicidal cognitions that is important in rendering someone vulnerable to future
suicidal crises. Rather, it is the ease with which these patterns of thinking can be
activated that is important.
The differential activation theory of recurrence for depression has most frequently
been investigated in patients once they have recovered using an experimental
manipulation to ‘prime’ their mood. Such studies have used a variety of measures to
assess the shift towards depressogenic thinking following mood induction, most
commonly the Dysfunctional Attitudes Scale (DAS; Weissman, 1979), but also
information processing tasks (such as tests of memory bias, dichotic listening, or the
Stroop test). Although some of these studies have not replicated the finding of increased
reactivity in previously depressed patients (e.g., Dykman, 1997) the balance of evidence
123
Cogn Ther Res (2008) 32:83–104 85
finds cognitive vulnerability following priming (e.g., Ingram & Ritter, 2000; Miranda,
Gross, Persons & Hahn, 1998; Taylor & Ingram, 1999; Van der Does, 2002a). In two
studies, high cognitive reactivity in dysfunctional attitudes, assessed following mood
priming, predicted relapse and recurrence (Segal, Gemar and Williams, 1999; Segal
et al., 2003; see Lau, Segal & Williams, 2004 for review).
Recently it has been suggested that, in addition to using a mood challenge, important
components of cognitive reactivity, especially the habitual pattern of responses that
individuals tend to display when mood deteriorates, may be assessed by questionnaire.
In two studies, the Leiden Index of Depression Sensitivity (LEIDS) was found to
distinguish those who had, from those who had not experienced depression in the past
(Van der Does, 2002a; Van der Does, 2005). In both these studies DAS scores were
equivalent across groups.
The LEIDS follows the example of other questionnaires that assess vulnerability (for
example, the Anxiety Sensitivity Index, Peterson & Reiss, 1992), by asking conditional
questions. Participants respond with how they would feel and think if they were to
experience a low mood. Importantly, the LEIDS scale has not only been found to
distinguish between previously depressed and never depressed people, but also to
predict amount of change in Dysfunctional Attitude Scale scores following a mood
challenge (Van der Does, 2002a).
To examine suicidal reactivity, Studies 1 and 2, used the revised version of the LEIDS
(Van der Does, 2002a; Van der Does & Williams, 2003), which includes a hopelessness/
suicidality subscale. This subscale measures the extent to which individuals report that
they feel hopeless and have thoughts about death and suicide when they experience
dysphoria. Although it is a self-report measure, it allows us to begin to examine to what
extent this reactivity pattern is specific to history of suicidal ideation. The extent of such
specificity can be investigated from two perspectives. First, while those who have been
suicidal when last depressed may be reactive in several respects, previous suicidality
should be most closely related to hopelessness/suicidal reactivity. If suicidality when
depressed were found to be significantly associated with higher ratings of reactivity on
all the LEIDS subscales (e.g., perfectionism), then we should conclude that previous
within-episode suicidality is simply a marker of higher levels of cognitive reactivity in
general. Second, the presence or absence of other symptoms that occurred during the
past depressive episode, such as sleep or appetite disturbance, should not be
systematically related to degree of hopelessness/suicidal reactivity. If we were to find
that hopelessness/suicidal reactivity on the LEIDS was associated with the presence of
all or most symptoms of depression, we should conclude that this subscale of the LEIDS
was simply a measure of the extent or severity of past depressive episodes. We report
analyses for both aspects of specificity. Since hopelessness/suicidal reactivity has not
been examined before, we examined the data both through overall analyses of variance,
looking, for example, for the interaction between presence and absence of suicidality
during a past episode and the different sub-scales of reactivity, and also carrying out
hypothesis-driven (pre-planned) comparisons of the effect of previous suicidality on
particular sub-scales of reactivity.
Study 1 reports data from a cross-sectional study of non-depressed undergraduates,
examining the association between reports of past suicidality (when depressed) and the
endorsement of both hopelessness and suicidality items on the LEIDS. Study 2
examines this pattern in a community sample, adding to the first study by examining
data on prior history of depression that had been obtained 6 years earlier to see if it also
predicted current cognitive reactivity on LEIDS hopelessness/suicidality.
123
86 Cogn Ther Res (2008) 32:83–104
Both Studies 1 and 2 rely on participants’ self-report both for past history and for
current reactivity. Study 3 therefore tests the hypothesis that, when given an
experimental mood challenge, high scorers on the LEIDS hopelessness/suicidality scale
would show a different pattern of activation from low scorers, using a task that does not
rely on self-report. Experimental work derived from Tversky and Kahneman’s (1973)
availability heuristic strongly suggests that the experience of hopelessness, as with other
judgments under uncertainty, is critically related to the fluency with which individuals
are able to generate instances of relevant future events (see MacLeod, 1999 for review).
In a series of studies MacLeod and colleagues have used a future fluency task in which
participants are asked in alternating order to produce as many positive or negative
events as possible that may happen to them during certain time periods in the future
(e.g., week, month, year, 5–10 years). Results of these studies demonstrate that
hopelessness is significantly associated with lack of fluency for positive events while
there are usually no relations with fluency for negative events (MacLeod & Byrne, 1996;
MacLeod & Cropley, 1995; MacLeod, Pankhania, Lee, & Mitchell, 1997; MacLeod,
Rose, & Williams, 1993; O’Connor, 2003). Further, low positive future fluency is
particularly pronounced in suicidal patients (e.g., MacLeod et al., 1997) Given these
findings, future fluency was chosen to be the most appropriate paradigm to investigate
whether LEIDS hopelessness/suicidality would predict actual reactivity in processes
related to or underlying hopelessness/suicidality.
All studies were approved by the relevant Ethics Committees, and all participants
gave informed consent to participate.
Study 1
The first aim of Study 1 was to test the hypothesis that suicide ideation during a past
episode of depression will predict a pattern of increased hopelessness/suicidal reactivity,
as assessed by the LEIDS in individuals when they are not currently depressed.
Method
Participants
Participants in this study were undergraduate (first year) psychology students. They
filled in questionnaires during a mass testing session in November, which was before
they had taken any course in psychopathology. Students received course credit for
participating.
The questionnaires were administered with a number of other measures that were
unrelated to the present research. Participants spent approximately 35 min filling out
the questionnaires.
Measures
Depression diagnosis. The presence of current and past depression was assessed with a
self-report measure, the Major Depression Questionnaire (MDQ) (Van der Does,
Barnhofer, & Williams, 2003). The measure consists of a series of questions that cover
all DSM-IV diagnostic criteria for current and past major depression (American
Psychiatric Association, 1994), including impact on functioning and exclusion criteria
123
Cogn Ther Res (2008) 32:83–104 87
(e.g., mourning). Consistency of this questionnaire with diagnoses based on SCID
interviews was examined in a sample of 39 individuals. All of the 19 individuals who
received a diagnosis based on the interview, and 15 of the 20 individuals who did not
receive a diagnosis were correctly identified by MDQ self-ratings (Sensitivity of
MDQ = 100%, Specificity = 75%, Positive Predictive Value = 79%; Negative Predictive
Value = 100%; overall kappa = .75).
Depressive symptoms. The 21-item Beck Depression Inventory—2nd edition (BDI-II;
Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996) was used to assess current (past 2 weeks) level of
depressive symptoms. The Dutch translation was used (Van der Does, 2002b).
Cognitive reactivity. The Leiden Index of Depression Sensitivity (LEIDS; Van der
Does, 2002a) is a self-report measure of cognitive reactivity to sad mood. The scale has
been found to discriminate between never-depressed and recovered-depressed individ-
uals (Van der Does, 2002a). Recently, a revised version has been developed that has 34
items and six subscales (Van der Does & Williams, 2003). The names of the subscales,
and sample items are: Hopelessness/Suicidality (HOP: When I feel down, I more often
feel hopeless about everything; When I feel sad, I feel more that people would be better
off if I were dead); Acceptance/Coping (ACC: When I am sad, I feel more like myself);
Aggression (AGG: When I feel down, I lose my temper more easily); Control/
Perfectionism (CTR: When in a sad mood, I become more bothered by perfectionism);
Harm Avoidance (HAV: When I feel down, I take fewer risks); Rumination (RUM:
When I feel sad, I spend more time thinking about the possible causes of my moods).
Internal consistencies of the subscales ranged from a = .64 for Acceptance/Coping to
a = .84 for Hopelessness/Suicidality.
Results
Participants
The questionnaires were filled out by 146 participants. Of these, 24 reported depressive
symptoms on the MDQ suggestive of a full episode and were excluded. The
characteristics of the remaining sample of 122 participants are listed in Table 1.
Thirty-six participants reported past symptoms fulfilling diagnostic criteria for a
previous episode of depression (hereafter referred to as ‘probable diagnoses’ in Studies
1 and 2 to reflect the fact that diagnoses were made on the basis of questionnaire only),
another six reported having had at least five symptoms over a period of less than
Table 1 Gender distribution and means and standard deviations for age and BDI scores
Past depression
Yes No
Study 1
N (female/male) 36 (31/5) 80 (69/11)
Age 19.7 (3.7) 19.1 (3.7)
BDI-II 11.1 (9.3) 6.4 (5.9)
Study 2
N (female/male) 63 (36/27) 57 (32/25)
Age 46.7 (7.0) 49.5 (6.6)
BDI-II 8.5 (5.2) 5.6 (5.2)
123
88 Cogn Ther Res (2008) 32:83–104
2 weeks, and 80 participants reported having never been depressed. Eighty-three
percent were women, and the male/female ratio was equivalent in the never-depressed
and previously depressed groups (v2(1) = .00; ns). There was no significant difference in
mean age, but groups differed significantly in their BDI-II scores, t (114) = 3.24, P < .01.
Analyses, therefore, followed up significant findings with ANCOVAs using BDI scores
as a covariate.
Cognitive reactivity and history of suicidality
The first hypothesis to be examined was that individuals with a history of suicidal
ideation during an episode of depressed mood would differ significantly from those with
episodes of depressed mood without suicidal ideation only with respect to levels of
hopelessness/suicidal reactivity on the LEIDS. For this purpose two groups of
participants were created: those who reported the presence of one or both of the core
symptoms of MDD for a period of at least 2 weeks and who also reported being suicidal
at this time versus those who did not report being suicidal during such an episode of
depressed mood. Scores on each subscale of the LEIDS were compared between these
groups. Table 2 shows significance levels after co-varying out current depression levels
(BDI). The Hopelessness/Suicidality subscale was markedly higher in people who had
reported suicidal ideation (P < .001). Scores on the other subscales of the LEIDS did
not differ significantly. In other words, those who reported having been suicidal during a
past episode of depressed mood reported pronounced elevation of one aspect of
cognitive reactivity, hopelessness/suicidality. This finding also remained significant when
differences were tested with number of symptoms (except suicidality) during the past
index episode of depression entered as a covariate, F (2, 65) = 5.50, P = .02, suggesting
that this effect is not due to differences in severity of previous depression. The same
pattern of findings was obtained when analyses were based on sub-groups of previously
and never-suicidal participants constructed to match exactly for current BDI scores
(n = 13, BDI: M = 5.00 in both groups), F (1, 24) = 6.41, P < .05, for Hopelessness/
Suicidality, all other scales P > .10.
Table 2 Means and Standard Deviations of LEIDS subscale and total scores by absence/presence of
suicidal ideation in currently non-depressed individuals
LEIDS Scores
HOP ACC AGG CTR HAV RUM
Study 1
Suicidal thoughts
No (n = 46) 4.80 (3.32) 1.47 (1.77) 9.32 (3.95) 6.76 (3.71) 9.39 (3.68) 10.86 (4.47)
Yes (n = 22) 11.34 (6.12)*** 2.72 (3.24) 10.14 (5.30) 7.90 (4.69) 10.22 (4.94) 12.27 (5.06)
Study 2
Suicidal thoughts
No (n = 44) 4.59 (3.22) 2.55 (2.87) 7.16 (4.57) 7.57 (4.22) 10.64 (4.75) 11.41 (4.80)
Yes (n = 51) 7.59 (4.93)** 2.73 (2.75) 8.25 (5.01) 8.35 (4.22) 12.12 (3.79) 13.06 (4.73)
Note. HOP = Hopelessness; ACC = Acceptance/coping; AGG = Aggression; CTR = control/
perfectionism; HAV = Harm avoidance; RUM = rumination; TTL = total LEIDS score. Asterisks
denote significant differences in ANCOVAs with BDI scores (study 1) or age and BDI scores as
covariates (study 2)
** P < .01; *** P < .001
123
Cogn Ther Res (2008) 32:83–104 89
In order to further investigate this difference with regard to the two components of the
LEIDS hopelessness/suicidality scale, we constructed separate subscales based on the 3
items referring to suicidal thoughts and the 2 items referring to hopelessness, respectively.
Internal consistencies of these subscales were a = .88 for the suicidality component and
a = .52 for the hopelessness component; the two subscales correlated r = .51, P < .01.
Simple ANOVAs showed that participants with and without a history of suicidal ideation
differed significantly in their tendency to respond with hopelessness (previously suicidal:
M = 4.45, SD = 2.01; non-suicidal: M = 3.15, SD = 1.78; F (1, 66) = 7.26, P < .01) as well
as their tendency to respond with suicidal thoughts (previously suicidal: M = 5.00,
SD = 3.71; non-suicidal: M = .84, SD = 1.72; F (1, 66) = 39.94, P = .001).
A repeated measures ANOVA with z-transformed scores on the hopelessness
subscale and the five LEIDS sub-scales assessing other aspects of reactivity as within-
and group (history vs. no history of suicidal ideation) as between-subjects factor yielded
a significant main effect for group, F (1, 66) = 5.7, P < .05, but no significant group by
sub-scale interaction, F (4.2, 277.3) = .82, P > .10, suggesting that the difference in
hopelessness reactivity did not represent a significant deviation from the general trend
of higher reactivity in the group reporting previous suicidality. However, as a further
investigation of the degree of specificity of the link between prior suicidality and
hopelessness reactivity, we carried out an analysis of covariance, testing the predicted
difference in hopelessness reactivity with each other sub-scale covaried separately. We
found that, in each case, difference on hopelessness reactivity remained significant (all
P < .05).
The second hypothesis to be examined was that it is only the presence of past suicidal
ideation that is related to current levels of suicidal reactivity. In order to test this
hypothesis, we compared suicidal reactivity in groups defined on the basis of presence or
absence of each of the symptoms of depression in turn. Depressed mood and anhedonia
were not used as grouping variables since selection of participants for analysis was
contingent on presence of one or both of these core symptoms of depression. Table 3
shows the means (SDs) of LEIDS Hopelessness/Suicidality scores of participants in each
of these groups. Of all the other non-core symptoms of depression, only ‘guilt’
significantly predicted suicidal reactivity. Again, significant results were followed-up
with ANOVAs using BDI scores as a covariate. Results showed that presence of
suicidality when depressed was associated with significantly higher score on the LEIDS
Hopelessness/Suicidality scale even when BDI was entered as covariate in the model.
Discussion
The results of Study 1 are consistent with a differential activation model of
hopelessness/suicidal ideation: individuals who had experienced suicidal thoughts when
depressed in the past had higher scores on the LEIDS subscale Hopelessness/Suicidality
than individuals who did not have these thoughts when depressed. This finding was
based on both differences in reactivation of hopelessness and differences in suicidal
thoughts and maintained when current level of depression (BDI) was entered as a
covariate. Although differences in hopelessness reactivity did not significantly deviate
from a general trend of higher reactivity in the previously suicidal group, none of the
other LEIDS scales significantly discriminated between groups. The data are consistent
with the hypothesis that hopeless/suicidality is triggered by mild dysphoria in individuals
who have experienced suicidal thoughts when depressed in the past.
123
90 Cogn Ther Res (2008) 32:83–104
However, this study has a number of limitations. First, the assessment of past
depressive symptoms and cognitive reactivity was based on self-report with both
measures administered at the same testing session. Therefore it remains possible that
the participants, when asked on the LEIDS how they might react if they were in a sad
mood, were simply remembering what they said on the MDQ a few minutes before. The
fact that this pattern was shown on both the suicidal and hopelessness aspects of the
LEIDS Hopelessness/Suicidality subscale when examined separately provides some
reassurance that participants are not simply responding to questions on the same issue
(past and present suicidal ideation) in the same way due to the overlap in content of the
two measures. However, collecting data on past and present mental state at the same
testing session remains suboptimal and does increase risk of demand effects.
Second, the study involved undergraduate students, and while they have high rates of
depression and suicidality (rates comparable to the present study are reported by Cox,
Enns, Borger, & Parker, 1999; Hawton & James 2005, and Lewinsohn, Hops, Roberts,
Seeley, & Andrews, 1993), there may be significant differences between individuals who
experience a first onset of depression during late adolescence or young adulthood and
those with onset of depression in later life.
Study 2
Study 2 addressed limitations of Study 1 by relating current LEIDS scores to
information about history of depression collected several years prior to completion of
the LEIDS in a community sample of middle-aged adults.
Table 3 Means (Standard Deviations) of LEIDS Suicidality/Hopelessness scores by absence/presence of
prior symptoms of depression in currently non-depressed individuals
Symptoms of Depression
Weight
change
Sleep Retardation/
Agitation
Fatigue Concen-
tration
Guilt Suicidal
Ideation
Study 1
No
M 6.62 (5.2) 6.4 (3.9) 5.63 (4.9) 6.00 (5.3) 6.55 (4.5) 4.96 (4.4) 4.80 (3.3)
N 46 35 23 11 24 36 46
Yes
M 7.52 (5.8) 7.41 (6.6) 7.57 (5.5) 7.03 (5.4) 7.11 (5.8) 9.11(5.6) * 11.34 (6.1)***
N 22 33 45 57 44 32 22
Study 2
No
M 4.48 (3.3) 3.00 (2.3) 5.20 (7.3) 7.00 (6.0) 5.83 (6.7) 3.62 (3.2) 4.59 (3.2)
N 21 6 5 8 6 21 44
Yes
M 6.67 (4.6) 6.42 (4.5) 6.24 (4.3) 6.13 (4.3) 6.22 (4.3) 6.93 (4.5)* 7.59 (4.9)**
N 75 89 91 87 89 74 51
Note. Asterisks denote significant differences in ANCOVAs with BDI scores (study 1) or age and BDI
scores as covariates (study 2)
* P < .05; ** P < .01; *** P < .001
123
Cogn Ther Res (2008) 32:83–104 91
Method
Participants
Participants were recruited by contacting individuals who had previously participated in
a study on neuroticism and who had given their written permission to be contacted again
for participation in further research. Diagnostic information on history of depression
was available from answers to questions about symptoms from the DSM-IV criteria for
Major Depression. Prior diagnostic status was derived using the DSM-IV algorithm
except that, because it was a community-based volunteer sample, questions referred to a
period of at least 4 weeks rather than 2 weeks and loss of interest was not used as an
index criterion making diagnoses generally more conservative.
Of the 1,608 individuals that took part in the study 6 years previously, 419 had received
a prior diagnosis of Major Depression. An attempt was made to contact a similar number
of participants without depression in the past. Potential participants were contacted by
letter and asked to send back a reply form to indicate whether they might be willing to take
part in the research. Of the 707 subjects contacted, 224 (32%) indicated their willingness to
take part. These were sent a questionnaire booklet along with a stamped return envelope,
of which a final sample of 182 (81%) returned the questionnaire booklet.
Measures
Questionnaires in the booklet included the LEIDS and the BDI-II as well as several
other questionnaires unrelated to the current study. Participants were instructed to fill
out the questionnaire booklet at a quiet place at their home where they did not expect to
be disturbed for approximately 45 min.
Results
Sample characteristics
Of the 182 participants in the final sample, 62 (34.0%) reported suffering from clinically
significant levels of current symptoms of depression (BDI > 18) and were excluded from
the analyses. Of the remaining sample (N = 120), 63 participants met criteria for a prior
diagnosis of Major Depression and 57 participants had never been depressed. Charac-
teristics of the formerly depressed and never-depressed groups are shown in Table 1.
Women were overrepresented amongst those who participated, comprising 56% of the
sample. The male/female ratio did not differ significantly between formerly and never
depressed groups, v2 (1, N = 120) = .01, P > .10. However, the two groups differed
significantly in age, t (118) = 2.2, P < .05, and BDI scores, t (118) = 3.1, P < .001.
Suicidal reactivity and prior reports of suicidality
Analyses concentrated on n = 95 individuals who had reported having suffered from a
period of at least 4 weeks of depressed mood in the past whether or not they fulfilled full
diagnostic criteria over this time. First, individuals with and without suicidal ideation
during this prior episode were compared with regard to LEIDS reactivity scores. Again,
after entering age and BDI as covariates, LEIDS Hopelessness/Suicidality scores
differed significantly between these two groups, F (3, 91) = 8.37, P < .01. This finding
123
92 Cogn Ther Res (2008) 32:83–104
also remained significant when number of symptoms during the past index episode of
depression was entered as a covariate, F (2,93) = 7.92, P < .01, thus suggesting that
differences were not due to severity of past depression. None of the other LEIDS scales
yielded significant differences. The same pattern of findings emerged when differences
were tested between groups of previously and never-suicidal participants that were
exactly matched for their BDI scores (n = 30, BDI: M = 6.60 in each group), F(1,
58) = 10.05, for Hopelessness/Suicidality, all other scales P > .10.
Separate analyses of the hopelessness and suicidality components of the Hopeless-
ness/Suicidality scale showed that participants with and without a reported history of
suicidality differed both in their tendency to respond with hopelessness (previously
suicidal: M = 4.42, SD = 2.09; non-suicidal: M = 3.43, SD = 2.07; F (1, 94) = 5.40,
P = .02) and their tendency to respond with suicidal thoughts (previously suicidal:
M = 3.25, SD = 3.27; non-suicidal: M = 1.16, SD = 1.82; F (1, 94) = 14.20, P = .001).
Internal consistencies of the subscales were a = .74 for the hopelessness component and
a = .82 for the suicidality component; the two subscales correlated r = .59, P < .01.
A repeated measures ANOVA with z-transformed scores on the hopelessness
subscale and the five LEIDS scales assessing other aspects of reactivity as within- and
group (history vs. no history of suicidal ideation) as between-subjects factor did not
yield a significant interaction between LEIDS scores and group, F (3.7, 351.3) = .79,
P = .52, indicating that the size of the group difference in hopelessness reactivity did not
deviate significantly from the general trend of higher reactivity in those with previous
suicidal ideation, F (1, 93) = 3.36, P = .07. However, an analysis of covariance showed
that group differences in hopelessness reactivity remained significant when tested with
Acceptance/Coping, Aggression and Control/Perfectionism entered as covariates, all
P < .05, and were at trend level when scores on Harm Avoidance, F (1, 92) = 2.68,
P = .10, and Rumination, F (1, 92) = 2.58, P = .11, were entered as covariates.
Second, LEIDS Hopelessness/Suicidality scores were compared between groups
defined on the basis of presence or absence of non-core symptoms (see Table 3). The
pattern of results replicated Study 1. Of the other non-core symptoms of depression,
only presence or absence of worthlessness/guilt was associated with suicidal reactivity, F
(3, 91) = 6.11, P < 05.
Discussion
Study 2 replicated the findings of the first study and showed that similar results are
obtained when self-reports of hopelessness/suicidal cognitive reactivity are related to
history of depression assessed several years prior to completion of the LEIDS. The
results also indicate that the relation between past history of suicidal ideation and
current ratings of hopelessness/suicidal reactivity is generalizable to an older community
sample of volunteers.
The findings of studies 1 and 2 suggest that individuals with a history of suicidal
ideation during episodes of sad mood report higher levels of hopelessness/suicidal
reactivity during times of recovery. Is suicidal ideation when depressed in the past
simply a marker of higher levels of cognitive reactivity in general? While group
differences in hopelessness reactivity did not deviate sufficiently from other aspects of
reactivity to yield a significant group by sub-scale interaction (the strongest form of the
specificity hypothesis), nevertheless it was only the hopelessness/suicidality subscale of
the LEIDS which yielded significant differences between groups. Therefore although
the results do not support the strongest form of specificity, the results of our planned
123
Cogn Ther Res (2008) 32:83–104 93
comparisons are consistent with a weaker form of specificity: that suicidality during past
episodes was significantly linked with rating of continued reactivity in the hopelessness/
suicidality domain, and this predicted difference largely remained when other aspects of
reactivity were entered as covariates.
Furthermore, in both studies, hopelessness/suicidality reactivity was significantly
related to prior suicidal ideation, and to a lesser extent, with worthlessness/guilt. It was
not associated with other symptoms of depression.
The overall pattern of these findings is consistent with a differential activation model of
hopelessness/suicidality. However, interpretation of the results relies heavily on the
validity of the LEIDS as a measure of reactivity and the more general question of whether
it is possible to assess relevant aspects of cognitive reactivity by self-report. An underlying
assumption of cognitive reactivity models is that mood disturbance activates latent
vulnerability processes which would not be observable under neutral conditions. From this
perspective the validity of asking individuals to report on their own patterns of cognitive
reactivity when euthymic is questionable. However the rationale of the LEIDS is based on
the assumption that patterns of reactivity, although mood dependent, may become
habitual in nature and thus that individuals may be able to reflect and report upon their
patterns of reactivity to sad mood as a repeatedly appearing and characteristic response.
Although the results of Study 2 suggest that our findings are not due to a general
reporting bias at time of testing, it may still be argued that self-descriptions on the LEIDS
reflect memory for symptoms during prior episodes of depression rather than patterns of
reactivity as a habitual response to small changes in mood. A crucial question therefore is
whether LEIDS Hopelessness/Suicidality scores predict actual reactivation of behavioral
markers of hopelessness/suicidality at a later time. Experimental tests of this assumption
would involve a direct measure of processes related to the experience of hopelessness/
suicidality, using a measure that was distinct from the LEIDS in both content and method.
A series of studies by MacLeod and colleagues has shown that an important mechanism
underlying hopelessness and pronounced in parasuicide patients is the inability to
generate positive events that might occur in the future (MacLeod & Byrne, 1996;
MacLeod & Cropley, 1995; MacLeod et al., 1997; MacLeod et al., 1993; O’Connor, 2003).
In order to investigate this question a subgroup of participants from Study 2
participated in a further experimental study in which this behavioral fluency measure was
assessed before and after a negative mood induction. Based on the above findings, we
hypothesized that high scorers on the LEIDS Hopelessness/Suicidality subscale would
have greater difficulty in generating positive future events following a mood challenge.
Furthermore, as the LEIDS is designed as a measure of reactivity, correlations with
baseline levels of future fluency were expected to be low and non-significant. Finally, we
predicted no relations with change in fluency for negative events, since this is generally
found not to be associated with hopelessness (MacLeod et al., 1993; O’Connor, 2003).
Study 3
Method
Participants
The sample consisted of a subgroup of 40 participants from the local area who had
participated in Study 2 and who had agreed additionally to take part in an experimental
123
94 Cogn Ther Res (2008) 32:83–104
study on cognitive reactivity. Of the total sample, 8 participants had to be excluded from
analyses because of a current diagnosis of Major Depression (n = 4) or current
suicidality (n = 4) as assessed by clinical interview (see below). The remaining sample
(N = 32) consisted of 19 women and 13 men with an average age of M = 49.3 (SD = 6.6)
years. Current and prior diagnostic status was assessed by trained post-doctoral
psychologists using the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID, First, Spitzer,
Gibbon, & Williams, 1996). Thirteen (7 female/6 male) of the participants had
experienced an episode of depression without suicidal ideation, 5 (4 female/1 male) had
experienced an episode of depression with suicidal ideation and 14 (8 female/6 male)
participants had never been depressed. Current BDI scores in previously depressed
subjects with suicidal ideation (M = 13.6, SD = 8.7) and previously depressed subjects
without suicidal ideation (M = 10.1, SD = 5.7) were significantly higher than in
participants without a lifetime diagnosis of depression (M = 5.6, SD = 7.1; t
(30) = 2.2, P = .03). One participant had attempted suicide in the past. In terms of
previous and current treatment, ten had previous treatment with antidepressant
medication, and four were currently taking such medication. Two had been hospitalized
in the past, nine had previous psychotherapy or counseling, two had received cognitive
behavior therapy and two were currently in psychotherapy.
In terms of lifetime co-morbid diagnoses, one had prior alcohol dependence, and one
non-alcohol substance dependence; four had a history of panic disorder, three
agoraphobia, three social phobia, four specific phobia, two obsessive-compulsive
disorder, two General Anxiety Disorder, one anorexia, one bulimia. There were no
participants with a history of psychosis, nor of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, nor of
Borderline Personality Disorder.
Materials
Future Fluency Task. Future fluency was assessed before and after a mood induction.
Following the procedure described by MacLeod et al. (1997) participants were given four
time intervals (next week, next month, next year and next 5–10 years) and were asked in
alternating order to come up with as many events as they could think of, either that they
would look forward to happening (positive future events) or that they would not look
forward to happening (negative future events). All four time intervals were presented once
before and once after the mood induction with participants randomly allocated to receive
positive event instructions for two of the time intervals and negative event instructions for
the other two time intervals. For each time interval, participants were given 30 s.
Mood induction. In order to induce negative mood a combined mood induction using
sad music and Velten statements (Clark & Teasdale, 1985) was administered.
Participants listened to Prokofiev’s ‘‘Russia under the Mongolian Yoke’’ (Alexander
Nevsky Suite) played at half speed over a period of 8 min while reading a set of 32
negative Velten statements (e.g., ‘‘Everything seems futile, pointless’’ or ‘‘I get no
satisfaction from the things I do’’). Mood was measured at the beginning and end of the
mood induction and the experiment using two VAS scales on which participants
indicated how ‘‘despondent’’ and ‘‘happy’’ they felt at the moment.
Procedure
Participants had filled out the LEIDS on average 1–2 weeks prior to their appointment
for the experimental study. Testing started with the structured clinical interview. Future
123
Cogn Ther Res (2008) 32:83–104 95
Fluency was assessed before and immediately after the mood induction. Following the
experimental session, participants filled out several diagnostic questionnaires including
the Beck Depression Inventory.
Results
Mood Induction
In order to check effectiveness of the mood induction procedure, VAS scores for
despondency and happiness were subjected to separate repeated-measures ANOVAs
with time (before experiment, before mood induction, after mood induction, after
experiment) as the single within-subjects factor. Both of these analyses yielded
significant main effects (despondency: F (3, 93) = 33.1, P < .01; happiness: F
(3,93) = 31.3, P < .01). Despondency and happiness changed significantly from the
beginning to the end of the mood induction (despondency: before mood induction
M = 15.0, SD = 17.5, after mood induction: M = 35.6, SD = 24.1, MD = –20.5,
SE = 2.8, P < .01; happiness: before mood induction M = 67.0, SD = 16.3, after mood
induction: M = 44.9, SD = 17.1, MD = 22.1, SE = 2.5, P < .01) with the significant
differences from baseline levels on both scales being retained until the end of the
experimental session (despondency: end of experiment: M = 34.1, SD = 27.1,
MD = –19.0 , SE = 3.6, P < .01; happiness: end of experiment: M = 49.2, SD = 24.3,
MD = 17.7, SE = 3.7, P < 01). Mood change from the beginning to the end of the
induction was not significantly related to scores on the LEIDS Hopelessness/Suicidality
scale (Dhappiness: r = .04, p = .82; Ddespondency: r = –.16, P = .37).
LEIDS Hopelessness/Suicidality and Future Fluency
Participants produced an average of M = 7.7 (SD = 2.1) positive and M = 5.3
(SD = 2.1) negative events before and M = 5.7 (SD = 2.0) positive and M = 4.6
(SD = 2.0) negative events after the mood induction. The average LEIDS Hopelessness/
Suicidality score was M = 5.4 (SD = 4.5). Correlations between LEIDS Hopelessness/
Suicidality scores and future fluency for positive and negative events are shown in
Table 4. Consistent with the hypotheses, higher LEIDS Hopelessness/Suicidality scores
were associated with greater decreases in positive future fluency from pre to post mood
induction and lower fluency for positive events following mood induction. The
correlation between LEIDS Hopelessness/Suicidality and negative future fluency
approached significance for fluency before the mood induction and was significant for
fluency after the mood induction, but there was no relation between change in negative
future fluency and LEIDS scores. Analyses based on subscales of items referring to
hopelessness and suicidality, respectively, showed that correlations were mainly carried
by the hopelessness facet of the scale, which was significantly related to change in
positive future fluency (see Fig. 1). In contrast, the correlation between change in
positive future fluency and the suicidality subscale, though in the same direction, did not
reach significance (see Table 4).
In order to take account of baseline levels of future fluency and current symptoms of
depression, change in positive future fluency was predicted in a hierarchical regression
analysis where future fluency (pre mood induction) and BDI scores were entered into
the equation in the first and LEIDS Hopelessness/Suicidality in the second step. At step
1 baseline levels of positive future fluency proved to be a significant predictor of change
123
96 Cogn Ther Res (2008) 32:83–104
while this was not the case for scores on the BDI. LEIDS Hopelessness/Suicidality
predicted changes in positive future fluency at step 2 over and above the influence of
baseline levels and BDI scores. A summary of the hierarchical regression analysis is
given in Table 5. When similar regression analyses were run for the two facets of the
scale, the hopelessness subscale emerged as a significant predictor, b = .49, P = .001,
DR2 = .19, while this was not the case for the suicidality subscale, b = .21, P = .13,
DR2 = .04.
Finally, in order to examine the effect of co-morbid diagnoses, we computed a total
co-morbity index by summing the number of past diagnoses for each participant. Twelve
participants had a history of one co-morbid diagnosis, two individuals had two such
diagnoses, one had three and one had six. Examining the correlation of this prior history
on reactivity showed that total co-morbidity was marginally associated with LEIDS-
hopelessness (r = .31, P < .10; rho = .36, P = .04), but not with LEIDS-suicidality
(r = –.05; rho = .14). Entering co-morbidity into a partial correlation analysis of
Table 4 Intercorrelations Between LEIDS Hopelessness/Suicidality and Future Fluency Scores Pre and
Post Mood Induction (N = 32)
Positive future fluency Negative future fluency
Pre Post Pre-post Pre Post Pre-post
LEIDS Hop/Suica –.01 –.51** .40*b .34 .39* –.03
Hop –.05 –.64** .48** .35 .34 .02
Suic .01 –.31 .26 .28 .37* –.08
Note. a LEIDS Hop/Suic = LEIDS Hopelessness/Suicidality, Hop = Hopelessness items only,
Suic = Suicidality items only
b Positive correlation indicates larger reduction (pre minus post) in fluency for higher scores on LEIDS
Hop/Suic
* P < .05; ** P < .01
8.006.004.002.000.00
LEIDS Hopelessness Subscale
6.00
4.00
2.00
0.00
-2.00
-4.00
Po
si
tiv
e 
Fu
tu
re
 F
lu
en
cy
 P
re
 - 
Po
st
Fig. 1 Scatter-plot showing association between hopelessness reactivity on the LEIDS and change in
fluency of positive events following mood challenge (note, higher pre-post change scores reflect greater
deterioration in fluency performance).
123
Cogn Ther Res (2008) 32:83–104 97
LEIDS-hopelessness with change in positive future fluency made no difference to the
correlation (r = –.59; P < .001).
Discussion
The results of Study 3 support the prediction that self-reports on the LEIDS
hopelessness/suicidality scale reflect individual tendencies to respond to small changes
in mood with increases in those processes known to underlie the experience of
hopelessness. Consistent with the concept of the LEIDS as a measure of cognitive
reactivity, hopelessness/suicidality scores predicted change in positive future fluency
following mood induction over and above the influence of current symptomatology
while being unrelated to baseline levels of positive future fluency. This association was
stronger for the hopelessness aspect of the hopelessness/suicidality subscale. However
there was no significant difference between the magnitude of the correlation coefficients
between the hopelessness and suicidal reactivity items and positive future fluency
change, suggesting a similar relationship holds in both cases.
General Discussion
The present studies were designed as a preliminary test of a differential activation
model of hopelessness/suicidality. This model assumes that during previous episodes of
depression, an association is formed between depressed mood and hopeless and suicidal
cognitions establishing a response pattern that may easily be reinstated when mood
deteriorates at later times, thus increasing risk for further suicidal crises.
We investigated whether non-depressed individuals who had experienced suicidal
ideation during a past episode of depressed mood, would tend to report being more
likely to experience hopelessness and suicidal thoughts during dysphoric mood states
than individuals who had also been depressed in the past but had not experienced
suicidal ideation. The results of two separate studies supported this association: history
of suicidal ideation was significantly related to tendencies to respond to mild changes in
mood with a pattern of thinking related to suicidality. The fact that this reactivity was
shown not only in explicitly suicidal thoughts (which might have arisen through a simple
Table 5 Summary of hierarchical regression analysis for variables predicting change in future fluency for
positive events (N = 32)
Variable B SE B b
Step 1
Pos future fluency Pre .10 .17 .67**
BDI .79 .05 .28
Step 2
Pos future fluency Pre .76 .15 .65**
BDI .05 .05 .15
LEIDS Hop/Suic .19 .07 .36*
Note. R2 = .45 for step 1; (R2 = .12 for step 2 (Ps < .05). Pos Future Fluency Pre = Number of positive
future events generated before the mood induction, BDI = Beck Depression Inventory, LEIDS Hop/
Suic = LEIDS Hopelessness/Suicidality. Change in Future Fluency for Positive Events was computed as
fluency pre induction fluency minus post induction fluency, thus, leading to higher scores for higher
decreases in fluency
* P < .05; ** P < .01
123
98 Cogn Ther Res (2008) 32:83–104
confounding of predictor and criterion variables) but also on thoughts of hopelessness,
provides some reassurance that one is seeing evidence of vulnerability to react with a
relatively distinctive pattern of thinking. These relationships were found in college
students who retrospectively rated their past depressive symptoms and in an older
community-based volunteer sample from whom a depression history (including suicidal
ideation) had been obtained 6 years earlier. Findings in Study 1 and 2 were exclusively
based on self-report. The validity of these self-reports was tested in Study 3. LEIDS
Hopelessness/Suicidality scores, particularly its hopelessness aspect, predicted actual
mood-related changes in a behavioral measure underlying hopelessness and impaired in
suicidal patients, positive future fluency, while being unrelated to baseline levels of
fluency.
The findings of studies 1 and 2 contrast with the results by Young et al. (1996), who
found that hopelessness sensitivity, measured as the rate of increase of self-rated
hopelessness from baseline as a function of depression severity during relapse into a
full episode, was unrelated to later suicide attempts. Interpretation of this seeming
inconsistency is difficult, as it remains unclear how rate of increase over a period of
depression relates to measures of cognitive reactivity used in our study. Unlike the
study by Young et al., our research did not include prospective assessments of suicidal
ideation and, while findings from Study 3 established validity of LEIDS self-reports
with regard to hopelessness reactivity, no comparable evidence was gathered for self-
reports of suicidal reactivity, leaving implications with regard to later occurrences of
suicidal ideation more open. In the study by Young et al., associations between suicide
attempts and rates of increase may have been obscured if, as suggested by relations
between baseline hopelessness and suicide attempts, some of the patients at highest
risk suffered from chronically elevated levels of hopelessness even during remission,
thus, restricting their range of increase during full episodes. Furthermore, in a full
episode, self reports of hopelessness will increase in many patients due to a range of
external circumstances in addition to cognitive reactivity. The advantage of experi-
mental induction of mood in the laboratory is the possibility of observing subtle
changes that can more reliably be attributed to changes in mood, and cannot be due
to changes in life circumstances.
In interpreting our findings, a number of limitations have to be borne in mind. First,
the sample sizes were relatively small, so we must be cautious about generalizing from
these data. Response rates were also relatively low in studies 1 and 2 and the absence of
a gender difference in rates of depression suggests that these findings will require
replication in more representative samples.
Second, the hypothesis that there is specificity in patterns of hopeless/suicidal
reactivity amongst previously suicidal individuals should be regarded with caution at
this stage. The pattern of data suggested that the relation between history of
suicidality and hopelessness reactivity showed some signs of specificity, both in the
sense that other depressive symptoms, with the exception of guilt, did not predict
hopelessness reactivity, and in the sense that other aspects of the LEIDS were not
significantly predicted by a history of suicidal ideation. Further these findings
remained when previously suicidal and non-suicidal groups were exactly matched in
terms of current BDI and after controlling for the severity of past depressive episodes.
However it is possible that the study lacked the power to detect differences on the
other LEIDS subscales that might actually exist. Additionally when a more stringent
definition of specificity was tested—comparing the magnitude of group differences in
hopelessness reactivity and other aspects of cognitive reactivity—both studies failed to
123
Cogn Ther Res (2008) 32:83–104 99
produce a significant interaction of group and scale. This indicates that the magnitude
of group differences in hopelessness reactivity did not deviate significantly from the
overall pattern of differences on the other LEIDS scales, mainly due to general trends
towards higher reactivity in the previously suicidal group. Altogether, interpretation of
these results would suggest that, in individuals with previous suicidality, pronounced
increases in hopelessness reactivity are likely to be accompanied by unsystematic
increases in other aspects of reactivity, particularly ruminative and avoidant
tendencies, both of which reduced differences in hopelessness reactivity to near trend
levels when entered as covariates in Study 2 (though not Study 1). Larger samples are
needed to provide stronger tests of the uniqueness of suicidal ideation as a specific
predictor of hopelessness/suicidal reactivity and the hypothesis of specificity in
patterns of hopelessness/suicidal cognitive reactivity should, for the time being, be
interpreted with caution.
Tests of the relation between hopelessness reactivity and different symptoms of
depression revealed significant findings in both studies not only for suicidality but also
for guilt. This relation with guilt was unexpected and interpretation must, therefore,
remain speculative. It is interesting to note, however, that recent attempts at
identifying dimensional structures of depressive symptoms have highlighted the
relation between guilt and suicidality (Korszun et al., 2004). From a cognitive
perspective, guilt is likely to be an indicator of negative self-attributions that may be
similar in nature to beliefs underlying hopelessness. Both, guilt about the past and
hopelessness about the future, may contribute to a sense of entrapment that may
ultimately fuel suicidal ideation.
A third set of limitations relates to the fact that the LEIDS primarily deals with the
experience of suicidal ideation and feelings of hopelessness, rather than with
reactivation of suicidal behavior. Consistent with this, the vast majority of previously
suicidal participants in these studies had not made a suicide attempt. Clearly differences
may exist between suicide ideators and suicide attempters with regard both to the
degree and the consequences of suicidal cognitive reactivity (Rudd, Joiner, & Rajab,
1996). A number of factors are likely to moderate the relationship between the ease of
activation of suicidal thoughts in response to relatively mild states of low mood and the
development of sustained suicidal ideation or subsequent suicidal behavior. Further
studies, utilising clinical populations with higher base rates of attempted suicide, will be
required in order to examine such interactions in more detail.
Whilst studies 1 and 2 examined participants differing in their history of suicidal
ideation, Study 3 compared the effects of self-reported hopelessness/suicidal cognitive
reactivity on a behavioral measure closely associated with hopelessness. While Study 3
therefore provides useful validation of the LEIDS, the next step in examining
hopelessness/suicidal cognitive reactivity would be to explore whether individuals with a
history of suicidal behavior would display more pronounced deteriorations in positive
future fluency following mood induction, an analysis precluded in the current study by
the relatively small number of previously suicidal participants.
Finally, the data were collected in undergraduate and community samples rather than
patients referred for treatment, so we did not have co-morbidity data for participants in
Studies 1 and 2. It is possible that some participants in these studies had past or current
diagnoses other than depression. On the other hand, there is a great deal of evidence
that, even in other psychiatric conditions, it is depression and hopelessness that is the
critical mediator for serious suicidal ideation and behavior (Beautrais et al., 1996; Mann
et al., 1999). The findings of Study 3 were consistent with this evidence. In this study,
123
100 Cogn Ther Res (2008) 32:83–104
co-morbidity data was available, but entering it into a partial correlation analysis made
no difference to the prediction of change in positive future fluency by LEIDS
hopelessness following the mood induction.
The present research has a number of implications. First, hopelessness and suicidal
ideation are often regarded as symptoms of severe depression. The present study
indicates, however, that if they have co-occurred in the past, suicidal thoughts and their
precursors such as hopelessness may be triggered by mild mood fluctuations, and thus
can also be part of a mild or sub-clinical episode of depression. This process may be
involved in the escalation from mild dysphoria to severe negative moods and suicidal
ideation. Risk of further suicidal ideation and behavior, therefore, is determined by the
ease with which these reverberatory patterns of processing become re-established,
following recovery, in the face of mild negative affect.
Second, these findings may help us understand the apparent divergence between
previous treatment studies’ proven efficacy in treating important continuous variables
(hopelessness, depression and problem solving) and their relatively weak effects on
suicidal behavior itself (Hawton et al., 1998). It suggests that the critical risk factor is not
the resting level of these variables assessed after treatment and during follow-up or
when patients are in remission, but rather how easily activated these variables are in
response to mood challenge. Such activation vulnerability has not been assessed in any
treatment study to date.
Finally, if future suicidal behavior is determined in part by the ease with which
hopelessness and future fluency deficits are activated by mood change, then therapists
need to be cautious in drawing conclusions from apparent improvements in baseline
levels of hopelessness in their patients. Focusing on reducing hopelessness itself is not
sufficient, nor does a lower level of hopelessness at the end of treatment provide
reassurance that the underlying vulnerability has been treated. This is of particular
concern following antidepressant treatment for depression. Antidepressants are
effective in reducing depression levels and reducing levels of dysfunctional attitudes
as assessed when euthymic. However Segal et al. (1999, 2006) have demonstrated that
these patients remain susceptible to mood-activated cognitive reactivity, showing
increased dysfunctional attitudes following mood induction. There is the danger that
clinicians will see a patient’s reduction in hopelessness as indicating treatment success,
but fail to see that the underlying cognitive reactivity has not changed. This will be
especially problematic if the clinician decides to reduce the dose of medication.
Recent advances in Cognitive Therapy for suicidal behavior (Brown et al., 2005)
include a reactivity procedure towards the end of therapy to investigate what pattern of
thinking and impulses come to mind under such ‘activated’ conditions. Although to date
this component has not been formally evaluated our data strongly supports the wisdom
of such methods. The present series of studies shows that hopelessness and suicidality
may disappear altogether when patients are euthymic, but remain ready to be
reactivated when depression returns. It is this vulnerability towards which our
therapeutic efforts should be focused.
Acknowledgements The authors wish to thank Danielle Duggan, Melanie Fennell, Silvia Garnsey and
Wendy Swift for help with this research. This research was supported by the Wellcome Trust GR067797
123
Cogn Ther Res (2008) 32:83–104 101
References
American Psychiatric Association (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th Ed)
(DSM-IV). Washington, DC: Author.
Beautrais, A. L. (2004). Further suicidal behavior among medically serious suicide attempters. Suicide
and Life-Threatening Behavior, 34, 1–11.
Beautrais, A. L., Joyce, P. R., Mulder, R. T., Fergusson, D. M., Deavoll, B. J., & Nightingale, S. K.
(1996). Prevalence and co-morbidity of mental disorders in persons making serious suicide attempts:
A case-control study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 153, 1009–1014.
Beck, A. T., Brown, G., Berchick, R. J., Stewart, B. L., & Steer, R. A. (1990). Relationship between
hopelessness and ultimate suicide—A replication with psychiatric outpatients. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 147, 190–195.
Beck, A. T., & Steer, R. A. (1989). Clinical predictors of eventual suicide: A 5- to 10-year prospective
study of suicide attempters. Journal of Affective Disorders, 17, 203–209.
Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). The Beck Depression Inventory—2nd edition (BDI-II).
San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation.
Bouton, M. E. (2002). Context, ambiguity, and unlearning: Sources of relapse after behavioral extinction.
Biological Psychiatry, 52, 976–986.
Brown, G. K., Ten Have, T., Henriques, G. R., Xie, S. X., Hollander, J. E., & Beck, A. T. (2005).
Cognitive therapy for the prevention of suicide attempts: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA, 294,
563–570.
Clark, D. M., & Teasdale, J. D. (1985). Constraints on the effects of mood on memory. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 48, 1595–1608.
Cox, B. J., Enns, M. W., Borger, S. C., & Parker, J. D. A (1999) The nature of the depressive experience
in analogue and clinically depressed samples. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 37, 15–24.
Dykman, B. M. (1997). A test of whether negative emotional priming facilitates access to latent
dysfunctional attitudes. Cognition & Emotion, 11, 197–222.
Fawcett, J., Scheftner, W. A., Fogg, L., Clark, D. C., Young, M. A., Hedeker, D. et al. (1990). Time-
related predictors of suicide in Major Affective-Disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 147,
1189–1194.
First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J. B. (1996). User’s guide for the Structured Clinical
Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Goldney, R. D., Wilson, D., Del Grande, E., Fisher, L. J., McFarlane, A. C. (2000). Suicidal ideation in a
random community sample: Attributable risk due to depression and psychosocial and traumatic
events. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 34, 98–106.
Hawton, K., Arensman, E., Townsend, E., Bremner, S., Feldman, E., Goldney, R., Gunnell, D., Hazell,
P., van Heeringen, C., House, A., Owens, D., Sakinowsky, I., & Traskman-Bendz, L. (1998).
Deliberate self-harm: A systematic review of the efficacy of psychosocial and pharmacological
treatments in preventing depression. British Medical Journal, 317, 441–447.
Hawton, K., Fagg, J., Simkin, S., Bale, E., & Bond, A. (1997). Trends in deliberate self-harm in Oxford,
1985–1995—Implications for clinical services and the prevention of suicide. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 171, 556–560.
Hawton, K., & James A. 2005 Suicide and deliberate self harm in young people. British Medical Journal,
330, 891–894.
Hawton, K., & van Heeringen, K. (Eds.) (2000). The international handbook of suicide and attempted
suicide. New York, NY: John Wiley.
Ingram, R. E., Miranda, J., & Segal, Z. V. (1998) Cognitive vulnerability to depression. New York:
Guilford Press.
Ingram, R. E., & Ritter, J. (2000). Vulnerability to depression: Cognitive reactivity and parental bonding
in high-risk individuals. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109, 588–596.
Joiner, T. E. (2002). The trajectory of suicidal behavior over time. Suicide and Life-Threatening
Behavior, 32, 33–41.
Joiner, T. E., & Rudd, M. D. (Eds.) (2000a). Suicide science: Expanding the boundaries. New York, NY:
Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Joiner, T. E., & Rudd, M. D. (2000b) Intensity and duration of suicidal crises vary as a function of
previous suicide attempts and negative life events. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68,
909–916.
Kendler K. S., Thornton L. M., Gardner C. O. (2000). Stressful life events and previous episodes in the
etiology of major depression in women: An evaluation of the ‘kindling’ hypothesis. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 1243–1251.
123
102 Cogn Ther Res (2008) 32:83–104
Kessler, R. C., Borges, G., & Walters, E. E. (1999). Prevalence of and risk factors for lifetime suicide
attempts in the national comorbidity survey. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56, 617–626.
Korszun, A., Moskvina, V., Brewster, S., Craddock, N., Ferrero, F., Gill, M. et al. (2004). Familiality of
symptom dimensions in depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61, 468–474.
Lau, M. A., Segal, S. Z., & Williams, J. M. G. (2004). Teasdale’s differential activation hypothesis:
Implications for mechanisms of depressive relapse and suicidal behaviour. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 42, 1001–1004.
Lewinsohn, P. M., Hops, H., Roberts, R. E., Seeley, J. R., & Andrews, J. A. (1993) Adolescent
psychopathology: I. Prevalence and incidence of depression and other DSM-III-R disorders in high
school students. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 102, 133–144.
Linehan, M. M., Goodstein, J. L., Nielsen, S. L., & Chiles, J. A. (1983). Reasons for staying alive when
you are thinking of killing yourself. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 51, 276–286.
MacLeod, A. K. (1999). Prospective cognition. In T. Dalgleish, & M. J. Power (Eds.), Handbook of
cognition and emotion. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
MacLeod, A. K., & Byrne, A. (1996). Anxiety, depression, and the anticipation of future positive and
negative experiences. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 105, 286–289.
MacLeod, A. K., & Cropley, M. L. (1995). Depressive future-thinking—the role of valence and
specificity. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 19, 35–50.
MacLeod, A. K., Pankhania, B., Lee, M., & Mitchell, D. (1997). Parasuicide, depression and the
anticipation of positive and negative future experiences. Psychological Medicine, 27, 973–977.
MacLeod, A. K., Rose, G. S., & Williams, J. M. G. (1993). Components of hopelessness about the future
in parasuicide. Cognitive Therapy & Research, 17, 441–455.
Malone, K. M., Oquendo, M. A., Haas, G. L., Ellis, S. P., Li, S. H., & Mann, J. J. (2000). Protective
factors against suicidal acts in major depression: Reasons for living. American Journal of Psychiatry,
157, 1084–1088.
Mann, J. J., Waternaux, C., Haas, G. L., & Malone, K. M. (1999) Towards a clinical model of suicidal
behavior in psychiatric patients. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 181–189.
Miranda, J., Gross, J. J., Persons, J. B., & Hahn, J. (1998). Mood matters: Negative mood induction
activates dysfunctional attitudes in women vulnerable to depression. Cognitive Therapy and
Research, 22, 363–376.
Mitchell, P. B., Parker, G. B., Gladstone, G. L., Wilhelm, K., & Austin, M. P. V. (2003). Severity of
stressful life events in first and subsequent episodes of depression: The relevance of depressive
subtype. Journal of Affective Disorders, 73, 245–252.
Mueller, T. I., Leon, A. C., Keller, M. B., Solomon, D. A., Endicott, J., Coryell, W., Warshaw, M., &
Maser, J. D. (1999). Recurrence after recovery from major depressive disorder during 15 years of
observational follow-up. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 1000–1006.
O’Connor, R. C. (2003). Suicidal behaviour as a cry of pain: Test of a psychological model. Archives of
Suicide Research, 7, 1–12.
Orbach, I., Mikulincer, M., Sirota, P., & Gilboa-Schechtman, E. (2003) Mental Pain: a multidimensiopanl
operationalization and definition. Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 33, 219–230.
Paykel, E. S., Prusoff, B. A., & Myers, J. K. (1975). Suicide attempts and recent life events: A controlled
comparison. Archives of General Psychiatry, 32, 327–333.
Peterson, R. A., & Reiss, S. (1992). Anxiety Sensitivity Index Manual, 2 nd edn. Worthington, OH: IDS
Publishing Corporation.
Petrie, K., Chamberlain, K., & Clarke, D. (1988). Psychological predictors of future suicidal behaviour in
hospitalized suicide attempters. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 27, 247–257.
Pokorny, A. D. (1993). Prediction of suicide in psychiatric patients: Report of a prospective study. In R.
W. Maris, A. L. Berman, J. T. Maltsberger, & R. I. Yufit (Eds.), Assessment and prediction of suicide.
New York: Guilford Press.
Post, R. M. (1992). Transduction of psychosocial stress into the neurobiology of recurrent affective
disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 149, 999–1010.
Rudd, M. D., Joiner, T. E., & Rajab, M. H. (1996). Relationship among suicide ideators, attempters and
multiple attempters in a young adult sample. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 105, 541–550.
Salter, D., & Platt, S. (1990). Suicidal intent, hopelessness and depression in a parasuicide population:
The influence of social desirability and elapsed time. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 29, 361–
371.
Schotte, D. E., Cools, J., & Payvar, S. (1990). Problem-solving deficits in suicidal patients—trait
vulnerability or state phenomenon. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 58, 562–564.
Scott, J., House, R., Yates, M., & Harrington, J. (1997). Individual risk factors for early repetition of
deliberate self-harm. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 70, 387–393.
123
Cogn Ther Res (2008) 32:83–104 103
Segal, Z. V., Gemar, M., & Williams, S. (1999). Differential cognitive response to a mood challenge
following successful cognitive therapy or pharmacotherapy for unipolar depression. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 108, 3–10.
Segal, Z. V., & Ingram, R. E. (1994) Mood priming and construct activation in tests of cognitive
vulnerability to unipolar depression. Clinical Psychology Review, 14, 663–695.
Segal, Z. V., Kennedy, S., Gemar, M., Sagrati, S., Hood, K., & Pedersen, R. (2003). Using mood
induction to activate depression relapse vulnerability following cognitive or pharmacological
treatment. Presented at the Society for Research in Psychopathology, Toronto, ON.
Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M. G., Teasdale, J. D., & Gemar, M. (1996). A cognitive science perspective on
kindling and episode sensitization in recurrent affective disorder. Psychological Medicine, 26, 371–
380.
Segal, Z. V., Kennedy, S., Gemar, M., Hood, K., Pedersen, R., & Buis, T. (2006). Cognitive reactivity to
sad mood provocation and the prediction of depressive relapse. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63,
749–755.
Sidley, G. L., Calam, R., Wells, A., Hughes, T., & Whitaker, K. (1999). The prediction of parasuicide
repetition in a high-risk group. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 38, 375–386.
Szanto, K., Reynolds, C. F., Conwell, Y., Begley, A. E., & Houck, P. (1998). High levels of hopelessness
persist in geriatric patients with remitted depression and a history of attempted suicide. Journal of
the American Geriatrics Society, 46, 1401–1406.
Taylor, L., & Ingram, R. E. (1999). Cognitive reactivity and depressotypic information processing in
children of depressed mothers. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 108, 202–210.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and probability.
Cognitive Psychology, 5, 207–232.
Van der Does, A. J. W. (2002a). Cognitive reactivity to a sad mood: structure and validity of a new
measure. Behaviour Research & Therapy, 40, 105–120.
Van der Does, A. J. W. (2002b). Manual of the Dutch version of the BDI-II [Handleiding bij de
Nederlandse bewerking van de BDI-II]. San Antonio TX/Lisse NL: The Psychological Corporation/
Swets Test Publishers.
Van der Does, A. J. W. (2005). Thought suppression and cognitive vulnerability to depression. British
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 44, 1–14.
Van der Does, A. J. W., Barnhofer, T., & Williams, J. M. G. (2003). The Major Depression Questionnaire
(MDQ) www.dousa.nl/publications.
Van der Does, A. J. W., & Williams, J. M. G. (2003). The Leiden Index of Depression Sensitivity
(LEIDS). Revised version. Unpublished manuscript.
Wetzel, R. D., Margulies, T., Davis, R., & Karam, E. (1980). Hopelessness, depression, and suicide
intent. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 41, 159–160.
Weissman, A. N. (1979). The dysfunctional attitude scale. Philadelphia PA: University of Pennsylvania
(Dissertation Abstracts International: 40, 1389B–1390B).
Williams, J. M. G., Barnhofer, T., Crane, C., & Beck, A. T. (2005). Problem solving deteriorates
following mood challenge in formerly depressed patients with a history of suicidal ideation. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 114(3), 421–431.
Young, M. A., Fogg, L. F., Scheftner, W., Fawcett, J., Akiskal, H., & Maser, J. (1996). Stable trait
components of hopelessness: Baseline and sensitivity to depression. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 105, 155–165.
123
104 Cogn Ther Res (2008) 32:83–104
