Functional Anthology of Intrinsic Disorder. I. Biological Processes
and Functions of Proteins with Long Disordered Regions
Hongbo Xie†, Slobodan Vucetic†, Lilia M. Iakoucheva‡, Christopher J. Oldfield#, A. Keith
Dunker#, Vladimir N. Uversky#,§*, and Zoran Obradovic†
†Center for Information Science and Technology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA
‡Laboratory of Statistical Genetics, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021, USA
#Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Indiana University, School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA
§Institute for Biological Instrumentation, Russian Academy of Sciences, 142290 Pushchino, Moscow Region,
Russia
Abstract
Identifying relationships between function, amino acid sequence and protein structure represents a
major challenge. In this study we propose a bioinformatics approach that identifies functional
keywords in the Swiss-Prot database that correlate with intrinsic disorder. A statistical evaluation is
employed to rank the significance of these correlations. Protein sequence data redundancy and the
relationship between protein length and protein structure were taken into consideration to ensure the
quality of the statistical inferences. Over 200,000 proteins from Swiss-Prot database were analyzed
using this approach. The predictions of intrinsic disorder were carried out using PONDR VL3E
predictor of long disordered regions that achieves an accuracy of above 86%. Overall, out of the 710
Swiss-Prot functional keywords that were each associated with at least 20 proteins, 238 were found
to be strongly positively correlated with predicted long intrinsically disordered regions, whereas 302
were strongly negatively correlated with such regions. The remaining 170 keywords were ambiguous
without strong positive or negative correlation with the disorder predictions. These functions cover
a large variety of biological activities and imply that disordered regions are characterized by a wide
functional repertoire. Our results agree well with literature findings, as we were able to find at least
one illustrative example of functional disorder or order shown experimentally for the vast majority
of keywords showing the strongest positive or negative correlation with intrinsic disorder. This work
opens a series of three papers, which enriches the current view of protein structure-function
relationships, especially with regards to functionalities of intrinsically disordered proteins and
provides researchers with a novel tool that could be used to improve the understanding of the
relationships between protein structure and function. The first paper of the series describes our
statistical approach, outlines the major findings and provides illustrative examples of biological
processes and functions positively and negatively correlated with intrinsic disorder.
Keywords
Intrinsic disorder; protein structure; protein function; intrinsically disordered proteins;
bioinformatics; disorder prediction
*CORRESPONDING AUTHOR FOOTNOTE: Correspondence should be addressed to: Vladimir N. Uversky, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine, 635 Barnhill Drive, MS#4021, Indianapolis, IN 46202,
USA; Phone: 317-278-9194; Fax: 317-274-4686; E-mail: vuversky@iupui.edu.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
Published in final edited form as:
J Proteome Res. 2007 May ; 6(5): 1882–1898. doi:10.1021/pr060392u.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
Introduction
Among other objectives, computational biology aims to enable an understanding of the
relationships between the primary sequence, the higher order structure and the function of
proteins. Each protein function is generally thought to originate from a specific 3-dimensional
(3-D) structure. Formulation of this view began more than 100 years ago with the lock-and-
key model proposed by Fischer.1 More than 70 years ago Wu,2 and slightly later, Mirsky and
Pauling3 equated denaturation with loss of specific structure. The dependence of function on
3-D structure was accepted by the time of the protein folding studies of Anfinsen and
colleagues.4 The flood of protein 3-D structures determined by X-ray diffraction and by nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy has overwhelmed alternative concepts.5
In contrast to the dominant view given above, proteins for which intrinsic disorder is required
for function have been reported in the literature for many years. By “intrinsic disorder” we
mean that the protein (or protein region) exists as a structural ensemble, either at the secondary
or at the tertiary level. Thus, both extended regions with perhaps some elements of secondary
structure and collapsed (molten globule-like) domains with poorly packed side chains are
included in our view of intrinsic disorder.6 More detailed analysis of extended disordered
proteins/regions revealed that they can be further divided in two groups, random coil-like and
pre-molten globule-like conformations.7 Recently, more than 150 proteins have been identified
as containing functional disordered regions, or being completely disordered, yet performing
vital cellular roles.8, 9 Twenty-eight separate functions were assigned to these disordered
regions, including molecular recognition via binding to other proteins, or to nucleic acids.8,
10 A complementary view is that functional disorder fits into at least five broad classes based
on the mode of disordered protein/region action.10 Obviously, for these proteins, the
predominant structure-function paradigm is insufficient, which suggests that a more
comprehensive view is needed.11 In fact, a new paradigm was recently offered to elaborate
the sequence-to-structure-to-function scheme in a way that includes the novel functions of
disordered proteins.6, 7, 12 The complex data supporting this revised view were summarized
in “The Protein Trinity” hypothesis, which suggested that native proteins can exist in one of
three states, the solid-like ordered state, the liquid-like collapsed-disordered state or the gas-
like extended-disordered state.12 Function is then viewed to arise from any one of the three
states or from transitions between them. Later this paradigm was extended to “The Protein
Quartet” model to include one more extended-disordered conformation, the pre-molten globule
state.7 For structured proteins; i.e., proteins that form crystals without partners or have ordered
globular forms without partners in NMR experiments, we will use the terms “structured”,
“intrinsically ordered” or just ordered.
Recent studies revealed that many proteins lack rigid 3-D structure under physiological
conditions in vitro, existing instead as highly dynamic ensembles of interconverting structures.
Indeed, the literature on these proteins, known as intrinsically disordered, natively unfolded,
or intrinsically unstructured, has virtually exploded during the last decade.7, 13 This literature
explosion is consistent with bioinformatics studies predicting that about 25 to 30% of
eukaryotic proteins are mostly disordered,14 that more than half of eukaryotic proteins have
long regions of disorder,14, 15 and that more than 70% of signaling proteins and the vast
majority of cancer-associated proteins have long disordered regions.16 As it has been already
mentioned, despite the fact that intrinsically disordered proteins fail to form fixed 3-D
structures by themselves under physiological conditions, they carry out numerous important
biological functions.6–11, 13, 16–22 Intrinsically disordered regions are typically involved in
regulation, signaling and control pathways in which interactions with multiple partners, and
high-specificity/low-affinity interactions are often involved.21–23 Furthermore, sites of
posttranslational modifications (acetylation, hydroxylation, ubiquitination, methylation,
phosphorylation, etc.) and proteolytic attack are frequently associated with regions of intrinsic
Xie et al. Page 2
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
disorder.6, 16 Given the high frequency of intrinsically disordered proteins and their crucially
important functions, a curated Database of Disordered Protein (DisProt) has been recently
initiated.24 This database provides structure and function information about proteins that lack
a fixed 3D-structure under putatively native conditions, either in their entireties or in part.24
In spite of all of this, the phenomenon of intrinsic disorder in proteins is still severely under-
appreciated; not a single biochemistry textbook discusses these proteins.25
There is a large gap between the number of proteins with experimentally confirmed disordered
regions and actual number of such proteins in nature. Although studies of functional properties
of known disordered proteins are helpful in revealing the functional diversity of protein
disorder, they are bound to provide only a limited view. In this study, we propose a statistical
approach for comprehensive study of functional roles of protein disorder. This approach relies
on use of the VL3E26 predictor that is currently the most accurate predictor of long disordered
regions with estimated accuracy of above 86%.26 The high accuracy of VL3E ensures that
most disordered regions could be successfully detected with only a small fraction of ordered
regions being incorrectly labeled as disordered. The VL3E predictor was applied to over
200,000 Swiss-Prot27 proteins, many of which were annotated with one or more functional
keywords. Then, the disorder-and order-correlated functions were detected as those that are
overrepresented by proteins predicted to have long disordered regions (> 40 amino acid
residues) in comparison with a random selection of proteins with the same length distribution.
The proposed approach ensures that adverse effects of sequence redundancy and sequence
length are eliminated. Disorder predictors were previously used to analyze functions of
disordered proteins. For example, it was shown that a large fraction of cancer-related proteins
are likely to be disordered.16 In another study28 it was demonstrated that many processes in
yeast are related to protein disorder. The current study provides a comprehensive analysis of
disorder-related functions by using a much larger set of proteins (i.e., the entire Swiss-Prot
database).
Given a list of functions positively and negatively correlated with disorder, we performed an
extensive literature survey to find experimental evidence supporting the findings. We were
able to find at least one illustrative experimentally validated example of functional disorder/
order for a large majority of functional keywords. This work opens a series of three papers
dedicated to finding and description of protein functions and activities that are positively and
negatively correlated with long disordered regions. Being the first in the series, this paper deals
with the description of the statistical approach used here and delineates the major results of the
application of this tool for the analysis of over 200,000 proteins from Swiss-Prot database.
This paper also provides illustrative literature examples related to the Swiss-Prot keywords
associated with the biological processes and functions positively and negatively correlated with
intrinsic disorder. The second paper of the series portrays keywords related to the cellular
components, domains, technical terms, developmental processes and coding sequence diversity
associated with long disordered regions,29 whereas keywords correlated with ligands,
postranslational modifications and diseases associated with long disordered regions are the
topic for the last paper of the series.30 The overall result is that this series of papers represents
a functional anthology of intrinsic disorder that includes both the results of our bioinformatics
analysis and illustrative literature examples for the majority of functional keywords possessing
strongest positive or negative correlation with the intrinsic disorder prediction.
Materials and methods
Dataset
The dataset for analysis was constructed using the Swiss-Prot database (release 48, 2005)
containing 201,560 proteins.27 In this study we used the 196,326 proteins with length longer
than 40 amino acid residues. Each protein in Swiss-Prot is annotated with keywords that
Xie et al. Page 3
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
describe its functional or structural properties. Out of the 874 keywords used by Swiss-Prot,
710 were associated with at least 20 proteins. Swiss-Prot is statistically redundant, as it contains
a large number of homologous proteins with highly similar sequences.31 Ignoring the
redundancy would significantly bias statistical inference. To reduce redundancy,
TribeMCL32 was applied to cluster the protein sequences from Swiss-Prot into families.
TribeMCL uses the Markov clustering algorithm for the assignment of proteins into families
based on the similarity matrix generated from the all-against-all BLASTp33 comparison of
sequences. It is able to produce high quality families despite presence of multi-domain proteins,
peptide fragments, and promiscuous domains.32 The obtained BLAST profiles were imported
into TribeMCL software package (http://micans.org/mcl/) and clustering was performed with
all parameters set at default. As a result of application of this redundancy reduction procedure,
the sequences were grouped into 27,217 families.
Predicting long disordered regions in proteins
Previous studies suggested that in comparison with ordered sequences, disordered sequences
tend to have lower aromatic content, higher net charge,17, 34–36 higher values of the flexibility
indices, greater hydropathy values,34, 36 and lower sequence complexity.37 Following these
observations, the VL3E predictor26 was developed using 162 long (>30 residues) disordered
regions from non-redundant set of 152 DisProt proteins24, 38 and 290 completely ordered
proteins. The predictor consists of an ensemble of neural network classifiers and it achieves
~87% cross-validation accuracy on balanced data with equal number of ordered and disordered
residues. We used the VL3E predictor to predict Swiss-Prot proteins with long disordered
regions. Each of the 196,326 Swiss-Prot proteins was labeled as putatively disordered if it
contained a predicted intrinsically disordered region with ≥40 consecutive amino acids and as
putatively ordered otherwise. For notational convenience, we introduce disorder operator d
such that d(si) = 1 if sequence si is putatively disordered, and d(si) = 0 if it is putatively ordered.
Relationship between long disorder prediction and protein length
The likelihood of labeling a protein as putatively disordered increases with its length. To
account for this length dependency, we estimated the probability, PL, that VL3E predicts a
disordered region longer than 40 consecutive amino acids in a SwissProt protein sequence of
length L. Probability PL was determined by partitioning all SwissProt proteins into groups
based on their length. To reduce the effects of sequence redundancy, each sequence was
weighted as the inverse of its family size; if sequence si was assigned to TribeMCL cluster c
(si), we calculated ni as the total number of SwissProt sequences assigned to this cluster and
set its weight to w(si) = 1/ni. In this manner, each cluster is given the same influence in
estimation of PL, regardless of its size. To estimate PL, all SwissProt sequences with length
between L−l and L+l were grouped in set SL = {si, L−l ≤|si|≤L+l}. The probability PL was
estimated as
Window size l allowed us to control the smoothness of PL function. In this study we used
window size equal to 20% of the sequence length, l = 0.1·L. We show the resulting curve in
Figure 1 together with the same results when l = 0.
Extracting disorder-and order-related Swiss-Prot keywords
For each of the 710 SwissProt keywords occurring in more than 20 SwissProt proteins, we set
to determine if it is enriched in putatively disordered or ordered proteins. For a keyword
KWj, j = 1…710, we first grouped all SwissProt proteins annotated with the keyword to Sj. To
Xie et al. Page 4
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
take into consideration sequence redundancy, each sequence si ∈ Sj was weighted based on
the SwissProt TribeMCL clusters. If sequence si was assigned to cluster c(si), we calculated
nij as the total number of sequences from Sj that belonged to that cluster and set its weight to
wj(i) = 1/nij. Then, the fraction of putatively disordered proteins from Sj was calculated as
The question is how well this fraction fits the null model that is based on the length distribution
PL. Let us define random variable Yj as
where XL is a Bernoulli random variable with P(XL = 1) = 1 − P(XL = 0) = PL. In other words,
Yj represents a distribution of fraction of putative disorder among randomly chosen SwissProt
sequences with the same length distribution as those annotated with KWj.
If Fj is in the left tail of the Yj distribution (i.e. the p-value P(Yj > Fj) is near 1), the keyword
is enriched in ordered sequences, while if it is in the right tail (i.e. the p-value P(Yj > Fj) is near
0) it is enriched in disordered sequences. We denote all keywords with p-value < 0.05 as
disorder-related and those with p-value > 0.95 as order-related.
The distribution Yj is hard to derive analytically, so we randomly generated 1,000 realizations
and calculated the empirical p-value as the fraction of times these realizations were larger than
Fj. We also calculated the mean μj and standard deviation σj of the 1,000 realizations. We
observed that, when |KWj| is large, distribution of Yj resembles a Gaussian distribution with
mean μj and standard deviation σj. Using the Gaussian approximation, we calculated the Z-
score of KWj as (Fj − μj) / σj and its p-value as 1/2(1 − erf(Zj/2)), where erf() is the error function.
The Gaussian approximation is useful since using the fraction of 1,000 replicates is not accurate
in estimating p-values below 0.01 or above 0.99. We report the Z-scores together with the
empirical p-values in the results.
Results
Estimating correlation between long disordered regions and Swiss-Prot keywords
We applied the procedure described above to each of the 710 Swiss-Prot keywords occurring
each in more than 20 Swiss-Prot proteins. These 710 keywords can be grouped into 11
functional categories, which are listed in Table 1. We denote keywords with p-value > 0.95 as
disorder-related and the ones with p-value < 0.05 as order-related. Keywords with p-value
between 0.95 and 0.05 are ambiguous. These functions might depend on structured of
disordered regions but simply exhibit signals that are too weak. Alternatively these functions
might depend on short regions of disorder or might require both ordered and disordered regions.
The number of keywords strongly correlated with disorder and order is significantly larger than
expected by the random model. This is evident by observing that, for a p-value threshold of
0.05, a random predictor would result in about 5% (~36) of order and 5% of disorder-related
keywords. These results suggest that presence or absence of disordered regions is an important
factor in majority of biological functions and processes. Overall, this analysis shows that 238
Swiss-Prot functional keywords are disorder-related, whereas 302 are order-related.
Interestingly, only two of the categories, “Biological Process” and “Ligand”, are enriched in
Xie et al. Page 5
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
order-related keywords, while the remaining 9 are enriched in the disorder-related keywords.
This result supports an earlier conjecture that disordered regions have a larger functional
repertoire than the ordered regions.20
To further understand these function-disorder relationships, we carried out manual literature
mining and studied a large number of individual experimental examples. To organize the
presentation of these results, the keywords from various functional categories, which are most
significantly associated with protein order and disorder arranged into specific groups (Table
2–Table 6). In each table, the disorder-function relationships are ranged by their Z-scores (see
Materials and Methods). The Z-scores for all 710 functions are given in Supplementary
Materials (see Table S1). One of the major goals here was to determine for each example
whether the indicated function was carried out by regions of disorder or regions of structure.
After all, the keyword-disorder correlations established by the method of Figure 2 do not
determine whether the indicated association implies direct involvement of disorder with
function or not.
Biological processes associated with intrinsically disordered proteins
The set of top 20 Swiss-Prot annotated cellular processes associated with predicted disorder
are listed in Table 2. Presented below are several illustrative examples of biological processes
from this list for which the associations with long disordered regions have been experimentally
determined. The data below are organized in the following way: each discussed keyword is
placed at the beginning of the corresponding paragraph and Italized. If the following description
involves other keywords discussed in this and the subsequent papers29, 30 these keywords are
presented using the Italic font.
Differentiation—In developmental biology, cellular differentiation describes the process by
which different cell types are derived from a single fertilized egg cell. Differentiation is a
continuously regulated process, with specific interactions between the cell and its environment
playing a major role in maintaining stable expression of differentiation-specific genes.39
Obviously, numerous intracellular and extracellular proteins are involved in the differentiation
control and regulation. For example, extracellular matrix (ECM), which is an important
component of the cellular environment, was shown to play a role in regulating differentiation
and the differentiated phenotype of cells.40, 41 An ECM is present within mammalian embryos
from the two-cell stage and is a component of the environment of all cell types, although the
composition of the ECM and the spatial relationships between cells and ECM differ between
tissues. The ECM offers structural support for cells, and can also act as a physical barrier or
selective filter to soluble molecules.40 The ECM is composed of glycoproteins,
glycosaminoglycans and proteoglycans that are secreted and assembled locally into an
organized network to which cells adhere.42 Cells interact with the ECM via numerous cell-
binding sites located within individual ECM glycoproteins and ECM receptors. For example,
in case of fibronectin the primary determinant of cell-binding activity for many cell types
resides in the sequence GRGDSP, which occurs in one of the type III repeats that form the
central domain of the molecule.43 Intriguingly, this cell-binding sequence exclusively consists
of strongly disorder-promoting amino acid residues,37 thus it very likely is intrinsically
disordered. Importantly, it has been experimentally shown that the fibronectin binding domains
from several different species of Gram-positive bacteria44 as well as the N-terminal domain
of BBK32, a fibronectin-binding lipoprotein from Borrelia burgdorferi, the causative agent of
Lyme disease, are all intrinsically disordered.45
Transcription and transcription regulation—Transcription, being one of the key
processes in the living cell through which a DNA sequence is enzymatically copied to produce
a complementary RNA, is the transfer of genetic information from DNA into RNA. In the case
Xie et al. Page 6
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
of protein-encoding DNA, transcription initiates the process that ultimately leads to the
translation of the genetic code into a functional protein. Transcription is strongly regulated by
a number of proteins, especially transcription factors that include activators, repressors and
enhancer-binding factors. Transcription factors function through the recognition of specific
DNA sequences and the recruitment and assembly of the transcription machinery. Thus, both
protein-DNA and protein-protein recognition are central processes in function of transcription
factors. Several examples of intrinsically disordered proteins in transcriptional regulation have
been reported.18, 19 For example, the C-terminal activation domain of the bZIP proto-
oncoprotein c-Fos unstructured and highly mobile, yet this protein effectively suppresses
transcription in vitro.46 The C-terminal domain of the transcriptional corepressor CtBP, which
serves as a scaffold in the formation of a multiprotein complex hosting the essential components
of both gene targeting and coordinated histone modifications, is also intrinsically disordered,
as determined by using several complementary approaches (bioinformatics, NMR, CD, and
small-angle X-ray scattering).47 Recent analysis of high-resolution structures of transcription
factors in the Protein Data Bank revealed that these proteins are, on average, largely disordered
molecules with over 60% of amino acids residing in 'coiled' configurations.48 The abundance
of intrinsic disorder in transcriptional regulation was further demonstrated using a set of
bioinformatics tools, including the Predictor Of Natural Disorder Regions (PONDR). This
analysis showed that up to 94% of transcription factors have extended regions of intrinsic
disorder. Furthermore, the analysis of the disorder distribution within the transcription factor
datasets revealed that the degree of disorder is significantly higher in eukaryotic transcription
factors than in prokaryotic transcription factors.49 The complementary analysis of human
transcriptional regulation factors revealed that although their average sequence is more than
twice as long as that of prokaryotic proteins, the fraction of human sequences aligned to
domains of known structure in PDB is less than half of that found for bacterial transcription
factors,50 suggesting that the increased length of eukaryotic transcription factors results to a
significant degree from the addition of disordered regions.
Spermatogenesis—Spermatogenesis is the formation and development of mature
spermatozoa from stem cells by meiosis and spermiogenesis. As spermatogenesis progresses,
there is a widespread reorganization of the haploid genome followed by the extensive DNA
condensation suggesting that the dynamic composition of chromatin is crucial for the activities
of enzymes that act upon it. Histone variants such as H3.3, H2AX, and macroH2A play
important roles at the various stages of spermiogenesis. Furthermore, posttranslational
modifications of different histones, including specifically modulated acetylation of histone H4
(acH4), ubiquitination of histones H2A and H2B (uH2A, uH2B), and phosphorylation of
histone H3 (H3p), are also involved in the regulation spermatogenesis.51 Furthermore, during
the final stages of spermatogenesis, the DNA of sperm in most organisms is compacted due
to the replacement of somatic-type histones by DNA-condensing sperm nuclear basic proteins
(SNBPs), sperm histones (H type), protamine-like (PL type), and protamines (P type).52
Analysis of amino acid composition of PL-I sperm nuclear protein from Spisula solidissima
revealed that it contains high amounts of lysine and arginine (24.8 and 23.1%, respectively).
53 Also, the PL-I has been shown to possess a tripartite structure, consisting of N- and C-
terminal flexible "tails" flanking a globular, trypsin-resistant core of 75 amino acids.54–56
DNA condensation—DNA condensation in vivo relies on electrostatics-driven interaction
of DNA with small cations and/or a number of abundant proteins including histones. In
eukaryotes, the basic unit of chromatin (a condensed form of DNA) is commonly defined as a
nucleosome, which is made up of DNA wrapped in two left-handed superhelical turns around
a proteinaceous core.57 The nucleosome core contains eight histone proteins, two dimers of
H2A–H2B that serve as molecular caps for the central (H3–H4)2 tetramer.58 Thus, nucleosome
represents the first level of chromatin condensation and is often termed 'beads on a string'.
Xie et al. Page 7
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
Other crucial components of chromatine are the linker (H1 family) histones, which bind to the
DNA that enters and exits the nucleosome and which facilitate the shift in equilibrium of
chromatin towards more condensed, higher order forms.57 It was established long ago that
purified core histones being dissolved in water with no added salt, behave as polypeptides in
an “extended loose form”.58–63 Recently, using a combination of bioinformatics tools with
several biophysical techniques it has been shown that in low salt all bovine core histones are
typical natively unfolded proteins; i.e., they possess exceptionally high level of intrinsic
disorder.64 Importantly, in the presence of high enough salt concentrations, core histones adopt
a folded conformation.58–64 In the crystal structure, histones are highly helical proteins, with
α-helices accounting for 65–70% of the total structure. Only 3% of residues can be assigned
to short parallel β-sheets, the remainder, approximately 30%, is not ordered.65, 66 It has been
also emphasized that the N-terminal "tail" domains (NTDs)67 of the core histones and the C-
terminal tail domain (CTD) of linker histones are intrinsically disordered, yet they are able to
bind to many different macromolecular partners in chromatin.68 Particularly, histone tails are
known to be involved in the conformational changes of the nucleosome core particle (NCP)
as well as in the structural phase transitions occurring at the supramolecular level. It is generally
accepted that these tails interact with DNA at low salt and are extended outside of the particle
at salt concentrations above ~0.2 M monovalent salt.69 Analysis of the extension process of
isolated NCP tails as a function of ionic strength has been reported. The addition of salt
simultaneously screens Coulombic repulsive interactions between NCP and Coulombic
attractive interactions between tails and DNA inside the NCP.70
Cell cycle, cell division, mitosis, meiosis—The cell cycle consists of an ordered series
of events between the two cell divisions and involve the growth, replication, and division of a
eukaryotic cell. Depending on the type of cell, the cell division might result in two different
outcomes: in the division of somatic cells (mitosis), daughter cells are identical to the parent
cell and contain a complete copy of the parental chromosomes; in meiosis (the division of sex
cells), the daughter cells contain a half of the genes of the parent. Progression through the cell
cycle is controlled in part by the activity of cyclin-dependent kinases, which are considered to
be the major timekeepers of cell division.71 Cdks are regulated by binding to their cyclin
protein partners thus forming active heterodimeric complexes. Eight Cdk family members
(Cdk1–Cdk8) and nine cyclins (A–I) have been identified so far. Interestingly, each Cdk pairs
with a separate cyclin class, most of which have at least two members.72, 73 For example,
Cdk1 together with cyclin B1 directs the G2/M transition. Exit from G1, in contrast, is primarily
under the control of cyclin D/Cdk4/6. Finally, two other cyclins (A and E) that pair with Cdk2
are required for the G1/S transition and progression through the S phase.72, 73 The activity of
Cdks throughout the cell cycle is known to be precisely regulated by a combination of several
mechanisms, including the control of cycle-dependent variations in the levels of activating
partners, cyclins; coordination of Cdk phosphorylation and dephosphorylation; and variations
in the levels of the Cdk inhibitor proteins, CKIs, which are responsible for the deactivation of
the Cdk–cyclin complexes.71, 74 Five major mammalian CKIs are known: p21Waf1/Cip1/Sdi1
and p27Kip1 inactivate Cdk2 and Cdk4 cyclin complexes by binding to them, p16INK4 and
p15INK4B are specific for Cdk4 and Cdk6, whereas p57Kip2 is specific for Cdk2.71, 74 The
p21Waf1/Cip1/Sdi1,75 p27Kip1,76–78 and p57Kip2 CKIs79 are all intrinsically disordered
proteins that undergo sequential folding upon binding to their functional partners.
mRNA processing and splicing—An average gene in higher eukaryotes is very large due
to the interruption of the coding sequence with large noncoding introns. Introns are known to
be co-transcriptionally removed with great accuracy by pre-messenger RNA (mRNA)
splicing. A large number of proteins are involved in generating specificity in pre-mRNA
processing. Among the different pre-mRNA processing possibilities, alternative splicing is
the most prevalent mechanism to generate proteomic diversity. The role of intrinsic disorder
Xie et al. Page 8
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
in alternative splicing is discussed in the second paper of this series.29 Astounding examples
of extensively alternatively spliced genes includes the Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule
gene (Dscam) from Drosophila, the Neurexin and CD44 genes in humans, which can produce
as many as about 38,000, 3000 and 1000 different splice forms, respectively.80–82. Splicing
involves the stepwise assembly of five (U1, U2, U4, U5 and U6) small ribonucleoprotein
particles (snRNPs) and a large number of proteins onto the pre-mRNA to form a large complex
called the spliceosome.83 The role of intrinsic disorder in the spliceosome function is discussed
below in the Section entitled Cellular components associated with intrinsic disorder.
Apoptosis—Apoptosis is the programmed death of a cell. Regulation and control of apoptosis
is crucial for the normal functioning of the organism. On the other hand, cancer cells avoid
apoptosis and continue to multiply in an unregulated manner. The tumor suppressor protein
p53 represents an outstanding example of this concept. The p53 molecule regulates expression
of genes involved in numerous cellular processes, including cell cycle progression, apoptosis
induction, DNA repair, as well as others involved in responding to cellular stress.84 When p53
function is lost, either directly through mutation or indirectly through several other
mechanisms, the cell often undergoes cancerous transformation.85, 86 Cancers showing
mutations in p53 are found in colon, lung, esophagus, breast, liver, brain, reticuloendothelial
tissues and hemopoietic tissues.85 When activated, p53 accumulates in the nucleus and binds
to specific DNA sequences.86, 87 It has been shown to induce or inhibit over 150 genes,
including p21, GADD45, MDM2, IGFBP3, and BAX.87 The p53 protein can be divided into
three functional domains: an amino-terminal transactivation region, a central DNA binding
domain, and a carboxy-terminal tetramerization and regulatory region. At the physiological
temperature of 37°C and in the absence of modifications or stabilizing partners, wild-type p53
is more than 50% unfolded.88 According to NMR analysis, the isolated transactivation domain
lacks rigid structure,89, 90 although it does possess an amphipathic helix that forms secondary
structure part of the time, which can be stabilized by binding to Mdm291 or in the membrane
environment.92 Besides Mdm2, the transactivation domain interacts with numerous other
proteins including TFIID, TFIIH, RPA, CBP/p300 and CSN5/Jab1,84 thus playing a crucial
role in the regulation of p53 function. For example, p53 can be inhibited by interaction with
E3 ubiquitin ligase Mdm2,93 which is bound to a short stretch of p53, specifically to residues
13–29.91 As this region of p53 is within the transactivation domain, p53 cannot activate or
inhibit other genes when Mdm2 is bound. Thus, p53-Mdm2 interaction exemplifies a crucial
mechanism of vital regulation via the binding-induced folding of one of the interacting partners.
The C-terminal regulatory domain is also unstructured.94, 95 The structures of the core domain
bound to DNA96 and of several oncogenic mutants have been solved.97 The crystal and NMR
structures of the tetramerization domain are also known.89, 98, 99 The high disorder content
of p53 may help to explain its inherent instability and extreme oncogenic potential.100, 101
The BH3-only proteins belong to the proapoptotic family of proteins that function as key
initiators of the programmed cell death. The BH3-only members of the Bcl-2 family proteins
(those with a single Bcl-2 homology (BH) domain), including Bim, Bid, Bmf and Bad, are key
initiators of apotosis, and they interact specifically with numerous binding partners.102 In a
healthy cell BH3-only molecules are either repressed, or are present in an inactive state.103
The molecular mechanism of apoptosis initiation involves a stage of BH3-only proteins
activation by a death stimulus, followed by their interaction and inactivation of prosurvival
Bcl-2 proteins (such as CED-9 in Caenorhabdhitis elegans, and Bcl-xL in humans).102 Until
recently, the structural knowledge about BH3-only proteins has been limited to peptide
fragments bound to their targets. For example, in the complex of Bcl-xL and a 33 residues long
peptide corresponding to the BH3 domain of Bim, the peptide forms an α-helix upon binding
to the hydrophobic groove of Bcl-xL.104 Analysis of crystal structures of BH3 domain peptides
bound to the prosurvival proteins CED-9 and Bcl-xL revealed that the nature of this interaction
is highly conserved despite only a low level of shared sequence identity, with the conserved
Xie et al. Page 9
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
leucine and aspartic acid residues of the LXXXGDE motif, which defines BH3-only proteins,
making critical contacts with conserved residues in the hydrophobic binding groove of CED-9
and Bcl-xL.104–107 However, in another structure a 9-residue peptide of Bim forms a β-strand
upon binding to the component of dynein motor complex, DLC1.108 Recently, using methods
such as CD, NMR, analytical centrifugation, size exclusion chromatography and limited
proteolysis, it has been established that the BH3-only proteins Bim, Bad and Bmf are
unstructured in the absence of binding partners.109 Intriguingly, the majority of the Bim
residues remains disordered when this protein binds and inactivates prosurvival proteins, with
the only the short α-helical molecular recognition element110 becoming structured.109
Furthermore, detailed sequence analyses suggest that most BH3-only proteins are unstructured.
109 The disorder of this proapoptotic protein family is likely to be important for several
biological functions such as promiscuous binding, extensive splicing, and regulation via
phosphorylation.
Ubl conjugation pathway—Posttranslational modification via the covalent attachment of
ubiquitin and different ubiquitin-like proteins (Ubls, including SUMO, ISG15, Nedd8, and
Atg8) is a crucial regulatory cellular mechanism, which plays a number of important roles in
controlling cell division, signal transduction, embryonic development, endocytic trafficking
and the immune response.111 For example, conjugation of ubiquitin-like proteins (the Ubl
conjugation pathway) to components of the transcriptiol machinery is an important regulatory
mechanism allowing switching between different activity states. While ubiquitination of
transcription factors is associated with transcriptional activation, their SUMOylation is most
often connected with transcriptional repression.112 Recent bioinformatic analysis of a limited
number of known ubiquitination substrates showed that protein ubiquitination sites are
preferentially located within surface exposed, flexible loop regions.113 In addition, the
sequence analysis of ubiquitination sites and regions adjacent to them showed that their
properties such as low sequence complexity, high negative net charge and low hydrophobicity,
are similar to those of intrinsically disordered regions (Iakoucheva and Radivojac, personal
communication). An example of SUMOylation occurring within intrinsically unstructured
region is the conjugation of transcription factor Ets-1 with SUMO-1.114 Using NMR
spectroscopy it has been shown that the sumoylation motif of Ets-1 containing Lys15 is located
within the unstructured N-terminal segment of Ets-1 preceding its PNT domain.114 The
authors hypothesize that flexibility of the linking polypeptide sequence may be a general
feature contributing to the recognition of SUMO-modified proteins by their downstream
effectors.114
Wnt signaling pathway—Wnt is a critical pathway for embryogenesis, carcinogenesis, and
cancer stem cells.115, 116 Detailed information on this pathway can be found on the Wnt
Homepage (http://www.stanford.edu/~rnusse/wntwindow.html). The Wnt pathway shows
evolutionary conservation across a wide range of species, ranging from the freshwater polyp
Hydra to vertebrates.117 Mammals have 19 Wnt genes that can be grouped into 12 subfamilies.
118 Surprisingly, at least 11 of these subfamilies are present in Cnidaria (specifically, the sea
anemone Nematostella vectensis) suggesting that they are not the result of any recent
evolutionary diversification.119 This indicates that the acquisition of the Wnt subfamilies was
an early development in the evolution of metazoa and likely occurred about 650 million years
ago.119, 120
The best-understood Wnt pathway is often called the Wnt/β-catenin pathway, in which the Wnt
signal leads to activation of the nuclear functions of β-catenin. These functions activate
expression of a number of genes leading to cell survival, proliferation, or differentiation.121
A second vertebrate Wnt pathway, the Wnt/Ca2+ pathway, promotes intracellular Ca2+ release
and regulates cell movements in development and in some cancers.122 A number of Wnt
protein isoforms are generated by alternative splicing.123–125
Xie et al. Page 10
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
Wnt proteins comprise a large family of highly conserved secreted growth factors that activate
target-gene expression in both a short- and long-range manner and regulate cell-to-cell
interactions during embryogenesis. Wnt signaling is involved in virtually every aspect of
embryonic development and also controls homeostatic self-renewal in a number of adult
tissues.115, 117
Glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β) is a Ser/Thr protein kinase, which is one of the major
players in the Wnt signaling pathway as GSK3β hyperphosphorylates β-catenin, thus
promoting its ubiquitination and targeted destruction.126 The crystal structure of human
GSK3β (420 residues) has been solved at 2.8 Å.127 Clear electron density was only evident
for the 351 residues from Lys35 to Ser386, with the segments of the polypeptide preceding
Lys35 and following Ser386 being disordered in the crystal.127 The structure of the ordered
part of GSK3β agrees with the consensus observed for "activation-segment" protein kinases,
consisting of an N-terminal β-sheet domain, coupled to a C-terminal α-helical domain. The
visible N-terminal domain (35–134) consists of a seven-stranded β-sheet, which folds to a
closed orthogonal β-barrel. The core of the C-terminal α-helical domain (152–342) has a similar
topology to the equivalent region in such mitogen activated protein kinases, such as MAPK,
as ERK2 and p38.127 It is important to emphasize that the major difference between the C-
terminal α-helical domain of GSK3β and MAPK is the absence of the second helix in the
hairpin segment from 276–293 in the GSK3β domain. Furthermore, in GSK3β this region
represents a highly mobile and poorly defined 285–299 loop.127
Neurogenesis—Numerous proteins are involved in neurogenesis, the formation and
development of nervous tissue. Among these proteins are the transcription factors Pax3,128
Pax6,129 Glis2,130 and Erm,131 which play an important regulatory role in this process. These
transcription factors, like transcription factors in general, are highly disordered. For example,
Pax3 has a highly flexible linker (53 amino acids) separating two DNA binding domains: a
paired domain (128 amino acids) and a paired type homeodomain (60 amino acids).132 Similar
to Pax3, transcription factor PAX6 has two DNA-binding domains, a paired domain and a
homeodomain (HD), joined by a glycine-rich linker and followed by a proline-serine-
threonine-rich (PST) transactivation region at the C terminus.133 Structural analysis revealed
that the central 250 amino acid residues of the transcription factor Erm has very little (if any)
ordered structure.134
Chromosome partition—Chromosome partition in two daughter cells is a complex process
that involves a number of proteins. For example, proteins such as topoisomerase IV and XerCD
recombinase, as well as MukB and FtsZ are related to chromosome partition in Escherichia
coli.135 MukB exists as two thin rods (long antiparallel coiled coils) with globular domains
at the ends emerging from the very flexible (read disordered) linker domain (123 amino acids).
136 The flexibility of the hinge is crucial for the MukB function, as the arms can open up to
180°, separating the terminal domains by 100 nm, or close to near 0°, bringing the terminal
globular domains together.136
Immune response—The immune system is capable of generating specific antibodies
against an almost infinite diversity of physiological or synthetic antigens. However, the
repertoire of antibodies produced in any organism is fixed, suggesting that the immune system
is an example of nearly unlimited functional multiplicity based on limited sequence diversity.
137 The high flexibility of antigen-binding sites in the immunoglobulin, which provides the
antibody with a unique capability to access a great variety of configurations with similar
stabilities, was long ago proposed to be the basis of this binding diversity.138 In more detail
the interplay between the intrinsic disorder, antigenic structure and immunogenicity has been
recently overviewed to emphasize the crucial role of intrinsic disorder in the development of
immune response.22 For example, the conformational flexibility of antibodies drives their
Xie et al. Page 11
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
polyreactivity, thus expanding the antigen-binding capacity of the antibody repertoire. On the
other hand, short intrinsically disordered regions are likely important for the antigenicity of
continuous determinants. Furthermore, the conformational flexibility and spatial adaptation
play important roles in the antigen-antibody recognition and interaction. Finally, short
intrinsically disordered regions are good antigens, whereas several long disordered regions and
intrinsically disordered proteins initiate weak immune responses or are even completely non-
immunogenic.22 Based on these observations it has been hypothesized that the role of intrinsic
disorder in immunogenicity and antigenicity of a protein depends on the length of the
disordered segment: short disordered regions (usually five to eight residues) are important for
the development of the immune response to continuous epitopes, whereas long disordered
regions (longer than 30 amino acids) are less likely to be immunogenic.22
The role of intrinsic disorder in autoimmune diseases has also been emphasized recently.139
The observation that the majority of the nuclear systemic autoantigens are extremely disordered
proteins allowed the authors to introduce a new model of autoimmunity, disorder-based epitope
spreading.139
Another example that illustrates the importance of disorder for immune response is the
unstructured nature of the interferon tails.140
Finally, cytoplasmic domains of several immune receptors members of the family of multichain
immune recognition receptors (MIRRs) (e.g., T-cell receptors (TCRs), B-cell receptors
(BCRs), and the high-affinity IgE receptor) have signaling subunits carrying so-called
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM).141–143 ITAM-containing
cytoplasmic domains of signaling subunits of several MIRRs are intrinsically disordered.144,
145 An intriguing feature of these signaling subunits is their tendency for the specific
homooligomerization, which is not accompanied by their folding.145, 146
Ribosome biogenesis and rRNA processing—Ribosomes are responsible for the
production of the entire complement of proteins required for cellular maintenance, growth, and
survival. Eukaryotic ribosomes contain four RNA molecules: 25S, 18S, 5.8S, and 5S. The 5S
rRNA is transcribed by RNA polymerase III, while the three other rRNA molecules are
transcribed as a long 35S polycistronic precursor by RNA polymerase I.147 Ribosome
biogenesis and rRNA processing are universal cellular processes, which encompass
complicated series of events involving hundreds of transiently interacting components. It has
been shown, for example, that in Saccharomyces cerevisiae the biogenesis of pre-18S
ribosomal RNA is controlled by a large ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex, which contains the
U3 small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA) and 28 proteins.148 The analysis yielded five small subunit
ribosomal proteins (Rps4, Rps6, Rps7, Rps14 and Rps28) among other proteins. Intriguingly,
in eukaryotic cells, ribosomal protein S6 (Rps6) is the major phosphorylated protein on the
small ribosomal subunit,149 suggesting that this protein might contain functionally important
intrinsically disordered regions (see below, section dedicated to the posttranslational
modifications). Furthermore, bioinformatics analysis revealed that 14 of the U three proteins
(Utps) bear different repeats comprising crucial regions of their protein-protein interaction
domains (WD repeats, coiled-coil domains, HEAT repeats and a crooked-neck-like (crnlike)
tetratrico peptide repeat (TPR)).148 The crn-like TPR is found in several proteins involved in
other RNA processing events including pre-mRNA splicing (Prp42, Prp6 and Clf1) and
polyadenylation (RNA14).150 NMR analysis of the solution structure of the cytosolic TPR
domain of Tom20 in the complex with the presequence peptide revealed that the C-terminal
region of this protein (residues 105–145) is disordered.151
Chondrogenesis—This is the earliest phase of skeletal development, the process by which
the cartilage is formed. Cartilage is an elastic connective tissue found in such parts of the body
Xie et al. Page 12
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
as the joints, outer ear, and larynx. Furthermore, cartilage represents the major constituent of
the embryonic and young vertebrate skeleton, which is converted largely to bone with
maturation. Chondrogenesis involves multiple steps, including mesenchymal cell recruitment
and migration, condensation of progenitors, chondrocyte differentiation, and maturation,
resulting in the formation of cartilage and bone during endochondral ossification.152 This
complex process is precisely controlled by interactions with the surrounding matrix, growth
and differentiation factors, as well as other environmental factors responsible for the initiation
or suppression of the cellular signaling pathways and for the regulation of transcription of
specific genes.153 For example, the development of vertebrate limb is controlled by the
fibroblast growth factor, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP, a secreted signaling molecule,
multifunctional growth factor belonging to the transforming growth factor β superfamily), Wnt
and hedgehog pathways.154 Recently, crucial roles of different mediators (including
GADD45β, transcription factors of the Dlx, βHLH, leucine zipper, and AP-1 families, and the
Wnt/β-catenin pathway) that interact at different stages during chondrogenesis have been
revealed.153 Also, members of the mammalian RUNX protein family, which includes three
transcription factors RUNX1, RUNX2, and RUNX3, are expressed during chondrogenesis.
These transcription factors also play active roles in mesenchymal condensation, chondrocyte
proliferation, and chondrocyte maturation, and regulate transcription of target genes.155 Thus,
regulation and control of chondrogenesis involve multiple players, many of which possess
functional disordered regions. For example, the abundance and functional roles of intrinsic
disorder in transcription factors were already discussed (see section entitled Transcription and
transcription regulation), whereas the role of disorder in the leucine zippers will be discussed
in the second paper of this series.29
Growth regulation—Numerous proteins and pathways are implemented in growth
regulation. For example, cyclin G was shown to be highly expressed in regenerating
hepatocytes and motoneurons and in rapidly growing cancer cells and to have growth-
promoting functions.156, 157 Cyclin G interacts with cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (cdk5) and
GAK, a cyclin G-associated kinase,158 as well as with with the B′ subclass of PP2A
phosphatase.159 In addition, cyclin G directly interacts with Mdm2 and can stimulate the
ability of PP2A to dephosphorylate Mdm2.159 Furthermore, cyclin G was one of the earliest
p53 target genes to be identified.160 This suggests that cyclin G is a key regulator of the p53-
Mdm2 network. The role of intrinsic disorder in p53 function was already discussed.
Functions associated with intrinsically disordered proteins
Table 3 presents a list of the top 20 SwissProt functional keywords associated with intrinsic
disorder.
Ribonucleoproteins—Numerous facts have been accumulated to demonstrate intrinsic
disorder is crucial for function of different ribonucleoproteins. In fact, ribonucleoprotein
assembly is nearly always accompanied by changes in the conformation of the interacting RNA
or protein, or both.161–163 For example, the inter-domain linkers of sex-lethal protein (SXL)
possess significant disorder, which provides the RNA recognition motifs (RRMs) with a
possibility to be flexibly tethered in solution.164 Another example is ribonuclease P (RNase
P), a ribonucleoprotein complex containing one RNA subunit and at least one protein subunit.
RNase P is involved in pre-tRNA processing.165 In E.coli, RNase P consists of a small (119
amino acid residue) C5 protein bound to the much larger (377 nucleotide) P RNA subunit.
166 The C5 protein of E.coli is essentially disordered in buffer alone, but gains significant
amount of ordered secondary structure in an anion-dependent manner.167 A similar behavior
was also described for the Bacillus subtilis RNase P.168
Xie et al. Page 13
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
Ribosomal proteins—The assembly of the ribosome, which involves the sequential binding
of numerous proteins via multiple pathways leading to large-scale changes in the conformation
of the associated RNA and proteins, represents an extreme case involving dramatic structural
changes induced by protein-RNA interaction.169–172 In fact, many ribosomal proteins have
been shown to be significantly disordered prior binding to rRNA and to acquire ordered
structure during ribosome formation.7, 16, 17
Developmental proteins—α-Fetoprotein (AFP), a member of the family of albumin-like
proteins, is a serum glycoprotein belonging to the intriguing class of onco-developmental
polypeptides. AFP is homologous to human serum albumin (HSA).173 Similarly to HAS, AFP
is able to bind a number of small molecules, including metal ions, estrogens and different fatty
acids (reviewed in 174). Importantly, the removal of all ligands from AFP is accompanied by
a complete loss of rigid 3-D structure (reviewed in 174).
Hormones and growth factors—Growth hormone (GH), prolactin (PRL) and placental
lactogen (PL), being the pituitary hormones, are members of an extensive cytokine superfamily
of hormones and receptors that share many of the same general structure-function relationships
in expressing their biological activities.175 These hormones were shown to have two receptor-
binding sites that have different topographies and electrostatic character. This feature is crucial
for the regulation of these systems by producing binding surfaces with dramatically different
binding affinities to the receptor extracellular domains. The receptor evidently possesses an
exceptional conformational plasticity to be able to bind the topographically dissimilar sites on
the hormone.175 Human parathyroid-hormone-related protein (hPTHrP) is a hormone that is
over-expressed by a large number of tumors and is produced by a variety of normal cells. The
N-terminal fragment (1–34) of hPTHrP is responsible for the major biological functions of this
hormone. Furthermore, this fragment is mostly unstructured possessing only a small content
of α-helical secondary structure.176 Secretin, a gut hormone consisting of 27 amino acid
residues, was shown to be completely unfolded in aqueous solution but gain a fully ordered
structure in the presence of 40% trifluoroethanol.177
Activators, repressors, cytokines, protease inhibitors, antimicrobial peptides
and amphibian defense peptides—Several other function-related keywords, that are
associated with intrinsically disordered proteins or regions are illustrated below. Protein AphA
is a homodimeric member of a family of transcriptional activators. Transcriptional
activators, including nuclear receptors, activate target genes through two broad classes of co-
activators – those that remodel/modify chromatin and those that directly interfere with the
general transcription machinery to facilitate formation and/or function of the preinitiation
complexes. The AphA monomer is highly unstable by itself (i.e., likely it is highly disordered)
and the dimer is formed in such a way that the two AphA chains wrap around each other,178
suggesting that the dimmer arose via a disorder-to-order transition. The first 61 amino acid
residues of the DNA-free lac repressor (i.e., a fragment which includes headpiece and the hinge
region) are disordered, and thus are unobserved in the crystal structure.179 Lymphotactin (Ltn)
is unique member of family of pro-inflammatory activation-inducible cytokines. Ltn possesses
a unique C-terminal extension, which is required for biological activity180, 181 and which is
disordered and highly mobile.182 Analysis of the Bowman-Birk protease inhibitor by Raman
optical activity revealed that it possesses a "static" type of disorder similar to that in disordered
states of poly(L-lysine) and poly(L-glutamic acid).183 The pediocin-like class IIa bacteriocins,
which are antimicrobial peptides from lactic acid bacteria,184, 185 were shown to be
significantly unstructured in water.186 Similarly, hylaseptin P1, an amphibian defense
peptide, is in a random coil conformation in aqueous solutions.187
Xie et al. Page 14
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
Neuropeptides—Pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide (PACAP),188 which
occurs naturally in two forms consisting of a 38 amino acid peptide amide (PACAP38) and its
27 amino acid N-terminus (PACAP27), belongs to the secretin/glucagons/vasoactive intestinal
peptide (VIP) family.189 Structural analysis of PACAP38 and PACAP27 revealed that these
two neuropeptides are mostly disordered and retain only small transitory amounts of stable
structure in aqueous solution.190 Other opioid peptides are the enkephalins. The term
enkephalin mainly refers to two peptides, [Met]-enkephalin and [Leu]-enkephalin, that both
are products of the proenkephalin gene. [Met]-enkephalin is Tyr-Gly-Gly-Phe-Met; [Leu]-
enkephalin has Leu in place of Met. Recently performed structural characterization of
methionine and leucine enkephalins by hydrogen/deuterium exchange and electrospray
ionization tandem mass spectrometry revealed that the monomer forms of both peptides adopt
an unfolded conformation in aqueous solvent, whereas they prefer β-turn secondary structure
under the membranemimetic environment.191
GTPase activation and GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs)—The GTP-GDP
conversion by guanine nucleotide binding proteins (GNBPs) represents an important timer in
intracellular signaling and transport processes. GNBPs are highly abundant in different
genomes. For example, there are at least 140 small GTPases encoded in human (including the
Ras, Rho, Arf, Rab and Ran GTPases), with various subclasses of this protein superfamily
being implicated in almost all aspects of cell biology, including proliferation,
nucleocytoplasmic transport, differentiation, vesicle trafficking, cytoskeletal organization and
gene expression.192 These small GTPases are considered to be molecular switches, the cycling
of which between active and inactive forms is regulated by cellular factors.192 There are two
major classes of GNBP regulators, the guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs), which
promote the formation of active GTP-bound GTPases and the GTPase activating proteins
(GAPs), which promote GTPase inactivation by stimulating GTP-hydrolysis activity.193 In
fact, the natural rate of GNBP-mediated GTP hydrolysis is slow but the reaction is accelerated
by up to five orders of magnitude by the interaction of GNBPs with GAPs.194 At least 160
human genes have been recently predicted to encode proteins that resemble GAPs for various
members of the Ras GPTase superfamily.195 Furthermore, ~ 0.5% of all predicted human
genes likely encode GAPs suggesting that these proteins have widespread and important roles
in GTPase regulation. Finally, such famous domains as ankyrin, BAR, BTK, CH, CNH, PDZ,
PTB, RUN, SAM, SH2, SH3, WW and many others are all GAPs.196
Chromatin regulator—Several nuclear proteins serve as chromatin regulators, being
involved in modulation of chromosome structure, chromatin and nucleosome remodeling and
therefore playing a role in the controlling of gene transcription. Members of the HMGA family
of non-histone chromatin proteins (formerly known as HMGI/Y proteins) serve as an
illustrative example of such chromatin regulators.197 HMGA proteins are the founding
members of a new class of regulatory elements called ‘architectural transcription factors’ that
participate in a wide variety of cellular processes including regulation of inducible gene
transcription, integration of retroviruses into chromosomes, the induction of neoplastic
transformation and promotion of metastatic progression of cancer cells.198 HMGA proteins
are highly flexible and are characterized by the total lack of ordered structure.199–201
Pyrogen—Substances that can cause a rise in body temperature are known as pyrogens. Fever
is the multiphasic response of elevation and decline of the body core temperature regulated by
central thermoregulatory mechanisms localized in the preoptic area of the hypothalamus. Some
cytokines (which are highly inducible, secreted proteins mediating intercellular communication
in the nervous and immune system), including interleukin 1 (IL-1), interleukin 6 (IL-6) and
the tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα), act as endogenous pyrogens.202 The role of intrinsic
disorder in cytokine function was already discussed.
Xie et al. Page 15
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
Opioid peptides and endorphin—Opioid peptides are short natural peptides that mimic
the effect of opiates in the brain and therefore are potent pain suppressants. Some opioid
peptides (e.g., endorphin, dynorphin and endorphin) are produced endogenously, some are
produced by microbes (deltorphins and dermorphine), whereas others are absorbed from
partially digested food (casomorphins, exorphins, and rubiscolins). Opioid peptides mediate
their physiological and pharmacological effects through three major opioid receptor types (μ,
δ, κ),203 which are the members of the G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) family.204
The 1H-NMR spectra of human β-endorphin (the largest natural opioid peptide of 31 amino
acid residues) indicate that the peptide exists in random-coil conformation in aqueous solution
but becomes helical in mixed solvent.205
Inhibitors—The activity of many important proteins is regulated by specific proteins-
inhibitors. It has been already mentioned that the functionality of Cdk inhibitor proteins relies
on intrinsic disorder. Serine protease inhibitor elafin is a 57 amino acid residue peptide
inhibiting human leukocyte elastase, porcine pancreatic elastase and proteinase-3.206 Elafin
was shown to be almost completely unfolded in aqueous solutions.207
Protein phosphatase inhibitors—Calcineurin (CaN) is a calcium- and calmodulin-
dependent protein serine/threonine phosphate, which is critical for several important cellular
processes, including T-cell activation.208 CaN is a heterodimer composed of subunits A and
B (CaNA and CaN, respectively).208 CaN phosphatase activity is regulated by Ca2+ binding
to CaNB and by Ca2+-induced binding of calmodulin (CaM) to CaNA.209 Activity of CaN is
modulated by a number of factors, including an autoinhibitory domain (residues 457–479),
which binds in the active site cleft in the absence of Ca2+/CaM and inhibits the enzyme, acting
in concert with the CaM binding domain to confer CaM regulation.209 Analysis of CaN crystal
structure revealed that CaNA residues 1–13, 374–468, and 487–521 are not visible in the
electron density map; i.e., disordered.209 Importantly, long disordered region 374–468
includes the CaM-binding helix.209 Therefore, this transient helix in CaN becomes bound and
surrounded by CaM, turning on the CaN's serine/threonine phosphatase activity. Locating the
CaN helix within the disordered region is essential for enabling CaM to surround its target
upon binding.6
Cyclin—The progression of cells through the cell cycle is regulated by several specific
proteins, known as cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases. The concentrations of cyclins vary
in a cyclical fashion during the cell cycle. They are produced or degraded as needed in order
to drive the cell through the different stages of the cell cycle. The crucial role of intrinsic
disorder in function and regulation of Cdk–cyclin complexes was already discussed.
Biological processes and functions associated with ordered proteins
Table 4 and Table 5 list the top 20 biological processes and functions that are significantly
associated with predicted order. An examination of order-correlated keywords suggests the
presence of 5 major functional categories: (1) catalysis (this category includes all functions
listed in Table 5; i.e., oxidoreductase, transferase, hydrolase, lyase, glycosidase, kinase,
isomerase, ligase, decarboxylase, glycosyltransferase, protease, acyltransferase,
monooxygenase, aminotransferase, metalloprotease, methyltransferase, aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetase, aminopeptidase, and dioxygenase); (2) transport (electron transport, sugar
transport, and transport), (3) biosynthesis (amino-acid biosynthesis, GMP biosynthesis,
gluconeogenesis, amino-acid biosynthesis, pyrimidine biosynthesis, peptidoglycan synthesis,
lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis, aromatic amino acid biosynthesis, branched-chain amino
acid biosynthesis, purine biosynthesis, lipid a biosynthesis, and lipid synthesis) (4) metabolism
(carbohydrate metabolism, tricarboxylic acid cycle, aromatic hydrocarbons catabolism, and
one-carbon metabolism) (5) trans-membrane proteins (porins). Note that catalysis overlaps
Xie et al. Page 16
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
strongly with biosynthesis and metabolism in that all of the proteins associated with these
keywords are enzymes. The proteins associated with transport are often membrane proteins
and are necessarily structured so that their backbone hydrogen bonds are formed in the low
dielectric environment of the membrane. Other transport-associated proteins (which are not
the membrane proteins) often need to bind very small molecules (or a single atom such as
metals, or even electrons), which requires a precise coordination, and therefore, a well-defined
structure. Proteins from the fifth category, porins, represent are transmembrane proteins that
are large enough to facilitate passive diffusion. They are prevalent in the outer membrane of
the mitochondria and Gram-negative bacteria. Porins are almost entirely composed of beta
sheets and control the diffusion of small metabolites like sugars, ions, and amino acids.210
They have been shown to have a highly stable structure using various characterization methods.
211 For example, porin from Paracoccus denitrificans is extremely stable toward heat, pH,
and chemical denaturants.212 Thus, current result agrees with our previous observations that
proteins involved in catalysis, transport, biosynthesis and metabolism are less disordered than
regulatory proteins.
Interestingly, the smaller disorder content as well as the greater amount of structural
information (e.g. a greater PDB coverage) has previously been reported for proteins from the
first four functional categories as compared to highly disordered signaling and cancer-
associated proteins.16 Thus, the current result agrees with our previous observations that
proteins involved in catalysis, transport, biosynthesis and metabolism are less disordered than
regulatory proteins.
Finally, one noticeable exception should be mentioned here. Although glycosidases are among
the top 20 proteins with predicted functional order (Table 5), many of them in fact possess
large disordered regions, even though their catalytic function requires a well defined structure.
This is especially true for cellulases (Biological process: cellulose degradation, strong
correlation with predicted order, see Table S1) for which protein disorder has been
experimentally determined.213, 214 These cellulases are composed of a catalytic domain,
linked to a cellulose binding domain through a long disordered linker (109 amino acid residues
in Cel5G, an endoglucanase from Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis), which could be
considered as an entropic spring. In fact, the SAXS analysis of dimensions, shape, and
conformation of Cel5G full length in solution and especially of the linker between the catalytic
module and the cellulose-binding module revealed that the linker is unstructured, and unusually
long and flexible.213 This modular organization and the presence of a disordered linker are
crucial to optimize the biphasic process of crystalline cellulose degradation.
Another example of an enzyme that possesses functional disordered regions is retinaldehyde
dehydrogenase II (RalDH2).215 This enzyme converts retinal to the transcriptional regulator
retinoic acid in the developing embryo. It has been shown that a 20-amino acid span in the
substrate access channel is disordered, but folds during the course of catalysis and provides a
means for an enzyme that requires a large substrate access channel to restrict access to the
catalytic machinery by smaller compounds that might potentially enter the active site and be
metabolized.215 Therefore, RalDH2 represents a unique example of a protein that exhibits a
catalytic activity in which a large disordered region folds upon catalysis.
Comparing the identified disorder functions with literature findings
Recently, literature analysis identified 28 functions associated with 98 confirmed disordered
regions containing 30 or longer contiguous disorder residues.8, 9 These functions were grouped
into four broad categories: molecular recognition, molecular assembly, protein modification,
and entropic chains. Entropic chains carry out functions that depend directly on the disordered
state, and so such functions are simply outside the capabilities of fully folded structures.8, 9
The use of partially folded subunits for molecular assembly appears to have significant
Xie et al. Page 17
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
advantages compared to the use of ordered subunits.21, 22 Molecular recognition appears to
be a common function for both ordered and disordered proteins: molecular recognition by
disordered proteins may be primarily used for signaling whereas recognition by ordered
proteins may be primarily used for catalysis,8, 9 or for the assembly of functional complexes.
Finally, sites of some types of posttranslational modification frequently occur within the
regions with very strong preference for disorder.8–11, 18, 19, 22, 216
Out of 28 functions associated with the confirmed disordered regions, 13 were also found in
the Swiss-Prot keyword list. Eleven of these functions are strongly correlated with predicted
disorder with p-value above 0.95. Table 6 lists these 11 functions together with their z-scores.
Furthermore, previously reported16 strong functional correlations to intrinsic disorder were
also found by using the method proposed in this study. These results strongly support the
validity of the proposed statistical methodology for finding disorder-correlated functions.
Conclusions
We proposed a statistical approach that estimates the correlations between protein structure
and protein function. As an application, we studied the relationship between intrinsic protein
disorder and function in the Swiss-Prot database. Overall, 238 Swiss-Prot functional keywords
were discovered to be strongly associated with predicted intrinsic disorder, and 302 function
keywords were shown to be strongly correlated with predicted order. We validated a significant
fraction of these findings by comparing them to literature data. The numerous correlations
between the known experimental data and the results of the analysis demonstrate the general
validity of our approach. However, a more thorough comparison with literature data will be
needed to determine the frequencies with which exceptions occur as compared to the observed
trends. In our original, manual curation of disorder-function correlations, we determined that
each function was unambiguously associated with a specific region of disorder.8, 9 While the
current methodology does not determine whether each function is directly associated with a
disordered segment, the literature data verify that these functions are indeed, for the most part,
associated with regions of disorder. Of special interest is that disease related proteins were
shown to have the high correlation with disordered regions of proteins (see the last paper of
this series30). Overall, this approach provides an innovative and relevant method to examine
protein structure-function relationships.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgment
The authors express their deepest gratitude to Celeste Brown and Predrag Radivojac for numerous valuable discussions.
This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health LM007688-0A1 (A. K. D. and Z. O.) and
GM071714-01A2 (A.K.D and V.N.U.), and by the Indiana Genomics Initiative (INGEN) ( A. K. D.). INGEN is
supported in part by Lilly Endowment Inc. The Programs of the Russian Academy of Sciences for the "Molecular and
cellular biology" and "Fundamental science for medicine" provided partial support to V. N. U., and L. M. I. was
supported by the NSF grant MCB 0444818.
References
1. Fischer E. Einfluss der Configuration auf die Wirkung der Enzyme. Ber. Dt. Chem. Ges 1894;27:2985–
2993.
2. Wu H. Studies on denaturation of proteins XIII A theory of denaturation. Chin. J. Physiol 1931;1:219–
234.
3. Mirsky AE, Pauling L. On the structure of native, denatured, and coagulated proteins. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1936;22:439–447. [PubMed: 16577722]
Xie et al. Page 18
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
4. Sela M, White FH Jr, Anfinsen CB. Reductive cleavage of disulfide bridges in ribonuclease. Science
1957;125:691–692. [PubMed: 13421663]
5. Berman HM, Westbrook J, Feng Z, Gilliland G, Bhat TN, Weissig H, Shindyalov IN, Bourne PE. The
Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Res 2000;28:235–242. [PubMed: 10592235]
6. Dunker AK, Lawson JD, Brown CJ, Williams RM, Romero P, Oh JS, Oldfield CJ, Campen AM, Ratliff
CM, Hipps KW, Ausio J, Nissen MS, Reeves R, Kang C, Kissinger CR, Bailey RW, Griswold MD,
Chiu W, Garner EC, Obradovic Z. Intrinsically disordered protein. J Mol Graph Model 2001;19:26–
59. [PubMed: 11381529]
7. Uversky VN. Natively unfolded proteins: a point where biology waits for physics. Protein Sci
2002;11:739–756. [PubMed: 11910019]
8. Dunker AK, Brown CJ, Lawson JD, Iakoucheva LM, Obradovic Z. Intrinsic disorder and protein
function. Biochemistry 2002;41:6573–6582. [PubMed: 12022860]
9. Dunker AK, Brown CJ, Obradovic Z. Identification and functions of usefully disordered proteins. Adv
Protein Chem 2002;62:25–49. [PubMed: 12418100]
10. Tompa P. Intrinsically unstructured proteins. Trends Biochem Sci 2002;27:527–533. [PubMed:
12368089]
11. Wright PE, Dyson HJ. Intrinsically unstructured proteins: re-assessing the protein structure-function
paradigm. J Mol Biol 1999;293:321–331. [PubMed: 10550212]
12. Dunker AK, Obradovic Z. The protein trinity--linking function and disorder. Nat Biotechnol
2001;19:805–806. [PubMed: 11533628]
13. Uversky VN. What does it mean to be natively unfolded? Eur J Biochem 2002;269:2–12. [PubMed:
11784292]
14. Oldfield CJ, Cheng Y, Cortese MS, Brown CJ, Uversky VN, Dunker AK. Comparing and combining
predictors of mostly disordered proteins. Biochemistry 2005;44:1989–2000. [PubMed: 15697224]
15. Dunker AK, Obradovic Z, Romero P, Garner EC, Brown CJ. Intrinsic protein disorder in complete
genomes. Genome Inform Ser Workshop Genome Inform 2000;11:161–171.
16. Iakoucheva LM, Brown CJ, Lawson JD, Obradovic Z, Dunker AK. Intrinsic disorder in cell-signaling
and cancer-associated proteins. J Mol Biol 2002;323:573–584. [PubMed: 12381310]
17. Uversky VN, Gillespie JR, Fink AL. Why are "natively unfolded" proteins unstructured under
physiologic conditions? Proteins 2000;41:415–427. [PubMed: 11025552]
18. Dyson HJ, Wright PE. Coupling of folding and binding for unstructured proteins. Curr Opin Struct
Biol 2002;12:54–60. [PubMed: 11839490]
19. Dyson HJ, Wright PE. Intrinsically unstructured proteins and their functions. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
2005;6:197–208. [PubMed: 15738986]
20. Daughdrill, GW.; Pielak, GJ.; Uversky, VN.; Cortese, MS.; Dunker, AK. Natively disordered proteins.
In: Buchner, J.; Kiefhaber, T., editors. Handbook of Protein Folding. Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-
VCH, Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA; 2005. p. 271-353.
21. Dunker AK, Cortese MS, Romero P, Iakoucheva LM, Uversky VN. Flexible nets. The roles of intrinsic
disorder in protein interaction networks. Febs J 2005;272:5129–5148. [PubMed: 16218947]
22. Uversky VN, Oldfield CJ, Dunker AK. Showing your ID: intrinsic disorder as an ID for recognition,
regulation and cell signaling. J Mol Recognit 2005;18:343–384. [PubMed: 16094605]
23. Haynes C, Oldfield CJ, Ji F, Klitgord N, Cusick ME, Radivojac P, Uversky VN, Vidal M, Iakoucheva
LM. Intrinsic Disorder is a Common Feature of Hub Proteins from Four Eukaryotic Interactomes.
PLoS Comput Biol. 2006in press
24. Vucetic S, Obradovic Z, Vacic V, Radivojac P, Peng K, Iakoucheva LM, Cortese MS, Lawson JD,
Brown CJ, Sikes JG, Newton CD, Dunker AK. DisProt: a database of protein disorder. Bioinformatics
2005;21:137–140. [PubMed: 15310560]
25. Dyson HJ, Wright PE. According to current textbooks, a well-defined three-dimensional structure is
a prerequisite for the function of a protein. Is this correct? IUBMB Life 2006;58:107–109. [PubMed:
16608823]
26. Peng K, Vucetic S, Radivojac P, Brown CJ, Dunker AK, Obradovic Z. Optimizing long intrinsic
disorder predictors with protein evolutionary information. J Bioinform Comput Biol 2005;3:35–60.
[PubMed: 15751111]
Xie et al. Page 19
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
27. Boeckmann B, Bairoch A, Apweiler R, Blatter MC, Estreicher A, Gasteiger E, Martin MJ, Michoud
K, O'Donovan C, Phan I, Pilbout S, Schneider M. The SWISS-PROT protein knowledgebase and its
supplement TrEMBL in 2003. Nucleic Acids Res 2003;31:365–370. [PubMed: 12520024]
28. Ward JJ, Sodhi JS, McGuffin LJ, Buxton BF, Jones DT. Prediction and functional analysis of native
disorder in proteins from the three kingdoms of life. J Mol Biol 2004;337:635–645. [PubMed:
15019783]
29. Xie H, Vucetic S, Iakoucheva LM, Oldfield CJ, Dunker AK, Obradovic Z, Uversky VN. Functional
anthology of intrinsic disorder. II. Cellular components, domains, technical terms, developmental
processes and coding sequence diversity associated with long disordered regions. J Proteome Res.
2006
30. Xie H, Vucetic S, Iakoucheva LM, Oldfield CJ, Dunker AK, Obradovic Z, Uversky VN. Functional
anthology of intrinsic disorder. III. Ligands, postranslational modifications and diseases associated
with long disordered regions. J Proteome Res. 2006
31. O'Donovan C, Martin MJ, Glemet E, Codani JJ, Apweiler R. Removing redundancy in SWISS-PROT
and TrEMBL. Bioinformatics 1999;15:258–259. [PubMed: 10222414]
32. Enright AJ, Van Dongen S, Ouzounis CA. An efficient algorithm for large-scale detection of protein
families. Nucleic Acids Res 2002;30:1575–1584. [PubMed: 11917018]
33. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ. Basic local alignment search tool. J Mol
Biol 1990;215:403–410. [PubMed: 2231712]
34. Romero P, Obradovic Z, Dunker AK. Sequence data analysis for long disordered regions prediction
in the calcineurin family. Genome Informatics 1997;8:110–124. [PubMed: 11072311]
35. Romero, P.; Obradovic, Z.; Kissinger, C.; Villafranca, JE.; Dunker, AK. Identifying disordered
regions in proteins from amino acid sequence; 1997 Proceedings of International Conference on
Neural Networks; 1997. p. 90-95.
36. Xie Q, Arnold GE, Romero P, Obradovic Z, Garner E, Dunker AK. The Sequence Attribute Method
for Determining Relationships Between Sequence and Protein Disorder. Genome Inform Ser
Workshop Genome Inform 1998;9:193–200.
37. Romero P, Obradovic Z, Li X, Garner EC, Brown CJ, Dunker AK. Sequence complexity of disordered
protein. Proteins 2001;42:38–48. [PubMed: 11093259]
38. Sickmeier M, Hamilton JA, LeGall T, Vacic V, Cortese MS, Tantos A, Szabo B, Tompa P, Chen J,
Uversky VN, Obradovic Z, Dunker AK. DisProt: the Database of Disordered Proteins. Nucleic Acids
Res 2007;35:D786–D793. [PubMed: 17145717]
39. Blau HM, Baltimore D. Differentiation requires continuous regulation. J Cell Biol 1991;112:781–
783. [PubMed: 1999456]
40. Adams JC, Watt FM. Regulation of development and differentiation by the extracellular matrix.
Development 1993;117:1183–1198. [PubMed: 8404525]
41. Watt FM. The extracellular matrix and cell shape. Trends Biochem Sci 1986;11:482–485.
42. Hay, ED. Cell Biology of Extracellular Matrix. New York: Plenum Press; 1981.
43. Ruoslahti E, Pierschbacher MD. New perspectives in cell adhesion: RGD and integrins. Science
1987;238:491–497. [PubMed: 2821619]
44. House-Pompeo K, Xu Y, Joh D, Speziale P, Hook M. Conformational changes in the fibronectin
binding MSCRAMMs are induced by ligand binding. J Biol Chem 1996;271:1379–1384. [PubMed:
8576127]
45. Kim JH, Singvall J, Schwarz-Linek U, Johnson BJ, Potts JR, Hook M. BBK32, a fibronectin binding
MSCRAMM from Borrelia burgdorferi, contains a disordered region that undergoes a
conformational change on ligand binding. J Biol Chem 2004;279:41706–41714. [PubMed:
15292204]
46. Campbell KM, Terrell AR, Laybourn PJ, Lumb KJ. Intrinsic structural disorder of the C-terminal
activation domain from the bZIP transcription factor Fos. Biochemistry 2000;39:2708–2713.
[PubMed: 10704222]
47. Haynes C, Iakoucheva LM. Serine/arginine-rich splicing factors belong to a class of intrinsically
disordered proteins. Nucleic Acids Res 2006;34:305–312. [PubMed: 16407336]
48. Bhalla J, Storchan GB, Maccarthy CM, Uversky VN, Tcherkasskaya O. Local flexibility in molecular
function paradigm. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2006
Xie et al. Page 20
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
49. Liu J, Perumal NB, Oldfield CJ, Su EW, Uversky VN, Dunker AK. Intrinsic Disorder in Transcription
Factors. Biochemistry 2006;45:6873–6888. [PubMed: 16734424]
50. Minezaki Y, Homma K, Kinjo AR, Nishikawa K. Human transcription factors contain a high fraction
of intrinsically disordered regions essential for transcriptional regulation. J Mol Biol 2006;359:1137–
1149. [PubMed: 16697407]
51. Lewis JD, Abbott DW, Ausio J. A haploid affair: core histone transitions during spermatogenesis.
Biochem Cell Biol 2003;81:131–140. [PubMed: 12897846]
52. Ausio, J. Histone H1 and the evolution of the nuclear sperm-specific proteins. In: Jamieson, BGM.;
Ausio, J.; Justine, JL., editors. Advances in Spermatozoal Phylogeny and Taxonomy. Paris, France:
Memoires du Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle; 1995.
53. Ausio J, Subirana JA. A high molecular weight nuclear basic protein from the bivalve mollusc Spisula
solidissima. J Biol Chem 1982;257:2802–2805. [PubMed: 7061451]
54. Ausio J, Toumadje A, McParland R, Becker RR, Johnson WC Jr, van Holde KE. Structural
characterization of the trypsin-resistant core in the nuclear sperm-specific protein from Spisula
solidissima. Biochemistry 1987;26:975–982. [PubMed: 3567164]
55. Lewis JD, Ausio J. Protamine-like proteins: evidence for a novel chromatin structure. Biochem Cell
Biol 2002;80:353–361. [PubMed: 12123288]
56. Lewis JD, McParland R, Ausio J. PL-I of Spisula solidissima, a highly elongated sperm-specific
histone H1. Biochemistry 2004;43:7766–7775. [PubMed: 15196019]
57. Harvey AC, Downs JA. What functions do linker histones provide? Mol Microbiol 2004;53:771–
775. [PubMed: 15255891]
58. Isenberg I. Histones. Annu Rev Biochem 1979;48:159–191. [PubMed: 382983]
59. Boublik M, Bradbury EM, Crane-Robinson C. An investigation of the conformational changes in
histones F1 and F2a1 by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Eur J Biochem 1970;14:486–497.
[PubMed: 5530727]
60. Li HJ, Wickett R, Craig AM, Isenberg I. Conformational changes in histone IV. Biopolymers
1972;11:375–397. [PubMed: 5016554]
61. Wickett RR, Li HJ, Isenberg I. Salt effects on histone IV conformation. Biochemistry 1972;11:2952–
2957. [PubMed: 4339475]
62. D'Anna JA Jr, Isenberg I. Conformational changes of histone ARE(F3, III). Biochemistry
1974;13:4987–4992. [PubMed: 4474008]
63. D'Anna JA Jr, Isenberg I. Conformational changes of histone LAK (f2a2). Biochemistry
1974;13:2093–2098. [PubMed: 4857059]
64. Munishkina LA, Fink AL, Uversky VN. Conformational prerequisites for formation of amyloid fibrils
from histones. J Mol Biol 2004;342:1305–1324. [PubMed: 15351653]
65. Luger K, Mader AW, Richmond RK, Sargent DF, Richmond TJ. Crystal structure of the nucleosome
core particle at 2.8 A resolution. Nature 1997;389:251–260. [PubMed: 9305837]
66. Arents G, Burlingame RW, Wang BC, Love WE, Moudrianakis EN. The nucleosomal core histone
octamer at 3.1 A resolution: a tripartite protein assembly and a left-handed superhelix. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1991;88:10148–10152. [PubMed: 1946434]
67. Hansen JC. Conformational dynamics of the chromatin fiber in solution: determinants, mechanisms,
and functions. Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 2002;31:361–392. [PubMed: 11988475]
68. Hansen JC, Lu X, Ross ED, Woody RW. Intrinsic protein disorder, amino acid composition, and
histone terminal domains. J Biol Chem 2006;281:1853–1856. [PubMed: 16301309]
69. Walker IO. Differential dissociation of histone tails from core chromatin. Biochemistry
1984;23:5622–5628. [PubMed: 6509040]
70. Mangenot S, Leforestier A, Vachette P, Durand D, Livolant F. Salt-induced conformation and
interaction changes of nucleosome core particles. Biophys J 2002;82:345–356. [PubMed: 11751321]
71. Morgan DO. Principles of CDK regulation. Nature 1995;374:131–134. [PubMed: 7877684]
72. Morgan DO. Cyclin-dependent kinases: engines, clocks, and microprocessors. Annu Rev Cell Dev
Biol 1997;13:261–291. [PubMed: 9442875]
73. Nigg EA. Mitotic kinases as regulators of cell division and its checkpoints. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
2001;2:21–32. [PubMed: 11413462]
Xie et al. Page 21
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
74. Pavletich NP. Mechanisms of cyclin-dependent kinase regulation: structures of Cdks, their cyclin
activators, and Cip and INK4 inhibitors. J Mol Biol 1999;287:821–828. [PubMed: 10222191]
75. Kriwacki RW, Hengst L, Tennant L, Reed SI, Wright PE. Structural studies of p21Waf1/Cip1/Sdi1
in the free and Cdk2-bound state: conformational disorder mediates binding diversity. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1996;93:11504–11509. [PubMed: 8876165]
76. Flaugh SL, Lumb KJ. Effects of macromolecular crowding on the intrinsically disordered proteins
c-Fos and p27(Kip1). Biomacromolecules 2001;2:538–540. [PubMed: 11749217]
77. Bienkiewicz EA, Adkins JN, Lumb KJ. Functional consequences of preorganized helical structure
in the intrinsically disordered cell-cycle inhibitor p27(Kip1). Biochemistry 2002;41:752–759.
[PubMed: 11790096]
78. Lacy ER, Filippov I, Lewis WS, Otieno S, Xiao L, Weiss S, Hengst L, Kriwacki R. W. p27 binds
cyclin-CDK complexes through a sequential mechanism involving binding-induced protein folding.
Nat Struct Mol Biol 2004;11:358–364. [PubMed: 15024385]
79. Adkins JN, Lumb KJ. Intrinsic structural disorder and sequence features of the cell cycle inhibitor
p57Kip2. Proteins 2002;46:1–7. [PubMed: 11746698]
80. Schmucker D, Clemens JC, Shu H, Worby CA, Xiao J, Muda M, Dixon JE, Zipursky SL. Drosophila
Dscam is an axon guidance receptor exhibiting extraordinary molecular diversity. Cell
2000;101:671–684. [PubMed: 10892653]
81. Zhu J, Shendure J, Mitra RD, Church GM. Single molecule profiling of alternative pre-mRNA
splicing. Science 2003;301:836–838. [PubMed: 12907803]
82. Tabuchi K, Sudhof TC. Structure and evolution of neurexin genes: insight into the mechanism of
alternative splicing. Genomics 2002;79:849–859. [PubMed: 12036300]
83. Jurica MS, Moore MJ. Pre-mRNA splicing: awash in a sea of proteins. Mol Cell 2003;12:5–14.
[PubMed: 12887888]
84. Anderson, CW.; Appella, E. Signaling to the p53 tumor suppressor through pathways activated by
genotoxic and nongenotoxic stress. In: Bradshaw, RA.; Dennis, EA., editors. Handbook of Cell
Signaling. New York: Academic Press; 2004. p. 237-247.
85. Hollstein M, Sidransky D, Vogelstein B, Harris CC. p53 mutations in human cancers. Science
1991;253:49–53. [PubMed: 1905840]
86. Balint EE, Vousden KH. Activation and activities of the p53 tumour suppressor protein. Br J Cancer
2001;85:1813–1823. [PubMed: 11747320]
87. Zhao R, Gish K, Murphy M, Yin Y, Notterman D, Hoffman WH, Tom E, Mack DH, Levine AJ.
Analysis of p53-regulated gene expression patterns using oligonucleotide arrays. Genes Dev
2000;14:981–993. [PubMed: 10783169]
88. Bell S, Klein C, Muller L, Hansen S, Buchner J. p53 contains large unstructured regions in its native
state. J. Mol. Biol 2002;322:917–927. [PubMed: 12367518]
89. Lee H, Mok KH, Muhandiram R, Park KH, Suk JE, Kim DH, Chang J, Sung YC, Choi KY, Han KH.
Local structural elements in the mostly unstructured transcriptional activation domain of human p53.
J Biol Chem 2000;275:29426–29432. [PubMed: 10884388]
90. Dawson R, Muller L, Dehner A, Klein C, Kessler H, Buchner J. The N-terminal domain of p53 is
natively unfolded. J Mol Biol 2003;332:1131–1141. [PubMed: 14499615]
91. Kussie PH, Gorina S, Marechal V, Elenbaas B, Moreau J, Levine AJ, Pavletich NP. Structure of the
MDM2 oncoprotein bound to the p53 tumor suppressor transactivation domain. Science
1996;274:948–953. [PubMed: 8875929]
92. Rosal R, Pincus MR, Brandt-Rauf PW, Fine RL, Michl J, Wang H. NMR solution structure of a
peptide from the mdm-2 binding domain of the p53 protein that is selectively cytotoxic to cancer
cells. Biochemistry 2004;43:1854–1861. [PubMed: 14967026]
93. Vargas DA, Takahashi S, Ronai Z. Mdm2: A regulator of cell growth and death. Adv Cancer Res
2003;89:1–34. [PubMed: 14587869]
94. Ayed A, Mulder FA, Yi GS, Lu Y, Kay LE, Arrowsmith CH. Latent and active p53 are identical in
conformation. Nat Struct Biol 2001;8:756–760. [PubMed: 11524676]
95. Weinberg RL, Freund SM, Veprintsev DB, Bycroft M, Fersht AR. Regulation of DNA binding of
p53 by its C-terminal domain. J Mol Biol 2004;342:801–811. [PubMed: 15342238]
Xie et al. Page 22
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
96. Cho Y, Gorina S, Jeffrey PD, Pavletich NP. Crystal structure of a p53 tumor suppressor-DNA
complex: understanding tumorigenic mutations. Science 1994;265:346–355. [PubMed: 8023157]
97. Joerger AC, Ang HC, Veprintsev DB, Blair CM, Fersht AR. Structures of p53 cancer mutants and
mechanism of rescue by second-site suppressor mutations. J Biol Chem 2005;280:16030–16037.
[PubMed: 15703170]
98. Clore GM, Ernst J, Clubb R, Omichinski JG, Kennedy WM, Sakaguchi K, Appella E, Gronenborn
AM. Refined solution structure of the oligomerization domain of the tumour suppressor p53. Nat
Struct Biol 1995;2:321–333. [PubMed: 7796267]
99. Lee W, Harvey TS, Yin Y, Yau P, Litchfield D, Arrowsmith CH. Solution structure of the tetrameric
minimum transforming domain of p53. Nat Struct Biol 1994;1:877–890. [PubMed: 7773777]
100. Canadillas JM, Tidow H, Freund SM, Rutherford TJ, Ang HC, Fersht AR. Solution structure of p53
core domain: structural basis for its instability. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006;103:2109–2114.
[PubMed: 16461916]
101. Veprintsev DB, Freund SM, Andreeva A, Rutledge SE, Tidow H, Canadillas JM, Blair CM, Fersht
AR. Core domain interactions in full-length p53 in solution. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2006;103:2115–2119. [PubMed: 16461914]
102. Hinds MG, Day CL. Regulation of apoptosis: uncovering the binding determinants. Curr Opin Struct
Biol 2005;15:690–699. [PubMed: 16263267]
103. Puthalakath H, Strasser A. Keeping killers on a tight leash: transcriptional and post-translational
control of the pro-apoptotic activity of BH3-only proteins. Cell Death Differ 2002;9:505–512.
[PubMed: 11973609]
104. Liu X, Dai S, Zhu Y, Marrack P, Kappler JW. The structure of a Bcl-xL/Bim fragment complex:
implications for Bim function. Immunity 2003;19:341–352. [PubMed: 14499110]
105. Sattler M, Liang H, Nettesheim D, Meadows RP, Harlan JE, Eberstadt M, Yoon HS, Shuker SB,
Chang BS, Minn AJ, Thompson CB, Fesik SW. Structure of Bcl-xL-Bak peptide complex:
recognition between regulators of apoptosis. Science 1997;275:983–986. [PubMed: 9020082]
106. Petros AM, Nettesheim DG, Wang Y, Olejniczak ET, Meadows RP, Mack J, Swift K, Matayoshi
ED, Zhang H, Thompson CB, Fesik SW. Rationale for Bcl-xL/Bad peptide complex formation from
structure, mutagenesis, and biophysical studies. Protein Sci 2000;9:2528–2534. [PubMed:
11206074]
107. Yan N, Gu L, Kokel D, Chai J, Li W, Han A, Chen L, Xue D, Shi Y. Structural, biochemical, and
functional analyses of CED-9 recognition by the proapoptotic proteins EGL-1 and CED-4. Mol Cell
2004;15:999–1006. [PubMed: 15383288]
108. Fan J, Zhang Q, Tochio H, Li M, Zhang M. Structural basis of diverse sequence-dependent target
recognition by the 8 kDa dynein light chain. J Mol Biol 2001;306:97–108. [PubMed: 11178896]
109. Hinds MG, Smits C, Fredericks-Short R, Risk JM, Bailey M, Huang DC, Day CL. Bim, Bad and
Bmf: intrinsically unstructured BH3-only proteins that undergo a localized conformational change
upon binding to prosurvival Bcl-2 targets. Cell Death Differ 2006;14:128–136. [PubMed:
16645638]
110. Oldfield CJ, Cheng Y, Cortese MS, Romero P, Uversky VN, Dunker AK. Coupled folding and
binding with alpha-helix-forming molecular recognition elements. Biochemistry 2005;44:12454–
12470. [PubMed: 16156658]
111. Huang DT, Walden H, Duda D, Schulman BA. Ubiquitin-like protein activation. Oncogene
2004;23:1958–1971. [PubMed: 15021884]
112. Hay RT. Role of ubiquitin-like proteins in transcriptional regulation. Ernst Schering Res Found
Workshop 2006:173–192. [PubMed: 16568955]
113. Catic A, Collins C, Church GM, Ploegh HL. Preferred in vivo ubiquitination sites. Bioinformatics
2004;20:3302–3307. [PubMed: 15256413]
114. Macauley MS, Errington WJ, Scharpf M, Mackereth CD, Blaszczak AG, Graves BJ, McIntosh LP.
Beads-on-a-string, characterization of ETS-1 sumoylated within its flexible N-terminal sequence.
J Biol Chem 2006;281:4164–4172. [PubMed: 16319071]
115. Logan CY, Nusse R. The Wnt signaling pathway in development and disease. Annu Rev Cell Dev
Biol 2004;20:781–810. [PubMed: 15473860]
Xie et al. Page 23
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
116. Kelleher FC, Fennelly D, Rafferty M. Common critical pathways in embryogenesis and cancer. Acta
Oncol 2006;45:375–388. [PubMed: 16760173]
117. Clevers H. Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in development and disease. Cell 2006;127:469–480.
[PubMed: 17081971]
118. Prud'homme B, Lartillot N, Balavoine G, Adoutte A, Vervoort M. Phylogenetic analysis of the Wnt
gene family. Insights from lophotrochozoan members. Curr Biol 2002;12:1395. [PubMed:
12194820]
119. Kusserow A, Pang K, Sturm C, Hrouda M, Lentfer J, Schmidt HA, Technau U, von Haeseler A,
Hobmayer B, Martindale MQ, Holstein TW. Unexpected complexity of the Wnt gene family in a
sea anemone. Nature 2005;433:156–160. [PubMed: 15650739]
120. Gordon MD, Nusse R. Wnt signaling: multiple pathways, multiple receptors, and multiple
transcription factors. J Biol Chem 2006;281:22429–22433. [PubMed: 16793760]
121. Moon RT, Bowerman B, Boutros M, Perrimon N. The promise and perils of Wnt signaling through
beta-catenin. Science 2002;296:1644–1646. [PubMed: 12040179]
122. Kohn AD, Moon RT. Wnt and calcium signaling: beta-catenin-independent pathways. Cell Calcium
2005;38:439–446. [PubMed: 16099039]
123. Katoh M, Kirikoshi H, Saitoh T, Sagara N, Koike J. Alternative splicing of the WNT-2B/WNT-13
gene. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2000;275:209–216. [PubMed: 10944466]
124. Pospisil H, Herrmann A, Butherus K, Pirson S, Reich JG, Kemmner W. Verification of predicted
alternatively spliced Wnt genes reveals two new splice variants (CTNNB1 and LRP5) and altered
Axin-1 expression during tumour progression. BMC Genomics 2006;7:148. [PubMed: 16772034]
125. Struewing IT, Toborek A, Mao CD. Mitochondrial and nuclear forms of Wnt13 are generated via
alternative promoters, alternative RNA splicing, and alternative translation start sites. J Biol Chem
2006;281:7282–7293. [PubMed: 16407296]
126. Ding Y, Dale T. Wnt signal transduction: kinase cogs in a nano-machine? Trends Biochem Sci
2002;27:327–329. [PubMed: 12114015]
127. Dajani R, Fraser E, Roe SM, Young N, Good V, Dale TC, Pearl LH. Crystal structure of glycogen
synthase kinase 3 beta: structural basis for phosphate-primed substrate specificity and
autoinhibition. Cell 2001;105:721–732. [PubMed: 11440715]
128. Apuzzo S, Gros P. The paired domain of pax3 contains a putative homeodomain interaction pocket
defined by cysteine scanning mutagenesis. Biochemistry 2006;45:7154–7161. [PubMed:
16752906]
129. Haubst N, Berger J, Radjendirane V, Graw J, Favor J, Saunders GF, Stoykova A, Gotz M. Molecular
dissection of Pax6 function: the specific roles of the paired domain and homeodomain in brain
development. Development 2004;131:6131–6140. [PubMed: 15548580]
130. Zhang F, Nakanishi G, Kurebayashi S, Yoshino K, Perantoni A, Kim YS, Jetten AM.
Characterization of Glis2, a novel gene encoding a Gli-related, Kruppel-like transcription factor
with transactivation and repressor functions. Roles in kidney development and neurogenesis. J Biol
Chem 2002;277:10139–10149. [PubMed: 11741991]
131. Paratore C, Brugnoli G, Lee HY, Suter U, Sommer L. The role of the Ets domain transcription factor
Erm in modulating differentiation of neural crest stem cells. Dev Biol 2002;250:168–180. [PubMed:
12297104]
132. Chalepakis G, Wijnholds J, Gruss P. Pax-3-DNA interaction: flexibility in the DNA binding and
induction of DNA conformational changes by paired domains. Nucleic Acids Res 1994;22:3131–
3137. [PubMed: 8065927]
133. Mishra R, Gorlov IP, Chao LY, Singh S, Saunders GF. PAX6, paired domain influences sequence
recognition by the homeodomain. J Biol Chem 2002;277:49488–49494. [PubMed: 12388550]
134. Mauen S, Huvent I, Raussens V, Demonte D, Baert JL, Tricot C, Ruysschaert JM, Van Lint C,
Moguilevsky N, de Launoit Y. Expression, purification, and structural prediction of the Ets
transcription factor ERM. Biochim Biophys Acta 2006;1760:1192–1201. [PubMed: 16730909]
135. Hiraga S. Chromosome partition in Escherichia coli. Curr Opin Genet Dev 1993;3:789–801.
[PubMed: 8274864]
Xie et al. Page 24
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
136. Melby TE, Ciampaglio CN, Briscoe G, Erickson HP. The symmetrical structure of structural
maintenance of chromosomes (SMC) and MukB proteins: long, antiparallel coiled coils, folded at
a flexible hinge. J Cell Biol 1998;142:1595–1604. [PubMed: 9744887]
137. James LC, Tawfik DS. Conformational diversity and protein evolution--a 60-year-old hypothesis
revisited. Trends Biochem Sci 2003;28:361–368. [PubMed: 12878003]
138. Pauling L. A theory of the structure and process of formation of antibodies. J Am Chem Soc
1940;62:2643–2657.
139. Carl PL, Temple BR, Cohen PL. Most nuclear systemic autoantigens are extremely disordered
proteins: implications for the etiology of systemic autoimmunity. Arthritis Res Ther 2005;7:R1360–
R1374. [PubMed: 16277689]
140. Slutzki M, Jaitin DA, Yehezkel TB, Schreiber G. Variations in the Unstructured C-terminal Tail of
Interferons Contribute to Differential Receptor Binding and Biological Activity. J Mol Biol. 2006
141. Sigalov AB. Multichain immune recognition receptor signaling: different players, same game?
Trends Immunol 2004;25:583–589. [PubMed: 15489186]
142. Sigalov AB. Immune cell signaling: a novel mechanistic model reveals new therapeutic targets.
Trends Pharmacol Sci 2006;27:518–524. [PubMed: 16908074]
143. Sigalov A. Multi-chain immune recognition receptors: spatial organization and signal transduction.
Semin Immunol 2005;17:51–64. [PubMed: 15582488]
144. Sigalov AB, Aivazian DA, Uversky VN, Stern LJ. Lipid-Binding Activity of Intrinsically
Unstructured Cytoplasmic Domains of Multichain Immune Recognition Receptor Signaling
Subunits. Biochemistry 2006;45:15731–15739. [PubMed: 17176095]
145. Sigalov A, Aivazian D, Stern L. Homooligomerization of the cytoplasmic domain of the T cell
receptor zeta chain and of other proteins containing the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation
motif. Biochemistry 2004;43:2049–2061. [PubMed: 14967045]
146. Sigalov AB, Zhuravleva AV, Orekhov VY. Binding of intrinsically disordered proteins is not
necessarily accompanied by a structural transition to a folded form. Biochimie. 2006
147. Wehner KA, Baserga SJ. The sigma(70)-like motif: a eukaryotic RNA binding domain unique to a
superfamily of proteins required for ribosome biogenesis. Mol Cell 2002;9:329–339. [PubMed:
11864606]
148. Dragon F, Gallagher JE, Compagnone-Post PA, Mitchell BM, Porwancher KA, Wehner KA,
Wormsley S, Settlage RE, Shabanowitz J, Osheim Y, Beyer AL, Hunt DF, Baserga SJ. A large
nucleolar U3 ribonucleoprotein required for 18S ribosomal RNA biogenesis. Nature 2002;417:967–
970. [PubMed: 12068309]
149. Hernandez VP, Higgins L, Schwientek MS, Fallon AM. The histone-like C-terminal extension in
ribosomal protein S6 in Aedes and Anopheles mosquitoes is encoded within the distal portion of
exon 3. Insect Biochem Mol Biol 2003;33:901–910. [PubMed: 12915181]
150. Chung S, McLean MR, Rymond BC. Yeast ortholog of the Drosophila crooked neck protein
promotes spliceosome assembly through stable U4/U6.U5 snRNP addition. Rna 1999;5:1042–
1054. [PubMed: 10445879]
151. Abe Y, Shodai T, Muto T, Mihara K, Torii H, Nishikawa S, Endo T, Kohda D. Structural basis of
presequence recognition by the mitochondrial protein import receptor Tom20. Cell 2000;100:551–
560. [PubMed: 10721992]
152. Olsen BR, Reginato AM, Wang W. Bone development. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2000;16:191–220.
[PubMed: 11031235]
153. Goldring MB, Tsuchimochi K, Ijiri K. The control of chondrogenesis. J Cell Biochem 2006;97:33–
44. [PubMed: 16215986]
154. Tickle C. Molecular basis of vertebrate limb patterning. Am J Med Genet 2002;112:250–255.
[PubMed: 12357468]
155. Yoshida CA, Komori T. Role of Runx proteins in chondrogenesis. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr
2005;15:243–254. [PubMed: 16390320]
156. Morita N, Kiryu S, Kiyama H. p53-independent cyclin G expression in a group of mature neurons
and its enhanced expression during nerve regeneration. J Neurosci 1996;16:5961–5966. [PubMed:
8815878]
Xie et al. Page 25
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
157. Skotzko M, Wu L, Anderson WF, Gordon EM, Hall FL. Retroviral vector-mediated gene transfer
of antisense cyclin G1 (CYCG1) inhibits proliferation of human osteogenic sarcoma cells. Cancer
Res 1995;55:5493–5498. [PubMed: 7585620]
158. Kanaoka Y, Kimura SH, Okazaki I, Ikeda M, Nojima H. GAK: a cyclin G associated kinase contains
a tensin/auxilin-like domain. FEBS Lett 1997;402:73–80. [PubMed: 9013862]
159. Okamoto K, Kamibayashi C, Serrano M, Prives C, Mumby MC, Beach D. p53-dependent association
between cyclin G and the B' subunit of protein phosphatase 2A. Mol Cell Biol 1996;16:6593–6602.
[PubMed: 8887688]
160. Okamoto K, Beach D. Cyclin G is a transcriptional target of the p53 tumor suppressor protein. Embo
J 1994;13:4816–4822. [PubMed: 7957050]
161. Williamson JR. Induced fit in RNA-protein recognition. Nat Struct Biol 2000;7:834–837. [PubMed:
11017187]
162. Leulliot N, Varani G. Current topics in RNA-protein recognition: control of specificity and biological
function through induced fit and conformational capture. Biochemistry 2001;40:7947–7956.
[PubMed: 11434763]
163. Chen Y, Varani G. Protein families and RNA recognition. Febs J 2005;272:2088–2097. [PubMed:
15853794]
164. Crowder SM, Kanaar R, Rio DC, Alber T. Absence of interdomain contacts in the crystal structure
of the RNA recognition motifs of Sex-lethal. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:4892–4897.
[PubMed: 10220389]
165. Torres-Larios A, Swinger KK, Pan T, Mondragon A. Structure of ribonuclease P - a universal
ribozyme. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2006;16:327–335. [PubMed: 16650980]
166. Harris ME, Christian EL. Recent insights into the structure and function of the ribonucleoprotein
enzyme ribonuclease P. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2003;13:325–333. [PubMed: 12831883]
167. Guo X, Campbell FE, Sun L, Christian EL, Anderson VE, Harris ME. RNA-dependent Folding and
Stabilization of C5 Protein During Assembly of the E. coli RNase P Holoenzyme. J Mol Biol. 2006
168. Henkels CH, Kurz JC, Fierke CA, Oas TG. Linked folding and anion binding of the Bacillus subtilis
ribonuclease P protein. Biochemistry 2001;40:2777–2789. [PubMed: 11258888]
169. Nissen P, Hansen J, Ban N, Moore PB, Steitz TA. The structural basis of ribosome activity in peptide
bond synthesis. Science 2000;289:920–930. [PubMed: 10937990]
170. Recht MI, Williamson JR. RNA tertiary structure and cooperative assembly of a large
ribonucleoprotein complex. J Mol Biol 2004;344:395–407. [PubMed: 15522293]
171. Schroeder R, Barta A, Semrad K. Strategies for RNA folding and assembly. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
2004;5:908–919. [PubMed: 15520810]
172. Klein DJ, Moore PB, Steitz TA. The roles of ribosomal proteins in the structure assembly, and
evolution of the large ribosomal subunit. J Mol Biol 2004;340:141–177. [PubMed: 15184028]
173. Deutsch HF. Chemistry and biology of alpha-fetoprotein. Adv Cancer Res 1991;56:253–312.
[PubMed: 1709334]
174. Gillespie JR, Uversky VN. Structure and function of alpha-fetoprotein: a biophysical overview.
Biochim Biophys Acta 2000;1480:41–56. [PubMed: 11004554]
175. Kossiakoff AA. The structural basis for biological signaling, regulation, and specificity in the growth
hormone-prolactin system of hormones and receptors. Adv Protein Chem 2004;68:147–169.
[PubMed: 15500861]
176. Gronwald W, Schomburg D, Tegge W, Wray V. Assessment by 1H NMR spectroscopy of the
structural behaviour of human parathyroid-hormone-related protein(1–34) and its close relationship
with the N-terminal fragments of human parathyroid hormone in solution. Biol Chem
1997;378:1501–1508. [PubMed: 9461349]
177. Gronenborn AM, Bovermann G, Clore GM. A 1H-NMR study of the solution conformation of
secretin. Resonance assignment and secondary structure. FEBS Lett 1987;215:88–94. [PubMed:
2883029]
178. De Silva RS, Kovacikova G, Lin W, Taylor RK, Skorupski K, Kull FJ. Crystal structure of the
virulence gene activator AphA from Vibrio cholerae reveals it is a novel member of the winged
helix transcription factor superfamily. J Biol Chem 2005;280:13779–13783. [PubMed: 15647287]
Xie et al. Page 26
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
179. Lewis M, Chang G, Horton NC, Kercher MA, Pace HC, Schumacher MA, Brennan RG, Lu P. Crystal
structure of the lactose operon repressor and its complexes with DNA and inducer. Science
1996;271:1247–1254. [PubMed: 8638105]
180. Hedrick JA, Zlotnik A. Lymphotactin: a new class of chemokine. Methods Enzymol 1997;287:206–
215. [PubMed: 9330324]
181. Marcaurelle LA, Mizoue LS, Wilken J, Oldham L, Kent SB, Handel TM, Bertozzi CR. Chemical
synthesis of lymphotactin: a glycosylated chemokine with a C-terminal mucin-like domain.
Chemistry 2001;7:1129–1132. [PubMed: 11303872]
182. Kuloglu ES, McCaslin DR, Markley JL, Volkman BF. Structural rearrangement of human
lymphotactin, a C chemokine, under physiological solution conditions. J Biol Chem
2002;277:17863–17870. [PubMed: 11889129]
183. Smyth E, Syme CD, Blanch EW, Hecht L, Vasak M, Barron LD. Solution structure of native proteins
with irregular folds from Raman optical activity. Biopolymers 2001;58:138–151. [PubMed:
11093113]
184. Ennahar S, Sashihara T, Sonomoto K, Ishizaki A. Class IIa bacteriocins: biosynthesis, structure and
activity. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2000;24:85–106. [PubMed: 10640600]
185. Eijsink VG, Axelsson L, Diep DB, Havarstein LS, Holo H, Nes IF. Production of class II bacteriocins
by lactic acid bacteria; an example of biological warfare and communication. Antonie Van
Leeuwenhoek 2002;81:639–654. [PubMed: 12448760]
186. Kaur K, Andrew LC, Wishart DS, Vederas JC. Dynamic relationships among type IIa bacteriocins:
temperature effects on antimicrobial activity and on structure of the C-terminal amphipathic alpha
helix as a receptor-binding region. Biochemistry 2004;43:9009–9020. [PubMed: 15248758]
187. Prates MV, Sforca ML, Regis WC, Leite JR, Silva LP, Pertinhez TA, Araujo AL, Azevedo RB,
Spisni A, Bloch C Jr. The NMR-derived solution structure of a new cationic antimicrobial peptide
from the skin secretion of the anuran Hyla punctata. J Biol Chem 2004;279:13018–13026. [PubMed:
14715660]
188. Miyata A, Arimura A, Dahl RR, Minamino N, Uehara A, Jiang L, Culler MD, Coy DH. Isolation
of a novel 38 residue-hypothalamic polypeptide which stimulates adenylate cyclase in pituitary
cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1989;164:567–574. [PubMed: 2803320]
189. Arimura A. Pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide (PACAP): discovery and current
status of research. Regul Pept 1992;37:287–303. [PubMed: 1313597]
190. Wray V, Kakoschke C, Nokihara K, Naruse S. Solution structure of pituitary adenylate cyclase
activating polypeptide by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Biochemistry 1993;32:5832–
5841. [PubMed: 8504103]
191. Cai X, Dass C. Structural characterization of methionine and leucine enkephalins by hydrogen/
deuterium exchange and electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry. Rapid Commun Mass
Spectrom 2005;19:1–8. [PubMed: 15568184]
192. Takai Y, Sasaki T, Matozaki T. Small GTP-binding proteins. Physiol Rev 2001;81:153–208.
[PubMed: 11152757]
193. Symons M, Settleman J. Rho family GTPases: more than simple switches. Trends Cell Biol
2000;10:415–419. [PubMed: 10998597]
194. Scheffzek K, Ahmadian MR. GTPase activating proteins: structural and functional insights 18 years
after discovery. Cell Mol Life Sci 2005;62:3014–3038. [PubMed: 16314935]
195. Bernards A. GAPs galore! A survey of putative Ras superfamily GTPase activating proteins in man
and Drosophila. Biochim Biophys Acta 2003;1603:47–82. [PubMed: 12618308]
196. Bernards A, Settleman J. GAP control: regulating the regulators of small GTPases. Trends Cell Biol
2004;14:377–385. [PubMed: 15246431]
197. Grosschedl R, Giese K, Pagel J. HMG domain proteins: architectural elements in the assembly of
nucleoprotein structures. Trends Genet 1994;10:94–100. [PubMed: 8178371]
198. Reeves R, Beckerbauer L. HMGI/Y proteins: flexible regulators of transcription and chromatin
structure. Biochim Biophys Acta 2001;1519:13–29. [PubMed: 11406267]
199. Lehn DA, Elton TS, Johnson KR, Reeves R. A conformational study of the sequence specific binding
of HMG-I (Y) with the bovine interleukin-2 cDNA. Biochem Int 1988;16:963–971. [PubMed:
3262346]
Xie et al. Page 27
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
200. Evans JN, Nissen MS, R R. Assignment of the 1H NMR spectrum of a consensus DNA-binding
peptide from the HMG-I protein. Bull Mag Reson 1992;14:171–174.
201. Evans JN, Zajicek J, Nissen MS, Munske G, Smith V, Reeves R. 1H and 13C NMR assignments
and molecular modelling of a minor groove DNA-binding peptide from the HMG-I protein. Int J
Pept Protein Res 1995;45:554–560. [PubMed: 7558586]
202. Conti B, Tabarean I, Andrei C, Bartfai T. Cytokines and fever. Front Biosci 2004;9:1433–1449.
[PubMed: 14977558]
203. Janecka A, Kruszynski R. Conformationally restricted peptides as tools in opioid receptor studies.
Curr Med Chem 2005;12:471–481. [PubMed: 15720255]
204. Chaturvedi K, Christoffers KH, Singh K, Howells RD. Structure and regulation of opioid receptors.
Biopolymers 2000;55:334–346. [PubMed: 11169924]
205. Lichtarge O, Jardetzky O, Li CH. Secondary structure determination of human beta-endorphin by
1H NMR spectroscopy. Biochemistry 1987;26:5916–5925. [PubMed: 2960378]
206. Tsunemi M, Kato H, Nishiuchi Y, Kumagaye S, Sakakibara S. Synthesis and structure-activity
relationships of elafin, an elastase-specific inhibitor. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
1992;185:967–973. [PubMed: 1627147]
207. Francart C, Dauchez M, Alix AJ, Lippens G. Solution structure of R-elafin, a specific inhibitor of
elastase. J Mol Biol 1997;268:666–677. [PubMed: 9171290]
208. Rusnak F, Mertz P. Calcineurin: form and function. Physiol Rev 2000;80:1483–1521. [PubMed:
11015619]
209. Kissinger CR, Parge HE, Knighton DR, Lewis CT, Pelletier LA, Tempczyk A, Kalish VJ, Tucker
KD, Showalter RE, Moomaw EW, et al. Crystal structures of human calcineurin and the human
FKBP12-FK506-calcineurin complex. Nature 1995;378:641–644. [PubMed: 8524402]
210. Delcour AH. Structure and function of pore-forming beta-barrels from bacteria. J Mol Microbiol
Biotechnol 2002;4:1–10. [PubMed: 11763966]
211. Sukumaran S, Hauser K, Maier E, Benz R, Mantele W. Structure-function correlation of outer
membrane protein porin from Paracoccus denitrificans. Biopolymers 2006;82:344–348. [PubMed:
16345000]
212. Sukumaran S, Hauser K, Maier E, Benz R, Mantele W. Tracking the unfolding and refolding
pathways of outer membrane protein porin from Paracoccus denitrificans. Biochemistry
2006;45:3972–3980. [PubMed: 16548524]
213. Violot S, Aghajari N, Czjzek M, Feller G, Sonan GK, Gouet P, Gerday C, Haser R, Receveur-Brechot
V. Structure of a full length psychrophilic cellulase from Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis revealed
by X-ray diffraction and small angle X-ray scattering. J Mol Biol 2005;348:1211–1224. [PubMed:
15854656]
214. von Ossowski I, Eaton JT, Czjzek M, Perkins SJ, Frandsen TP, Schulein M, Panine P, Henrissat B,
Receveur-Brechot V. Protein disorder: conformational distribution of the flexible linker in a
chimeric double cellulase. Biophys J 2005;88:2823–2832. [PubMed: 15653742]
215. Bordelon T, Montegudo SK, Pakhomova S, Oldham ML, Newcomer ME. A disorder to order
transition accompanies catalysis in retinaldehyde dehydrogenase type II. J Biol Chem
2004;279:43085–43091. [PubMed: 15299009]
216. Iakoucheva LM, Radivojac P, Brown CJ, O'Connor TR, Sikes JG, Obradovic Z, Dunker AK. The
importance of intrinsic disorder for protein phosphorylation. Nucleic Acids Res 2004;32:1037–
1049. [PubMed: 14960716]
Xie et al. Page 28
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
Figure 1.
Fraction of putative disorder as a function of sequence length. The smoothed curve uses
averaging window of size equal to 20% of the sequence length.
Xie et al. Page 29
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
Figure 2.
Schematic representation of the algorithm for extracting disorder- and order-related keywords.
Xie et al. Page 30
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
Xie et al. Page 31
Table 1
Summary of association between the prediction of long disordered regions and keywords for each of the 11 functional
categories. For each category, the table lists the total number of keywords associated with it (out of the 710 Swiss-Prot
functional keywords), as well as number of keywords associated with predicted order and disorder.
Functional category # Keywords # Keywords (p-value < 0.05) # Keywords (p-value > 0.95)
Biological process 301 174 73
Cellular component 77 23 33
Coding sequence diversity 9 0 6
Developmental stage 4 0 3
Disease 17 0 11
Domain 34 9 21
Ligand 72 41 17
Molecular function 143 37 51
PTM 37 11 18
Technical term 12 7 2
Tissue 4 0 3
TOTAL 710 302 238
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
Xie et al. Page 32
Ta
bl
e 
2
To
p 
20
 o
f p
ro
ce
ss
es
 th
at
 h
av
e 
st
ro
ng
es
t c
or
re
la
tio
n 
w
ith
 p
re
di
ct
ed
 d
is
or
de
r
K
ey
w
or
ds
N
um
be
r 
of
 p
ro
te
in
s
N
um
be
r 
of
 fa
m
ili
es
A
ve
ra
ge
 se
qu
en
ce
 le
ng
th
Z
-s
co
re
P-
va
lu
e
D
iff
er
en
tia
tio
n
14
06
42
2
43
9.
25
18
.8
1
1
Tr
an
sc
ri
pt
io
n
11
22
3
16
53
44
2.
64
14
.6
2
1
Tr
an
sc
ri
pt
io
n 
re
gu
la
tio
n
97
58
15
54
41
3.
31
14
.3
3
1
Sp
er
m
at
og
en
es
is
33
2
18
9
28
0.
49
13
.9
1
D
N
A 
co
nd
en
sa
tio
n
31
7
13
0
30
0.
06
13
.3
4
1
C
el
l c
yc
le
42
78
61
2
49
4.
17
12
.1
7
1
m
RN
A 
pr
oc
es
si
ng
15
75
24
9
51
5.
55
10
.9
2
1
m
RN
A 
sp
lic
in
g
71
6
18
0
45
9.
06
10
.1
3
1
M
ito
si
s
71
8
21
5
62
0.
43
9.
42
1
Ap
op
to
si
s
81
0
21
1
46
5.
48
9.
35
1
Pr
ot
ei
n 
tr
an
sp
or
t
30
81
57
9
42
1.
73
8.
77
1
M
ei
os
is
28
4
17
0
63
9.
16
8.
7
1
C
el
l d
iv
is
io
n
34
66
38
5
45
1.
63
8.
51
1
U
bl
 c
on
ju
ga
tio
n 
pa
th
w
ay
12
54
24
4
52
5.
99
8.
13
1
W
nt
 si
gn
al
in
g 
pa
th
w
ay
41
7
41
47
6.
84
6.
58
1
N
eu
ro
ge
ne
si
s
32
2
74
66
7.
4
6.
56
1
C
hr
om
os
om
e 
pa
rt
iti
on
55
6
67
49
5.
39
6.
39
1
Ri
bo
so
m
e 
bi
og
en
es
is
31
9
71
39
1.
79
5.
9
1
C
ho
nd
ro
ge
ne
si
s
64
6
33
2.
85
5.
58
1
G
ro
w
th
 re
gu
la
tio
n
15
5
45
35
4.
9
5.
14
1
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
Xie et al. Page 33
Ta
bl
e 
3
To
p 
20
 o
f f
un
ct
io
ns
 th
at
 h
av
e 
st
ro
ng
es
t c
or
re
la
tio
n 
w
ith
 p
re
di
ct
ed
 d
is
or
de
r
K
ey
w
or
ds
N
um
be
r 
of
 p
ro
te
in
s
N
um
be
r 
of
 fa
m
ili
es
A
ve
ra
ge
 se
qu
en
ce
 le
ng
th
Z
-s
co
re
P-
va
lu
e
Ri
bo
nu
cl
eo
pr
ot
ei
n
12
23
6
41
2
15
0.
55
22
.1
3
1
Ri
bo
so
m
al
 p
ro
te
in
11
69
2
33
0
14
0.
58
20
.6
3
1
D
ev
el
op
m
en
ta
l p
ro
te
in
32
60
72
1
47
7.
93
19
.2
8
1
H
or
m
on
e
11
87
16
1
14
1.
13
15
.5
8
1
G
ro
w
th
 fa
ct
or
78
5
84
25
5.
7
11
.1
6
1
C
yt
ok
in
e
89
9
11
0
21
3.
28
10
.2
1
1
N
eu
ro
pe
pt
id
e
26
8
20
9
95
.0
8
9.
65
1
Ac
tiv
at
or
30
86
57
3
42
8.
47
9.
04
1
G
AP
 p
ro
te
in
47
2
23
2.
96
7.
42
1
An
tig
en
11
13
45
5
43
7.
48
6.
99
1
Re
pr
es
so
r
23
09
44
9
37
4.
46
6.
92
1
C
hr
om
at
in
 re
gu
la
to
r
33
4
10
0
80
1.
24
6.
7
1
Py
ro
ge
n
37
2
26
2.
59
6.
44
1
Va
so
ac
tiv
e
12
5
39
16
0.
39
5.
56
1
Am
ph
ib
ia
n 
de
fe
ns
e 
pe
pt
id
e
12
3
14
8
50
.6
4
5.
44
1
G
TP
as
e 
ac
tiv
at
io
n
31
1
70
83
1.
03
5.
36
1
En
do
rp
hi
n
42
4
22
6.
68
5.
35
1
O
pi
oi
d 
pe
pt
id
e
24
4
21
6.
96
5.
14
1
Pr
ot
ei
n 
ph
os
ph
at
as
e 
in
hi
bi
to
r
47
8
36
6.
51
5.
07
1
C
yc
lin
18
2
25
43
0.
58
4.
88
1
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
Xie et al. Page 34
Ta
bl
e 
4
To
p 
20
 o
f p
ro
ce
ss
es
 th
at
 h
av
e 
st
ro
ng
es
t c
or
re
la
tio
n 
w
ith
 p
re
di
ct
ed
 o
rd
er
K
ey
w
or
ds
N
um
be
r 
of
 p
ro
te
in
s
N
um
be
r 
of
 fa
m
ili
es
A
ve
ra
ge
 se
qu
en
ce
 le
ng
th
Z
-s
co
re
P-
va
lu
e
G
M
P 
bi
os
yn
th
es
is
22
5
3
47
3.
11
−1
7.
62
0
Am
in
o-
ac
id
 b
io
sy
nt
he
si
s
70
98
21
2
36
1.
5
−1
7.
11
0
Tr
an
sp
or
t
19
88
8
21
99
37
8.
13
−1
4.
87
0
El
ec
tr
on
 tr
an
sp
or
t
46
33
34
6
27
2
−1
3.
72
0
Li
pi
d 
A 
bi
os
yn
th
es
is
53
3
13
29
1.
25
−1
3.
22
0
Ar
om
at
ic
 h
yd
ro
ca
rb
on
s c
at
ab
ol
is
m
32
0
10
5
30
0.
36
−1
2.
37
0
G
ly
co
ly
si
s
22
55
50
39
0.
64
−1
2.
14
0
Pu
ri
ne
 b
io
sy
nt
he
si
s
12
08
28
44
5.
46
−1
1.
89
0
Py
ri
m
id
in
e 
bi
os
yn
th
es
is
13
10
27
38
3.
27
−1
1.
7
0
C
ar
bo
hy
dr
at
e 
m
et
ab
ol
is
m
17
97
18
0
40
4.
2
−1
1.
68
0
Br
an
ch
ed
-c
ha
in
 a
m
in
o 
ac
id
 b
io
sy
nt
he
si
s
96
3
26
40
4.
12
−1
1.
11
0
Li
po
po
ly
sa
cc
ha
ri
de
 b
io
sy
nt
he
si
s
48
1
10
2
33
5.
93
−1
1.
09
0
Su
ga
r t
ra
ns
po
rt
90
3
10
9
38
7.
37
−1
1
0
An
tib
io
tic
 re
si
st
an
ce
12
03
17
7
35
4.
24
−1
0.
66
0
Li
pi
d 
sy
nt
he
si
s
21
84
12
2
32
8.
02
−1
0.
17
0
Tr
ic
ar
bo
xy
lic
 a
ci
d 
cy
cl
e
10
13
54
46
0.
88
−1
0.
04
0
Ar
gi
ni
ne
 b
io
sy
nt
he
si
s
13
53
17
41
4.
06
−9
.5
3
0
Io
n 
tr
an
sp
or
t
52
75
45
9
46
4.
46
−9
.3
7
0
Rh
am
no
se
 m
et
ab
ol
is
m
85
4
37
2.
84
−9
.1
2
0
Pe
pt
id
og
ly
ca
n 
sy
nt
he
si
s
18
39
38
37
2.
73
−9
.0
3
0
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
Xie et al. Page 35
Ta
bl
e 
5
To
p 
20
 o
f f
un
ct
io
ns
 th
at
 h
av
e 
st
ro
ng
es
t c
or
re
la
tio
n 
w
ith
 p
re
di
ct
ed
 o
rd
er
K
ey
w
or
ds
N
um
be
r 
of
 p
ro
te
in
s
N
um
be
r 
of
 fa
m
ili
es
A
ve
ra
ge
 se
qu
en
ce
 le
ng
th
Z
-s
co
re
P-
va
lu
e
O
xi
do
re
du
ct
as
e
14
99
5
99
2
37
6.
63
−2
9.
54
0
Tr
an
sf
er
as
e
26
52
5
16
06
44
5.
17
−2
4.
25
0
Ly
as
e
72
62
34
7
37
7.
92
−2
2.
64
0
H
yd
ro
la
se
20
46
4
19
95
43
0.
68
−2
1.
75
0
Is
om
er
as
e
44
87
22
0
38
3.
98
−1
4.
18
0
G
ly
co
si
da
se
18
26
24
4
44
4.
73
−1
3.
98
0
G
ly
co
sy
ltr
an
sf
er
as
e
29
50
26
1
43
7.
53
−1
2.
51
0
Ac
yl
tr
an
sf
er
as
e
22
39
17
9
40
2.
83
−1
0.
85
0
M
et
hy
ltr
an
sf
er
as
e
35
24
22
4
34
9.
6
−1
0.
53
0
K
in
as
e
70
17
32
2
44
8.
29
−1
0.
22
0
Li
ga
se
80
10
23
0
52
9.
41
−1
0.
06
0
D
ec
ar
bo
xy
la
se
12
93
63
34
5.
26
−9
.6
6
0
M
on
oo
xy
ge
na
se
16
68
73
44
4.
87
−9
.2
6
0
M
et
al
lo
pr
ot
ea
se
11
00
10
9
55
3.
73
−7
.8
9
0
Am
in
op
ep
tid
as
e
45
2
39
50
9.
17
−7
.5
5
0
D
io
xy
ge
na
se
36
0
66
43
3.
2
−7
.3
2
0
Am
in
oa
cy
l-t
RN
A 
sy
nt
he
ta
se
34
02
37
57
1.
83
−7
.1
5
0
Pr
ot
ea
se
44
23
38
0
54
9.
7
−7
.1
0
Am
in
ot
ra
ns
fe
ra
se
95
5
28
42
0.
27
−6
.0
2
0
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
N
IH
-PA Author M
anuscript
Xie et al. Page 36
Table 6
All (11) Swiss-Prot keywords associated with at least one of the 98 confirmed long disordered protein regions8,9. For
each function, number of the associated regions (out of 98) and z-ratio are listed.
Function Number of regions associate with function in
literatures (Dunker, et al 2002)
Z-ratio in SwissProt database
Protein-DNA interaction 19 18.2
Phosphorylation 16 27.1
Structural mortar >10 3.0
Ubiquitination 7 8.7
Protein-rRNA interaction 5 11.5
Fatty acylation 4 6.0
Protein-genomic RNA binding 3 17.7
Glycosylation 3 6.8
Methylation 1 2.9
ADP-ribosylation 1 2.0
Protein-tRNA interaction 1 1.8
J Proteome Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 19.
