11
Cancer genomics, proteomics,
and clinic applications
X. Steve Fu, Chien-an A. Hu, Jie Chen,
Z. JaneWang, and K. J. Ray Liu
Preface
Throughout the history of medicine, many advances are derived from important
innovations in technology. For example, the invention of the X-Ray machine has
revolutionized medicine and pioneered modern imaging. The invention of the
microscope essentially redefined the field of pathology and microbiology. In the
past few decades, “technology explosion” has created an immense impact on both
biomedical research and clinical medicine. Tremendous strides weremade with the
aid of numerous new technologies such as recombinant DNA methods, DNA se-
quencing, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
monoclonal antibodies, and so forth. Despite these, major hurdles remain. In the
field of cancer medicine, limited successes are still overshadowed by the tremen-
dous morbidity and mortality incurred by this devastating disease. It has become
increasingly important to integrate new technologies into both cancer research
and clinical practice if we hope to win the battle against cancer.
In this chapter, we will briefly review the molecular basis of cancer and our
current understanding. We will focus our attention on genomics and proteomics
of cancer. We believe that a thorough understanding of the DNA and protein com-
pliments of cancers that dictate the subsequent disease phenotype would eventu-
ally lead to breakthroughs. The impact of modern technology on cancer diagnosis,
prognosis, and treatment will also be discussed. We placed our emphasis on two
of the cutting-edge technologies, microarray technology and nanotechnology, as
they are clearly among the leading frontiers that will rapidly reshape biomedical
sciences and clinical oncology. Finally, we will discuss our current active research
to facilitate our understanding and management of cancer.
11.1. Understanding cancer
11.1.1. Overview
The financial and societal burden of common diseases such as cardiovascular,
metabolic (e.g., diabetes), and neoplastic diseases (cancer) is very significant.
368 Cancer genomics, proteomics, and clinic applications
Table 11.1. Number of people aﬀected and annual cost of common diseases in US popula-
tion. (Data derived from Center of Disease Control (CDC); http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/major
accomplishments.htm).
Disease Number of people aﬀected (million) Cost (billion)
Cardiovascular disease 58 $287
Arthritis 43 $65
Diabetes 16 $98
Cancer 8.4 $107
Alzheimer’s disease 4 $152
Schizophrenia 2 $30
Osteoporosis 1.5 fracture/year $14
Cancer is the fourth most common disease and the second leading cause of death
in the United States, accounting for nearly one quarter of total human mortality.
More than 500 000 people die from some forms of cancer each year in the US.
The costs are not only borne by the patients and health-care system for medical
expenses, but also caused by lost productivity and premature death. Examples of
the magnitude of the costs are shown in Table 11.1. Therefore, beneficial and eﬀec-
tive interventions in screening, diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment are desperately
needed.
There have been significant discoveries over the past several years in our un-
derstanding of the genetic basis of human cancer. Colorectal cancer (CRC), for
example, aﬀected approximately 135 000 people in the US in 2001, resulting in
approximately 57 000 deaths [1]. CRC develops as the result of the progressive ac-
cumulation of genetic and epigenetic alterations that lead to the transformation
of normal colonic epithelium to adenocarcinoma. The loss of genomic stability
is a key molecular and pathophysiological step in this process and serves to cre-
ate a permissive environment for the occurrence of alterations in cancer-related
genes (e.g., tumor-suppressor genes and oncogenes). Alterations in these genes
(e.g., APC, K-RAS, and p53, as shown in Figure 11.1) appear to promote colon tu-
morigenesis by perturbing the function of signaling pathways or by aﬀecting genes
that regulate genomic stability [2]. Epigenetics is generally defined as a modifica-
tion of the genome, inheritable by cell progeny, that does not involve a change
in DNA sequence. For example, genomic imprinting, a form of epigenetic inheri-
tance, is a modification of a specific parental allele of a gene, or the chromosome
on which it resided, in the gamete or zygote leading to diﬀerential expression of
the two alleles of the gene in somatic cells of the oﬀspring. One mechanism of ge-
nomic imprinting is altered methylation of CpG islands, diﬀerentially methylated
regions of a tumor-suppressor gene [3]. It is evident that environmental factors
(e.g., smoking, diet, and exercise) can certainly contribute to a person’s risk of
cancer.
Again, using CRC as an example, it develops as the result of the progressive ac-
cumulation of genetic and epigenetic alterations that lead to the transformation of
normal colonic epithelium to adenocarcinoma, as shown in Figure 11.1. The fact
that CRC develops over 10–15 years and progresses through parallel histological
X. Steve Fu et al. 369
Normal
epithelium
Early
adenoma
Intermediate
adenoma
Late
adenoma
Carcinoma Metastasis
APC/β-catenin K-RAS SMAD4/SMAD2 p53
Other
alterations
Figure 11.1. Genetic model of colon tumorigenesis.
and molecular changes has permitted the study of its molecular pathophysiology
in more detail than other cancer types. From the analysis of the development of
CRC, three key themes concerning the molecular pathogenesis of cancer have been
established. First, cancer emerges via amultistep progression at both themolecular
and the morphologic levels (refer to Figure 11.1). Second, loss of genomic stability
is a key molecular and pathophysiological step in cancer formation. Third, hered-
itary cancer syndromes frequently correspond to germ-line forms of key genetic
defects whose somatic occurrences drive the emergence of sporadic colon cancers
[3]. We elaborate on these themes.
(1) Sequential events of CRC tumorigenesis. The evolution of normal epithelial
cells to adenoma, and then to carcinoma usually follows a predictable progression
of histological changes and concurrent genetic and epigenetic changes. These al-
terations provide a growth advantage and lead to clonal expansion of the altered
cells. Subsequent alterations with waves of clonal expansion then occur as a con-
sequence of progressive events that provide other growth advantages to the cells
such as loss of cell contact inhibition. The earliest identifiable lesion in colon-
cancer formation is the aberrant crypt focus (ACF). The true neoplastic potential
of this lesion is still undetermined, but it does appear that some of these lesions
can progress to adenocarcinoma and harbor mutations in associated genes (e.g.,
APC). Subsequent alterations in other genes then play a role in tumor growth and
the eventual acquisition of other malignant characteristics such as tissue invasive-
ness and the ability to metastasize (refer to Figure 11.1).
(2) Genetic alterations. The p53 protein was initially identified as a protein that
formed a complex with the SV40 large T-antigen and was originally suspected
to be an oncogene [4]. Subsequent studies demonstrated that p53 is a transcrip-
tion factor with tumor-suppressor activity. Human p53 structural gene is located
at chromosome 17p13.1 and mutated in more than 50% of primary human tu-
mors, including tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. p53 maintains genomic sta-
bility through the control of cell cycle progression and apoptosis (programmed
cell death) in response to genotoxic stress (e.g., UV, toxic chemicals). In CRC, p53
mutations have not been observed in colon adenomas, but rather appear to be late
events in the colon adenoma-carcinoma sequence that may mediate the transition
from adenoma to carcinoma. Furthermore, mutation of p53 coupled with loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) of the wild-type allele was found to coincide with the ap-
pearance of carcinoma in an adenoma, thus providing further evidence of its role
in the transition to malignancy [2]. LOH, or allelic imbalance, is generally defined
370 Cancer genomics, proteomics, and clinic applications
as inactivation of the wild-type copy of a tumor-suppressor gene by deletion, gene
conversion, mitotic recombination (rearrangement), or loss of an entire chromo-
some. p53 normally serves to regulate cell growth and division in the context of
genotoxic stress. It is expressed at very low levels in cells until it is activated via
incompletely understood mechanisms by DNA damage as a result of gamma irra-
diation, UV irradiation, or chemotherapeutic agents. Its activation results in the
transcription of genes that directly regulate cell cycle progression and apoptosis.
This function of p53 to recognize DNA damage and induce cell cycle arrest and
DNA repair or apoptosis has led to p53 being called the “guardian of the genome.”
Thus, p53 normally acts as a tumor-suppressor gene by inducing genes that can
cause cell cycle arrest or apoptosis and also by inhibiting angiogenesis (new blood
vessel formation) [2].
(3) Genomic instability. In addition to having eﬀects on cell biology, some ge-
netic and epigenetic alterations do not directly aﬀect the cell biology of the tumor,
but instead result in the loss of genomic stability, which contributes to the accu-
mulation of mutations in oncogenes (K-RAS) and tumor-suppressor genes (e.g.,
p53). The timing of the loss of genomic stability, either chromosomal instability or
microsatellite instability, appears to be after adenoma formation but before pro-
gression to malignancy. One key concept that has emerged is that these alterations
involve specific molecular pathways in colon cancer formation, and the alterations
in these pathways presumably result in specific biological eﬀects that promote car-
cinogenesis.
In summary, CRC genetics has yielded new insights and paradigms that have
broadly informed the studies of most solid tumors. Key insights that have been
contributed include the multistep nature of tumorigenesis, the central role of
tumor-suppressor pathways, the key role in cancer of mutational inactivation of
p53, and the role of DNA repair genes and genomic stability in cancer preven-
tion. Nonetheless, many challenges remain. The genesis of the metastatic pheno-
type that directly accounts for cancer lethality still remains a new frontier awaiting
further exploration. A mechanistic understanding of the basis of chromosomal
instability of the cancer genome has yet to be achieved. Nor is there yet an un-
derstanding of the genetic basis within the general population of individual sus-
ceptibility to colon or other cancers. Lastly, the translation of molecular genetics
to new diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic interventions remains a challenge.
The identification of these alterations has provided targets for the development of
new strategies for the prevention and/or treatment of colon tumors throughout
their progression from normal epithelium to carcinoma. Indeed, pharmaceutical
and biological agents that target alterations such as mutant p53 and oncogenic
K-RAS are currently in clinical trials (refer to our later discussion).
11.1.2. Genomics, Human Genome Project, and postgenomic era
Over the past few years, life science-based research has witnessed revolutionary
progress driven by high-throughput measurement technologies for biological
X. Steve Fu et al. 371
GenomeGenomics
Transcription and
posttrascriptional modification
Transcriptomics Transcriptome
Translation and
posttranslational modification
ProteomeProteomics
Protein functions
MetabolomeMetabolomics
PhysiolomePhysiolomics
Figure 11.2. Schematic plot of what is included in system biology.
molecules, with a shift from an individual approach (genomics, proteomics, etc.)
towards an integrated approach. The new integrated approach naturally led to the
emerging field of systems biology focusing on achieving a system-level understand-
ing of a biological unit, as shown in Figure 11.2. Next, we will give a brief overview.
11.1.2.1. Genomics
Genome, a term coined by Winkler in 1920 as a conjunction between gene and
chromosome, symbolizes the haploid chromosome set together with its inclusive
genes [5]. The Human Genome Project (HGP) with its principal goals of com-
pletely mapping and sequencing the human genome was conceived in 1984 and
implemented in 1990. It was principally completed in 2003 [6, 7, 8]. The “final”
completion of HGP will be the sum total of a number of genomic studies; namely,
(a) the physical genome: the gene map, control motif map, and full DNA sequence;
(b) the functional and structural genome: an understanding of how genes are or-
ganized and what they do; (c) the population genome: the variation of genes in
the human population; (d) the comparative genome: the comparison of the human
genome with other genomes; and (e) the integrative genome: the functional inter-
action of genes within the genome, among others to be invented in the future.
In this postgenomic era, researchers will access, analyze, and mine vast vol-
umes andmultiple types of data on a grand scale. New “computer-based approach-
es” or “algorithm-based approaches” have appeared to tackle postgenomic chal-
lenges such as functional genomics, comparative genomics, proteomics, metabo-
lomics, pathway analysis, and systems biology.
Functional genomics has emerged recently as a new discipline employing ma-
jor innovative technologies for genome-wide analysis supported by information
372 Cancer genomics, proteomics, and clinic applications
technology. The widely used term “functional genomics” has many diﬀerent in-
terpretations. In one possible definition, functional genomics refers to the devel-
opment and application of global (genome-wide or system-wide) experimental
approaches to assess gene function by making use of the information and reagents
provided by genome sequencing and mapping [9]. It is also defined as the branch
of genomics that determines the biological function of the genes and their prod-
ucts, where this function can be defined at several levels, including biochemical,
cell biology tissue, organ, and organismal. Due to the function at diﬀerent levels,
we can identify a set of “vertical” areas such as DNA arrays for expression profiling,
proteomics, structural genomics, high-throughput description of cellular systems,
and so forth.
Functional genomics is characterized by large-scale, massively parallel experi-
mental methodologies (generating data on gene expression, protein structure, pro-
tein interactions, etc.) combined with statistical and computational analysis of the
results, and by mining the results for particularly valuable information. The fun-
damental strategy in a functional genomics approach is to expand the scope of bio-
logical investigation from studying single genes or proteins to studying all genes or
proteins at once in a systematic fashion. Functional genomics promises to rapidly
narrow the gap between sequence and function and to yield new insights into the
behavior of biological systems.
There are many limitations of gene-expression profiling using genomics ap-
proaches. Previously, systematic investigation of gene expression using diﬀerent
genomic methodologies such as subtractive hybridization, diﬀerential display, se-
rial analysis of gene expression (SAGE), and expression microarray have generated
some interesting and useful datasets. Although a systematic analysis of mRNA ex-
pression can provide a profile of a cell/tissue transcriptome, there may be marked
discrepancies between mRNAs and protein abundances [10]. Many changes in
gene expression might not be reflected at the level of protein expression or func-
tion. Moreover, quantitative mRNA level is insuﬃcient to predict actual protein
expression because of posttranscriptional regulation and internal ribosome initi-
ation of translation [11, 12]. Finally, proteins are subjected to posttranslational
modifications and their stability (turnover rate) is regulated under varying phys-
iological conditions. Therefore, proteomics is an emerging field to the discovery
and characterization of regulated proteins or biomarkers in diﬀerent diseases in
the postgenomic era.
11.1.2.2. Proteomics
Proteomics is the study of the protein complement of a cell. It is the proteome
and the collective functions of proteins that directly dictates the phenotype of the
cell. Proteomics strives to profile and characterize the entire proteome or a spe-
cific component (subproteome) [13, 14, 15]. In recent years, protein separation
methods coupled with various mass spectrometry (MS) technologies have evolved
as the dominant tools in the field of proteomics [16]. Technically, this is not triv-
ial and requires a number of sophisticated techniques in combination that involve
X. Steve Fu et al. 373
Tissues, cells, body fluids (e.g., blood/serum, saliva, urine)
or subcellular fractions (e.g., cell membrane, nucleus, mitochondria),
with or without specific isotope labeling, isolated from normal,
disease (e.g., cancer), drug-treated, or stressed states
Protein isolation
(B)
Digestion
(A)
Protein separation
2D or 1D PAGE
Peptide separation
1- or multidimensional HPLC
Protein digestion
(Tendam) mass spectrometry
SELDI, MALDI, ESI and TOF, QTOF, or TOF-TOF
Data analysis,
computational programs,
databases
Biological assays for validation,
confirmation, and charaterization
Functional assays
Figure 11.3. Schematic presentation of proteomic methodologies.
sample identification and isolation, protein separation, identification by MS, and
functional characterization, as shown in Figure 11.3. The brief description of each
step is as follows.
Sample identification and isolation. It can be as straightforward as obtaining a tis-
sue biopsy or body fluids (e.g., blood/serum, saliva, urine) from an individual,
or it may involve the precise isolation of a cell or cluster of cells from a biopsy
specimen by using diﬀerent micromanipulation (e.g., fluorescence-activated cell
sorter (FACS), laser capture microdissection). To increase both specificity and sen-
sitivity, acquired samples can be labeled in advance with radio-isotope precursors.
Once the sample has been obtained, it is subjected to protein isolation by remov-
ing DNA, RNA, carbohydrates, and lipids. Typically, this step is accomplished by
organic solvent (e.g., methanol) extraction. After protein isolation, two diﬀerent
374 Cancer genomics, proteomics, and clinic applications
tracks (track (A) and track (B) as indicated in Figure 11.3) can be used to generate
peptides for MS analysis as follows.
(i) Track (A)—direct protein separation. Traditionally, the separation of ex-
tracted proteins is accomplished by 1-dimensional (1D) or 2D polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (PAGE). Using 2D PAGE as an example, in the first dimension,
proteins are separated according to their isoelectric point (or net charge) in a tube
gel; whereas in the second dimension, proteins are separated according to their
molecular masses in the orthogonal direction using electrophoresis in a slab gel
containing sodium dodecyl sulfate. After gel staining, interested protein spots that
show altered intensity compared to the control are cut out and subjected to pro-
tease (typically trypsin) digestion. When first developed, 2D PAGE was believed
to provide unique and unequivocal protein separation with each “spot” on the
gel corresponding to a single protein. Using this approach, several thousand pro-
tein spots can be resolved in a single slab gel. However, subsequent analysis using
highly sensitive MS techniques has shown that this view is incorrect: many, if not
most, spots on a 2D PAGE contain multiple proteins. Furthermore, sensitivity of
2D PAGE is also limited by the staining method used to detect protein spots on
the gel. Thus, due to the lack of sensitivity and specificity, alternative methods (see
Track (B)) have been developed recently.
(ii) Track (B)—protein digestion and separation. The coupling of liquid
chromatography (LC) with MS has had a great impact on small molecule and
protein profiling, and has proven to be an important alternative to 2D PAGE. Typ-
ically, proteins are first digested by protease into small peptides then the derived
peptide mixture are separated by ionic or reverse phase LC and subjected to MS
analysis. LC-MS has been applied to large-scale protein characterization and iden-
tification. In addition to its role in protein profiling, LC-MS is perhaps the most
powerful technique for monitoring, characterization, and identification of impu-
rities in pharmaceuticals. Because of the complexity of any given proteome and
the separation limits of both 2D PAGE and LC, only a fraction of that proteome
can be analyzed. An alternative approach is to reduce the complexity prior to pro-
tein separation and characterization. Many of these approaches involve LC meth-
ods, which utilize solid- and liquid-phase media to separate proteins according to
specific biochemical properties (e.g., molecular mass, isoelectric point, hydropho-
bicity). These LC separations can be performed in series (or multidimensional)
to improve resolving power. Furthermore, if one is interested in a specific class
of proteins (e.g., those bearing phosphate group(s)) or proteins with posttrans-
lational modification (e.g., glycosylation), unique columns that contain a matrix
specific for these functional groups can be used to separate these proteins from all
others by aﬃnity chromatography. For many of the LC approaches, proteins are
subjected to proteolytic digestion to aﬀord a multitude of peptides derived from
each protein.
Protein identification byMS. Once separated by either track, the resulting peptides
require identification. Currently available methods all use some form of MS. MS
is a rapidly evolving methodology that converts proteins or peptides to charged
species that can be separated on the basis of their mass-to-charge ratio (m/z).
X. Steve Fu et al. 375
These methods have been considered a major advance in the identification of
polypeptides from the proteome. John Fenn and Koichi Tanaka shared the No-
bel Prize in chemistry in 2002 for their contributions to the MS field [17]. MS
requires that proteins or peptides are first converted to gas-phase ions within a
specific region of the instrument, the ionization source. The ions are then sepa-
rated with a mass analyzer on the basis of their m/z. The resulting mass spectra
are represented as plots of intensity versus m/z. There are several diﬀerent types
of MS ionization methods currently available, including surface-enhanced laser
desorption ionization (SELDI), electrospray ionization (ESI), and matrix-assisted
laser desorption ionization (MALDI), which have made it possible to analyze large
biomolecules, such as peptides and proteins. Another key developments were the
invention of the time-of-flight (TOF) MS and relatively nondestructive methods
to convert proteins into volatile ions. Using MALDI-TOF and ESI-TOF as exam-
ples, essentially, the resulting charged peptides that are detected in MALDI or ESI
can next be subjected to high-speed collision with an inert gas, such as argon,
yielding smaller charged fragments that can be pieced together to reconstruct pep-
tide sequences. Peptide sequences identified with these methods must next be an-
alyzed by comparison with known database sequences to determine the unequivo-
cal identity of the protein. WhenMALDI is used, the peptide samples are solidified
within an acidified matrix, which absorbs energy in a specific UV range and dissi-
pates the energy thermally. This rapidly transferred energy generates a vaporized
cloud, thereby simultaneously ejects the analytes into the gas phase where they ac-
quire charge. A strong electrical field between theMALDI plate and the entrance of
the MS tube forces the charged analytes to rapidly reach the entrance at diﬀerent
speeds and times based on their m/z ratios. A significant advantage of MALDI-
TOF is that it is relatively easy to perform protein or peptide identification with
moderate throughput (96 samples at a time). MALDI-MS provides a rapid way to
identify proteins when a fully decoded genome is available because the deduced
masses of the resolved analytes can be compared to those calculated for the pre-
dicted products of all of the genes in the human genome.
The ESI method is also widely used to introduce the mixtures of peptides into
the biological MS instrument. The unique feature of ESI is that at atmospheric
pressure it allows the rapid transfer of analytes from the liquid phase to the gas
phase. The spray device creates droplets, which once in the MS go through a repet-
itive process of solvent evaporation until the solvent has disappeared and charged
analytes are left in the gas phase. Compared with MALDI, ESI has a significant
advantage in the ease of coupling-to-separation techniques such as LC and high-
pressure LC (HPLC), allowing high throughput and online analysis of peptide or
protein mixtures.
Currently, proteomics analysis is rapidly switching to MALDI-TOF or ESI-
TOF coupled with tandem MS, that is, MS/MS. Typically, a mixture of proteins is
first separated by LC followed by MS/MS. In this procedure, a mixture of charged
peptides is separated in the first MS according to their m/z ratios to create a list of
the most intense peptide peaks. In the second MS analysis, the instrument is ad-
justed so that only a specific m/z species is directed into a collision cell to generate
376 Cancer genomics, proteomics, and clinic applications
“daughter” ions derived from the “parent” species. Using the appropriate colli-
sion energy, fragmentation occurs predominantly at the peptide bonds such that
a ladder of fragments, each of which diﬀers by the mass of a single amino acid, is
generated. The daughter fragments are separated according to their m/z, and the
sequence of the peptide can then be predicted by comparing the databases.
Radioisotope labeling-assist proteomics. Once proteins in a given proteome have
been identified, their relative abundance levels need to be determined, especially
if one purpose of the experiment is to determine the comparative abundance of
a protein or proteins in normal versus diseased states. Without using 2D PAGE,
direct protein quantization based on MS signals remains a challenge because of
the nonlinear correlation between protein quantity and MS ionization eﬃciency
[13, 18]. Therefore, a number of isotope-tagging methods such as isotope-coded
aﬃnity tag (ICAT), have been introduced for providing MS recognizable mark-
ers/references in protein quantification [19]. To determine relative species abun-
dance, the ICAT method uses a pair of reagents, containing a biotin moiety and
a linker chain with either eight deuterium or eight hydrogen atoms, to diﬀeren-
tially label protein samples on their cysteine residues. Two samples, each labeled
with the ICAT reagent carrying one of the two diﬀerent isotopes, were mixed and
subjected to site-specific protease digestion. The labeled peptides containing cys-
tine can be highly enriched by binding the biotin tags to streptavidin, resulting
in a greatly simplified peptide mixture. Characterization of the peptide mixture
was carried out by the LC-MS approach as described above. Quantization of dif-
ferential protein expression level can be achieved by comparing the areas under
the doublet peaks that are separated by eight mass units. Thus, the ICAT method
works well for the diﬀerential analysis of many proteins in a complex mixture: one
of natural abundance and the other isotopically labeled, quantitative diﬀerences
in abundance of proteins between the two diﬀerent samples can be readily de-
termined. The obvious limitation of the ICAT labeling approach is that a protein
has to contain at least one cysteine residue to be detected [14]. Another labeling
strategy, amino-acid-coded mass tagging (AACT) with stable isotopes through in
vivo culturing [15], provided an accurate and comprehensive approach for quan-
titative protein analysis on a proteome-scale [20]. For example, we have utilized
the AACT strategy coupled with both LC-MS/MS and MALDI-TOF MS to pro-
file global protein expression in p53-induced apoptosis in a human CRC cell line
that harbors an inducible p53 gene (GU, Molecular and Cellular Proteomics, in
press).
Proteomics in cancer research. In cancer, the proteome of the cancer cells experi-
ence continuous and dynamic alterations [16]. Individual protein changes can be
functionally benign, synergistic, or detrimental, but collectively, they can result in
malignant phenotypes. However, the changes to the proteome can also be protec-
tive, resulting in systemic stress responses. In general, cancer cells have defects in
the regulation of either cell cycle or apoptosis (programmed cell death), enabling
them to gain survival advantages and immortality. Studies are designed to uncover
the molecular bases of cancer development and to restore functional cell cycle
X. Steve Fu et al. 377
arrest and apoptosis in cancer cells. Proteomics has been used in understanding
cell cycle and apoptosis. Using apoptosis as an example, this process is an essential
and highly regulated physiological function required for normal development and
maintenance of tissue homeostasis in all multicellular organisms. The function of
this process is to eliminate unwanted or injured cells with characteristic cellular
and biochemical hallmarks. Dysregulation of apoptosis is evident in many human
diseases including cancer, neurodegenerative disorders, and AIDS. p53, a tumor-
suppressor protein and a transactivating factor, plays a pivotal role in regulating
cell cycle arrest, diﬀerentiation, and apoptosis. The elevated expression of p53
leads to mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis. p53-induced apoptosis plays a critical
role in the suppression of tumorigenesis. LOH andmutations in p53 were found in
more than 50% of all human tumors. Previously, systematic investigation of p53-
induced apoptosis has been explored by four diﬀerent genomic methodologies,
namely SAGE, microarray, diﬀerential display, and subtractive hybridization. Ap-
proximate 150 genes have been shown to be transcriptionally upregulated by p53
[10]. A proteomic study compared the proteome of a human CRC cell transfected
with inducible p53 (DLD-1.p53) with that of the control DLD-1.vector cell line
(Gu, Molecular a Cellular Proteomics, online publication). Using AACT-assisted
MS, the group has systematically identified those proteins upregulated by the p53-
mediated apoptosis. In cell culturing, the deuterium-labeled (heavy) amino acids
were incorporated in vivo into the proteome of the DLD-1.p53 cells at the time
of p53 induction, whereas the DLD-1.vector cells were grown in the unlabeled
medium. In high throughput LC-ESI MS/MS analyses, the AACT-containing pep-
tides derived from the mixture of equal numbers of DLD-1 and DLD-1.p53 cells
were paired and their relative isotopic peak intensities gave the relative diﬀeren-
tial protein expression levels. In response to p53 overexpression, those proteins
that changed their level of expression were found to be associated with six distinct
function categories: cell cycle arrest and p53 binding, protein chaperoning, plasma
membrane dynamics, stress response, antioxidant enzymes, and anaerobic glycol-
ysis. This quantitative proteomic dataset suggests that the p53-induced apoptosis
involves the activation of multiple pathways that are glycolysis relevant, energy de-
pendent, oxidative stress mediated, and possibly mediated through interorganelle
crosstalks. This profiling provides a new insight into a global view of p53-induced
apoptosis, as shown in Figure 11.4.
Serum-based biomarkers identified through clinical proteomics. Clinical proteomics
is the application of proteomics specific to the field of medicine. It encompasses
the translation of proteomic technologies and methods into the production of di-
agnostics and therapeutics for the direct application to human health. Instead of
using cancer tissues or cells, development on proteomic strategy for analysis of
body fluids (e.g., serum, urine, and saliva) for biomarkers is also pivotal [21]. For
example, tracking and monitoring the disease-induced modifications and increase
of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) in serum of prostate-cancer patients, is a gold
standard for diagnosis of prostate-cancer progression. Another example is a rev-
olutionary approach for the early diagnosis of ovarian cancer using SELDI-MS.
378 Cancer genomics, proteomics, and clinic applications
P
p53
Cell cycle arrest
(e.g., c-myc, 14-3-3-σ)
Membrane alterations
(e.g., annexins)
ROS generation
Glycolysis
(e.g., GAPDH, PK, LDH)
ATP generation
and transport
Signaling molecules
Stress response
Antioxidant enzymes
Protein chaperones
Protein configuration
MMP induction
ANT
VDAC
Cyclophillins
Organelle crosstalk
Mitochondrion
ER
Lysosome
Nucleus
Figure 11.4. Functions of p53 in apoptosis. p53-regulated proteins and pathways in apoptosis were
identified by genomic and proteomic approaches and can be grouped into five major “intermediate”
functions; cell cycle arrest, membrane alterations, reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, glycolysis,
ATP generation and transport, and signaling; and threemajor “downstream” functions; stress response,
mitochondrial membrane permeability (MMP) induction, and organelle crosstalk. Some representa-
tive proteins of each group are shown in parenthesis.
A clinical proteomics program jointly run by the NCI and the FDA developed a
diagnostic test that is 100% sensitive and 95% specific in detecting ovarian can-
cer. Rather than looking for a specific protein, the group analyzed blood/serum
samples for multiple protein biomarkers and found a “cancer signature.” In other
words, this proteomic pattern analysis relies on the pattern of proteins observed
and does not rely on the identification of a traceable biomarker. Because of the
high-throughput nature of this technique, hundreds of clinical samples per day can
be analyzed utilizing this technology, which has the potential to be a novel, highly
sensitive diagnostic tool for the early detection of cancer. Nevertheless, some sci-
entists have reservations on using serum directly because serum is a complex, ever
changing source of proteins. A marker found there may not be traced to organs
easily, and the marker might be a body’s systemic response to cancer instead of a
specific signal derived from the tumor itself.
In summary, proteomics, the systematic evaluation of changes in the protein
constituency of a cell, is more than just the generation of lists of regulated pro-
teins that increase or decrease in expression as a cause of physiological change
or consequence of disease. The ultimate goal is to characterize the information
flow through protein pathways that interconnect the extracellular microenviron-
ment with the control of gene transcription. The nature of this information can
be a cause or a consequence of disease processes. Applications of proteomics to
cancer research are limited at the current time, but are rapidly evolving. Can-
cer biologists have made the first attempts to utilize proteomics for diagnostic
and prognostic purposes. Studies of proteomic patterns in sera of patients with
breast or ovarian cancer provide examples of this strategy. One need not know
the function of a protein when using this approach; rather, proteomic profiling
using sera oﬀer the possibility of identifying simple associations for diagnosis,
X. Steve Fu et al. 379
Initial clinical
encounter
History and physical
examination, etc.
Diagnosis and
predicting prognosis
Imaging studies,
laboratory tests,
tissues diagnosis,
special studies, etc.
Therapeutic
intervention
Surgery,
radiotherapy,
chemotherapy,
novel therapies, etc.
Figure 11.5. Typical ways of cancer diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment.
prognosis, and response to therapies. Clinical proteomics involve the use of pro-
teomic methodologies at the bedside. The analysis of human cancer as a model
for how proteomics can have an impact at the bedside is now employing several
new proteomic technologies that are being developed for early detection, ther-
apeutic targeting and patient-tailored therapy. Additionally, proteomics pushes
technical limits as it attempts to provide information to complete our under-
standing of how the cell, tissue, organ or in some cases the whole system adapts
during diseases. MS-based approaches have emerged as powerful tools for the
genome-wide profiling of cellular or organismal proteins. However, proteomic
analysis is currently limited by sensitivity, specificity, and throughput. Sensitivity
is rapidly improving, with detection at the attomole (10−18 mol) level achieved
by current MS methods, although this benchmark is not yet a routine. Speci-
ficity continues to improve, especially with application of multidimensional LC
methods in place of 2D PAGE, and looking for patterns of biomarkers rather than
single species. Finally, high throughput remains a challenge in proteomics anal-
ysis, however, some newer devices are designed to accommodate multiplexing of
samples.
11.2. Advances in cancer diagnosis and prognosis
It is well known that the accumulation of genetic changes within cells could lead
to cancer, and the activation of many genes are critical to the process of carcino-
genesis. Therefore, an understanding of these genetic changes would be essential
for cancer prevention, diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment. This also poses one of
the key challenges now facing the cancer community. Although there is currently
no cure for most forms of cancer, many options including surgery, chemotherapy,
radiotherapy, and others novel approaches can be eﬀective in prolonging survival,
preventing metastasis, and improving patients’ quality of life. Traditional ways of
diagnosing cancer and predicting prognosis involve clinical examination in com-
bination with pathologic evaluation (examining features of cancer under micro-
scope), laboratory testing (blood works, etc.), and imaging studies (X-rays, etc.),
as shown in Figure 11.5.
380 Cancer genomics, proteomics, and clinic applications
While clinical examination will always be one of the most critical and indis-
pensable parts of establishing cancer diagnosis and prognosis, emerging new tech-
nologies have significantly improved its accuracy. This is especially true with cellu-
lar/molecular tests and the newer generations of radiographic imaging studies. In
this section of the chapter, we will discuss some of the important advances in tech-
nology that can be applied to cancer diagnosis and prognosis. We will first review
some of the current technologies in laboratory testings, radiographic imaging, and
nuclear medicine briefly. We will then focus on using microarray technology for
cancer diagnosis and prognosis, a leading technology that is rapid and radically
changing the landscapes of cancer research and clinical practices.
11.2.1. Current techniques in cancer diagnosis and prognosis
11.2.1.1. Radiographic imaging and nuclear medicine
Various imaging studies are integral parts of a cancer workup. Over the past two
decades, cancer imaging has relied heavily on cross-sectional studies. Computer-
ized tomography (CT) is the single most used imaging modality for this purpose.
Identification of disease processes is largely dependent upon the degree of struc-
tural changes. While this strategy is still widely used in practice, there are obvious
limitations. For example, cancers may not always be obvious anatomically and
therefore can be missed. Similarly, viable cancer residuals and scar tissues left be-
hind after treatment cannot always be distinguished accurately just by the struc-
tural image. In the past decade, many new imaging techniques are emerging that
have crossed beyond the traditional boundaries. The trend is shifting from a pure
anatomical evaluation toward incorporating metabolic information into imaging
studies (also referred to as functional imaging). To illustrate this, we discuss some
of these new imaging modalities. Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging
is a form of nuclear imaging that is extremely useful in cancer management [22].
PET takes advantage of the fact that cancer cells have higher metabolic rates and
take up greater amounts of glucose than surrounding normal tissues. It employs an
analog of glucose, [18F]-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose (FDG). FDG enters into tu-
mor cells via glucose transporter and is phosphorylated by intracellular enzymes.
Unlike regular glucose, FDG cannot be metabolized by glycolytic enzymes in the
cells, and is “trapped” in the cells. The accumulation of FDG in tumor cells there-
fore allows the detection of tumors as high intensity signals. In contrast, scar tissue
and some other benign lesions are not FDG avid (the intensity of the signal is usu-
ally similar to that of the background) and therefore can be distinguished from
malignant tumors. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy ( MRS) is another example.
Using existing magnetic resonance technology, it can analyze the chemical com-
position in an area of interest, such as a lesion, to assist in diagnosis [23]. There
are three important spectroscopic signals: N-acetylaspartate, choline, and lactate.
By analyzing the signal patterns detected with MR spectroscopy, physicians can
narrow down the diﬀerential diagnoses and select their clinical approaches. Cur-
rently, MR spectroscopy is increasingly utilized as a diagnostic technique for brain
X. Steve Fu et al. 381
tumors. This technique may improve the diﬀerentiation of locally infiltrative brain
tumors from other types of benign, well-circumscribed intracranial lesions. It can
also help diﬀerentiate between neoplasm and other central nervous system pro-
cesses such as infections or necrosis. Potential application of MRS in other types
of malignancies includes head and neck cancer and lymphoma. Areas of research
for applications of MRS in nonmalignant diseases such as strokes and dementia
are also ongoing. It is not only worth mentioning that some of these new imaging
modalities can be used for detecting and evaluating cancer, but can also be used to
monitor drug penetration and distribution in solid organs or tissues.
11.2.1.2. Laboratory tests using cellular andmolecular tools
Among many approaches in assessing a patient’s illness, including that of cancer
patients, one of the initial evaluations invariably involves obtaining some form
of laboratory data. This can be as easy as a simple blood draw, or can be more
complicated such as obtaining a bone marrow biopsy. For several decades, physi-
cians and scientists were trying to identify specific “tumor markers” in patients’
blood so as to help diagnose and prognose cancer. Despite limited success in do-
ing so, a majority of tumors lack specific markers. Up to now, only a handful of
tumor markers are routinely used, for example, alpha fetoprotein (AFP) for hep-
atocellular carcinoma and germ cell tumor, beta subunit of human chorionic go-
nadotropin (beta-HCG) for choriocarcinoma, PSA for prostate cancer, and CA
125 for ovarian cancer, and so forth. Despite their wide clinical application, the
lack of sensitivity and specificity limit their usefulness. More recently, newer gener-
ations of laboratory testing are becoming available as a result of new technologies.
Several examples, including the PCR and flow cytometry, will help illustrate these
advances. PCR, the Nobel Prize winning technology, has revolutionized modern
science. Here we will illustrate its use in cancer medicine. In chronic myeloge-
nous leukemia (CML), a type of leukemia aﬀecting approximately 5 000 people
annually, claims approximate 2, 500 lives per year. More than 95% of these pa-
tients have a molecular signature called Philadelphia chromosome. This is caused
by swapping segments of chromosome 9 with those of chromosome 22. The de-
tection of this feature is not only important for CML diagnosis, but also critical
in evaluation of response to treatment and detection of recurrence. Traditionally,
chromosome changes are detected via a special stain and subsequent microscopic
examination. As a result, there are limitations in terms of the sensitivity of this
test. With the emergence of PCR, even a few cells left behind after therapy can be
detected [24]. Similarly, other newer technologies, such as flow cytometry and flu-
orescence in situ hybridization (FISH), have significantly advanced the diagnosis
of cancer [25, 26]. In flow cytometry studies, with the aid of special antibodies
against a panel of cell surface markers and a special machine, doctors can now cat-
egorize cancers according to patterns of cell surface markers, making it far more
reliable than simple morphology [27]. There are many other examples for appli-
cations of newer laboratory technologies in cancer management. We will dedicate
the majority of the following section to expression array analysis.
382 Cancer genomics, proteomics, and clinic applications
11.2.2. Expressionmicroarrays
There are great needs in the pursuit of better ways to predict the outcomes of
disease, especially, in the field of cancer medicine. Recently developed microarray
techniques present unique opportunities to investigate gene function on a genomic
scale, and provide a versatile platform for utilizing genomic information to bene-
fit human health [28]. In particular, gene-expression microarray technology is be-
coming an essential tool in exploring cancer development. In this subsection, we
will review the basic principles of the microarray technology as well as its applica-
tions in cancer research and management. We will highlight the current advances,
mostly using breast cancer as an example.
Microarrays are used to survey the expression of thousands of genes in a single
experiment. Applied creatively, they can be used to test and generate new hypothe-
ses. As the technology becomes more accessible, microarray analysis is finding ap-
plications in diverse areas of biology and medicine. Microarrays are a method for
visualizing genes likely to be expressed in a particular tissue at a particular time
under a particular set of conditions. The output of a microarray experiment is
either called a gene-expression profile or a sample molecular profile.
The principles of microarray applications. A microarray, or “gene chip,” is an or-
derly arrangement of oligonucleotide probes, some companies use 25-mer, some
use 60-mer, attached to a solid support, measuring the expression level of a gene
by determining the amount of messenger RNA that is present [29]. Microarray
facilitates large-scale surveys of gene expression in which transcript levels can be
determined for hundreds, thousands, or even tens of thousands of genes in a sin-
gle experiment simultaneously. With the latest Aﬀymetrix chip designs, the entire
genome (less than 45 000 genes) can be measured on a single array. All microarray
experiments rely on the core principle that transcript abundance can be deduced
by measuring the amount of hybridization of labeled RNA to a complementary
probe. The idea of a microarray is simply to lay down a field of thousands of these
probes in, where each probe represents the complement of at least a part of a tran-
script that might be expressed in a tissue. Once the microarray is constructed,
the target mRNA population is labeled, typically with a fluorescent dye, so that
hybridization to the probe spot can be detected when scanned with a laser. The
intensity of the signal produced by 1000 molecules of a particular labeled tran-
script could be twice as bright as the signal produced by 500 molecules and, simi-
larly, that produced by 10 000 molecules half as bright as one produced by 20 000
molecules.
So a microarray is a massively parallel way to survey the expression of thou-
sands of genes from diﬀerent populations of cells. An illuminated microarray is
shown in Figure 11.6. Trivially, if fluorescence is observed for a gene in one popu-
lation but not another, the gene can be inferred to be on or oﬀ, respectively. With
appropriate replication, normalization, and statistics, though, quantitative diﬀer-
ences in abundance as small as 1.1-fold can readily be detected using Agilent chip
when having huge sample size. The output of all microarray hybridizations is ul-
timately a series of numbers, which covers a range of three orders of magnitude,
X. Steve Fu et al. 383
Figure 11.6. An illuminated Agilent microarray. A typical dimension of such an array is about 1 inch
or less, the spot diameter is of the order of 250 µm to submicron for lithography-dependent processes,
for some microarray types can be even smaller.
from perhaps less than one transcript per cell to many thousands of transcripts per
cell. It is the comparison of gene-expression profiles that is usually of most interest.
This is because the visualization is done at the level of transcript abundance, but
just seeing a transcript does not guarantee that the protein is produced or func-
tional. If, however, a diﬀerence in transcript abundance is observed between two
or more conditions, it is natural to infer that the observed diﬀerence might point
to an interesting biological phenomenon.
Many diﬀerent design formats of microarrays exist, and the types of gene-
expression assays include SAGE, complementary DNA (cDNA) arrays (e.g., Stan-
ford University), fiber optic arrays (e.g., Illumina), short oligonucleotide array
(e.g., Agilent inkjet), and long oligonucleotide arrays (e.g., Aﬀymetrix). There are
three main diﬀerent methods for creating the microarray: (1) spotting long DNA
fragments, (2) spotting prefabricated oligonucleotides, and (3) in situ (onchip)
synthesis of oligonucleotides [30]. A presentation of type-1 is cDNA arrays, and
type-2 is typically represented by Aﬀymetrix arrays and Agilent arrays. The arrays
require diﬀerent targets, as cDNA is used for competitive hybridization. Spotted
arrays make use of a complex biochemical-optical system to perform robotic spot-
ting of cDNA probes that represent specific genes. Also, the design of probes is
diﬀerent, for instance, cDNA array uses the whole DNA sequence to prepare the
probes, while oligonucleotide array uses a set of probes made by a segment of
about 20 nucleotides. In comparison, the technology for spotting arrays is simpler
than that for in situ fabrication, while oligonucleotide array is muchmore accurate
and precise. Comparing arrays of prefabricated oligonucleotides and in situ syn-
thesis of oligonucleotides, the latter has advantages over deposition of presynthe-
sized oligonucleotides. Therefore, arrays of the third type are most widely applied.
Two popular microarray platforms of this type include the Aﬀymetrix array of
25-mer oligonucleotide probes, and the Agilent microarray consisting of 60-mer,
in situ synthesized oligonucleotide probes. The Aﬀymetrix arrays are based on a
384 Cancer genomics, proteomics, and clinic applications
photolithographic process, where the array is formatted by photolithographic syn-
thesis of oligonucleotides [31]. The Agilent arrays are based on an in situ oligonu-
cleotide synthesis method in which the inkjet printing process is modified to ac-
commodate delivery of phosphoramidites to directed locations on a glass surface
[32]. In both spotted and oligonucleotide arrays, the purified mRNA could be
labeled by fluorescence or radioactivity, and then hybridized to the microarrays.
Also, an imaging system is used to scan the hybridized arrays. After image process-
ing, the normalization process is applied to each microarray.
Based on the input to the microarray, there are three applications of microar-
ray technology: gene-expression profiling, genotyping, and DNA sequencing [29].
In the first case, mRNA extracted from a biological sample is applied to the mi-
croarray, and the gene-expression profile, the level of expressions of genes in that
sample, is obtained. In the second case, a biological sample’s DNA amplified by a
PCR is hybridized to the microarray, and the genotype for genetic markers across
the genome is determined [33]. In the third case, the DNA is applied to specific
“sequencing” microarray, and thousands of base pairs of DNA are screened for
polymorphisms in genes whose sequences are known [34].
The sophistication of microarray analysis blurs the distinction between hy-
pothesis testing and data gathering verymuch. Hypothesis generation is just as im-
portant as testing, and very often expression profiling provides the necessary shift
in a perspective that will fuel a new round of progress. In many gene-expression
profiling experiments, the hypotheses being addressed are genome-wide integra-
tive ones rather than single-gene reductionist queries. In general, without a hy-
pothesis, only the most obvious features of a complex dataset will be seen, while
clear formulation of the scientific question undoubtedly fuels better experimental
design. And in some cases, the results of a microarray screen that was initially de-
signed as an eﬀort at cataloging expression diﬀerences are so unexpected that they
immediately suggest novel conclusions and new areas of inquiry.
Investigators are interested not just in asking how large the magnitude of an
expression diﬀerence is, but whether it is significant, given the other sources of
variation in the experiment. Similarly, we might want to evaluate whether some
subset of genes show similar expression profiles and so form natural clusters of
functionally related genes. Or, we may combine expression studies with genotyp-
ing and surveys of regulatory sequences to investigate the mechanisms that are
responsible for similar profiles of gene expression. Finally, all of the expression in-
ferences must be integrated with everything else that is known about the genes,
culled from text databases and proteomic experiments and from the investigator’s
own stores of biological insight. For instance, some genes are highly regulated at
the transcriptional level and have low variability while others are highly variable
from cell to cell but are highly invariable at the protein level.
The applications of microarrays in cancer study. In medical practice, it is very of-
ten that the strategies for treatment are tailored according to features that predict
the disease outcome and response to a particular treatment strategy. It is therefore
critical to use the most reliable predicting features available. Pathology of cancer
X. Steve Fu et al. 385
(histopathology) as well as clinical presentations such as tumor involvement of
the lymph nodes and distant organs are some of the most useful ways used to pre-
dict cancer outcome. However, not all cancers presented at the same stage behave
in the same way; better predicting tools are clearly needed. Microarrays oﬀer a
new way of categorizing cancers according to their molecular features (e.g., pat-
terns of genes). The ultimate goal would be to use a small set of genes placed on a
commercial available array to evaluate the molecular profile of cancer and predict
prognosis and design treatment strategies accordingly. Moving cancer diagnosis
away from visually based systems to such molecular-based systems is a major goal
of the cancer research community.
The rationale behind this proposition is based on the belief that the overall
behavior of a cancer is determined by the expressions of the genes that are modi-
fied. Microarray technology allows scientists to measure the activity of thousands
of genes in a given cancer at one time. The active presence of specific genes can
then be used by researchers to more specifically profile the tumor, and to predict
the aggressiveness of the malignancy. The combination of gene-expression pro-
filing and advanced bioinformatics is beginning to show promise in analyses of
hitherto indistinguishable disease states. For patients who, on conventional clin-
ical and histopathological criteria, have the same stage and grade of cancer, this
refinement in tumor classification allows more accurate prediction of the course
of disease. Using microarrays in human cancer study attracts increasing interest,
the increasing availability and maturity of this technology has been leading to an
explosion of cancer profiling studies, and it has the potential of impacting and
revolutionizing the diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of cancer patients.
The following section gives some specific examples of microarray’s applica-
tions in cancer management to highlight the current advances and applications of
microarray technology in cancer research, with a focus on breast cancer.
(a) Molecular classification of tumors. Tumor classification has been primarily
based onmorphological appearance, and has historically relied on specific biologi-
cal insights. Serious limitations are associated with such an approach, since tumors
with similar histopathological appearance can follow significantly diﬀerent clinical
courses and show diﬀerent responses to therapy [35]. Particularly, the facts that
breast tumors consist of many cell types and breast carcinoma (BC) cells them-
selves are morphologically and genetically diverse, make accurate classification of
human breast tumors very diﬃcult [36]. Recent genomic analysis approaches of-
fer great promise for tumor classification based on gene expression monitoring by
microarrays.
A hierarchical gene-clustering algorithm was used to identify gene-expression
patterns in human mammary epithelial cells growing in culture and in primary
breast tumors [36]. Clustering is defined as unsupervised classification of patterns
into groups. It was found that systematic characterization of gene-expression pat-
terns is useful to classify breast tumors into categories associated with cell types
and response to specific physiological and pathological perturbations. The poten-
tial of using the microarray data for identifying previously uncharacterized tumor
386 Cancer genomics, proteomics, and clinic applications
subgroups has been shown in [35, 37]. A class discovery procedure, based on a
technique called self-organizing maps (SOMs), automatically discovered the dis-
tinction between diﬀerent leukemia groups, that is, acutemyeloid leukemia (AML)
and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) [35]. SOM is an unsupervised neural
networks technique. Alizadeh et al. [37] extended this class discover approach to
identify two molecularly distinct categories of diﬀuse large B-cell lymphoma (DL-
BCL). Clustering analysis on microarray profiling has also been employed to dis-
tinguish the cancerous and noncancerous specimens [38], where a two-way clus-
tering method based on the deterministic-annealing algorithm was developed to
organize the data in a binary tree. cDNA array was used for classifying normal
breast epithelial cells, invasive cells, and metastatic cells [39]. An analysis pro-
cedure was presented in [40] for classifying (predicting) human tumor samples
based on microarray gene expressions. The proposed procedure involves dimen-
sion reduction using partial least squares (PLSs) and classification using logistic
discrimination (LD) and quadratic discriminant analysis (QDA). Artificial neural
networks (ANNs) were applied to build cDNA- and oligonucleotide-based tumor
classifiers capable of deciphering the identity of most human cancers [41].
The above results show that genomic analysis based on gene-expression mi-
croarray data provides a systematic and unbiased approach to defining each in-
dividual property of a tumor and understanding its diagnosis and clinical behav-
ior. However, it is worth mentioning that we are still far from a complete under-
standing of the diversity of many malignancies and there are potential limitations
of the microarray approaches, since human tissues are complex and highly vari-
able in their histology (e.g., the specimens may represent mixtures of cell types).
For example, the two new DLBCL groups obtained in [37] were not heterogenic
monomorphic (identical morphologically). Therefore, microarray technology is
not meant to replace other classical technologies in cancer study. Instead, microar-
ray data will be integrated with other data sources (e.g., clinical data, drug sensi-
tivity data, and data from new techniques such as tissue array) for this purpose.
With the vast amount of work still to be done, microarray technology will have an
increasingly important role in cancer study.
(b) Prediction of prognosis and tumor response to specific therapies. Breast cancer
is a heterogeneous disease encompassing diﬀerent morphological types and clini-
cal presentations. However, these specificities are currently diﬃcult to incorporate
into decision making with respect to therapy, and some simple prognostic fac-
tors, such as tumor size, lymph node involvement, grade, and hormonal receptor
status, are commonly used. These currently used prognostic factors can only im-
perfectly predict therapeutic outcome. Microarray technology can, in principle,
provide many types of information to help prediction of prognosis and tumor re-
sponse to specific therapies in cancer treatment, and thus is expected to have a
revolutionary eﬀect on cancer clinical practice by leading to a personalized, safer,
and more eﬃcient approach to therapy.
Information generated from expression microarray could help reduce unnec-
essary therapy in patient with very good prognosis, sparing patients’ exposure to
X. Steve Fu et al. 387
an ineﬀective and often toxic treatment, reducing the overall treatment cost, and
planning treatments in accordance with the probability of success in patients. Ex-
amples include identifying tumors that are likely to be responsive to specific cancer
treatments and identifying individuals who are likely to experience toxicity or drug
metabolism eﬀects (i.e., mutations in p450).
Gene-expression profiling can be used for predicting responders and non-
responders to chemotherapy [42]. Systemic chemotherapy substantially reduces
the risk of death in breast cancer patients. So far, there are no eﬃcient methods to
distinguish between responders and nonresponders. In [42], with a list of discrim-
inatory genes and their associated t values, a linear classifier based on the com-
pound covariate predictor method was developed to predict response to docetaxel
chemotherapy (e.g., responsive or resistant).
In addition to studying genes, it is now possible to look at the array of proteins
that leave complex patterns in the blood and urine of cancer patients. Researchers
have reported promising results for a potential test to detect ovarian cancer in a
single drop of blood. In the initial experimental group, all 50 ovarian cancer pa-
tients in the test group were identified correctly, including 18 that were early stage
and thus highly curable. The test also correctly identified 63 of 66 noncancerous
samples [42, 43]. If these results hold up in a larger sample, it will be a great step
forward in the early detection of ovarian cancer.
The above research suggests that gene- or gene-product expression arrays
could be used to predict the eﬀectiveness of treatment. However, further studies
are needed to refine the molecular expression fingerprint by which to portrait each
tumor and predict the response.
(c) Drug development and identification of therapeutic targets. The potentials of
molecular profiling by microarrays goes far beyond diagnosis. It also provides re-
searchers with clues on how to design therapies to target tumors at their most
vulnerable points—the genes or proteins that are deranged in cancer. Biochemis-
try-based approach has traditionally served the purpose of drug discovery and
development. Although the advent of molecular biology changed the process of
drug discovery, some major barriers remain in place [39]. The recent microarray
technology provides promise to surmount these barriers, and can be essential to
help drug discovery and development.
Microarrays are powerful tools for investigating the precise mechanisms of ac-
tion for a drug. For instance, microarrays can be used to screen for changes in gene
expression following exposure of tumor cells to drugs. In [44], by combining the
gene-expression data with molecular pharmacology data, the authors constructed
the relationships between a set of 188 drugs based on the transcriptional activity
pattern of the drugs against the NC160 cell lines. A yeast model system was used
to validate drug targets, identify secondary drug targets [45], and to investigate the
mechanism of drug action [46].
Expression microarray technology can be used to generate information rapid-
ly for the identification and validation of novel therapeutic targets. For instance, in
[47], the expression profiles of over 60 000 genes were measured for 15 infiltrating
388 Cancer genomics, proteomics, and clinic applications
ductal carcinoma (IDC) and 13 normal human breast tissues. Fold-change com-
parison between normal and IDC tissue samples identified 830 candidate genes.
Further analysis utilizing principle components analysis and hierarchical cluster-
ing revealed tissue-specific candidate targets. This study provides a rational basis
for the identification of therapeutic targets and diagnostic markers using microar-
ray technology.
In summary, the results that have been achieved so far clearly demonstrate the
feasibility of cancer diagnosis based on microarrays and suggest a general strategy
for discovering new subtypes of cancer, independent of previous biological knowl-
edge. It suggests that we may be able to use DNA microarrays in a variety of clini-
cal settings for confirming diagnoses, clarifying unusual cases, and predicting pa-
tients’ response to drugs. It may also provide an objective way to design therapies
and predict clinical outcome for patients. In principle, gene activities that deter-
mine the biological behavior of a tumor are more likely to reflect its aggressiveness
than general parameters such as tumor size and age of the patient. The clinical con-
sequence is that treatments can be tailored according to the gene-activity patterns
of the tumor.
No one doubts that this new technology will have a major impact on cancer
management. A comprehensivemolecular understanding of tumor formationmay
transform cancer from a death sentence into a chronic, but manageable disease.
Further analysis approaches are needed before the microarray technology can
become a practical tool for identifying therapeutic targets andmonitoring drug ac-
tion. It is becoming increasingly necessary to integrate expression data with other
types of data to gain new insights. For instance, microarray expression data can
be used in conjunction with database of drug sensitivity to unravel the molecular
basis of drug action.
11.2.3. Pharmacogenomics
Pharmacogenomics is the study of how an individual’s genetic inheritance aﬀects
the body’s response to drugs. The term comes from the words pharmacology and
genomics and is thus the intersection of pharmacology and genetics. Pharmacoge-
nomic analysis help examining the inherited variations in genes that dictate drug
response and explore the ways these variations can be used to predict patients’ re-
sponse or lack thereof. It may also be possible to predict adverse eﬀects along the
same lines.
Understanding of human genetics and diﬀerent variations between individ-
uals is thought to be the key to creating personalized drugs with greater eﬃ-
cacy and safety. Right now, there are intense eﬀorts to catalog as many of the ge-
netic variations found within the human genome as possible. These variations, or
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), pronounced “snips,” as they are com-
monly called, can be used as a diagnostic tool to predict a person’s drug response
[48]. For SNPs to be used in this way, a person’s DNA must be examined (se-
quenced) for the presence of specific SNPs. The problem is that traditional gene-
sequencing technology is very slow and expensive and has therefore impeded the
X. Steve Fu et al. 389
widespread use of SNPs as a diagnostic tool. DNA microarrays (or DNA chips)
are an evolving technology that should make it possible for doctors to examine
their patients for the presence of specific SNPs quickly and aﬀordably. A single mi-
croarray can now be used to screen 100 000 SNPs found in a patient’s genome in
a matter of hours. As DNA microarray technology further matures, SNP screen-
ing in advance of drug administration to predict patients’ response would be quite
possible.
Many therapeutic agents in cancer treatment have limited eﬃcacies. In addi-
tion, nearly all of them also have some degree of adverse eﬀects or toxicities. These
toxicities sometimes can be quite severe. However, the fatal consequences of not
treating cancer make it impossible for doctors to withhold these therapies despite
their imperfection. For example, paclitaxel is a relatively new chemotherapeutic
drug with wide range of activities against a variety of cancers. Even so, response
rates for many cancers to paclitaxel are less than 50%. In nonsmall cell lung cancer,
for example, a paclitaxel-containing regimen only produce 30–40% responses as
initial therapy [49]. This means that it is less than eﬃcacious in 60–70% of the pa-
tients. Additionally, potentially fatal side eﬀects such as anaphylaxis (generalized
allergic reaction) and nonfatal adverse eﬀects such as neuropathy (nerve damage)
are hard to predict on an individual basis. Pharmacogenomics holds promise to
solve problems posted by drugs such as paclitaxel and many others. It could be
of great value not only in predicting how cancer would respond to a therapy, but
also in predicting how the host will respond to treatment. The ideal therapy would
boast great eﬃcacy in treating cancer without any significant adverse eﬀects to the
host.
11.3. New paradigm in cancer therapeutics
The ultimate goal in cancer research is to maximize our understanding of the dis-
ease and to improve the quality and outcome of cancer care. Although surgery,
radiotherapy, and chemotherapy are the current major pillars to cancer treatment,
many recent advances focus on new, molecularly targeted therapeutic modalities.
Unlike older generation of cancer therapies, which are less diﬀerentiating of can-
cer versus normal cells, newer generations of cancer treatments boast more speci-
ficity, eﬃcacy, and less toxicity. The following discussion will concentrate on some
of these new treatment strategies.
11.3.1. New targets for cancer therapy
Better understanding of molecular events inside cancer cells has led to improved
strategies in designing cancer treatments. For the past few decades, cancer therapy
has been generally focused on some of the general biologic properties of cancer
cells, such as the rapid rate of replication, as ways of therapeutic approach. Molec-
ular targeting focuses on what is distinct inside the cancer cells and oﬀers much
better eﬃcacy and specificity. Below are some highlights of current advances to
illustrate this.
390 Cancer genomics, proteomics, and clinic applications
(1) Telomerase as a target for cancer therapy. Telomerase is a special enzyme that
is expressed in most cancer and immortal cells [50]. It has a unique capability of
stabilizing and extending the end portion of the DNA-telomere, and hence main-
tains the genomic integrity of cells [51]. This contributes partially to the unlimited
division potential of cancer cells. The detection of telomerase activity is of a diag-
nostic and prognostic value in many cancers. Typically cancer cells but not normal
somatic cells express it, drugs developed against telomerase may prove to be highly
selective and free from toxic side eﬀects. There has been considerable interest in
elucidating mechanisms that regulate the capacity for cell division in normal as
well as cancer cells, and substantial attention has focused specifically on the role
of telomeres as the “mitotic clock” that mediates replicative capacity. A number of
approaches have been taken to inhibit growth of malignant cells by targeting their
expression of telomerase.
(a) One straightforward strategy has been the inhibition of telomerase ac-
tivity in malignant cells [52, 53]. Inhibition of telomerase activity is ex-
pected to result in progressive telomere shortening during cell division
and would eventually lead to cessation of replication and cell death. The
downside for this kind of strategies is that it might not be eﬀective early
on, and that tumor cells would continue to grow until telomere short-
ening reached a critical level before growth arrest and apoptosis (see be-
low) occur.
(b) An alternative strategy, one not aimed at inhibition of telomerase en-
zymatic activity, but rather at promoting immune recognition and de-
struction of cells that express telomerase, would result in rapid immune
elimination of telomerase-expressing tumor cells without the lag time
involved in strategies that inhibit telomerase function and depend on
gradual telomere shortening to inhibit tumor growth [54].
(c) Another approach to the targeting of telomeres in cancer cells employs
the strategy of expressing a mutant telomerase template RNA to inhibit
tumor cell proliferation [55]. It does not involve either telomere short-
ening or inhibition of telomerase activity. It is rapid in onset and can
exert immediate impact on tumor cells. Although the exact mechanism
for this is still not clear, several theories have been proposed. It is spec-
ulated that incorporation of mutant sequences into telomeric DNA in-
terferes with telomere function, possibly through altered DNA-protein
or DNA-DNA interactions, and triggers inhibition of proliferation and
induction of apoptosis.
In general, although targeting the telomerase enzyme as part of cancer treat-
ment is still at the preclinical stage, it oﬀers great promise for the near future. New
insights into the role of telomere function in cell survival and cell cycle regulation
will further help in designing eﬀective therapy in targeting telomerase.
(2) Interfering the survival pathways. Normal cells go through their life cycles of
division, growth, maturation, and death. This life cycle is mainly dictated by the
X. Steve Fu et al. 391
cells’ genetic codes as well as their environment. During this process, cells may un-
dergo apoptosis (self-destruction) under certain circumstances [56]. Triggers for
apoptosis are numerous. For example, drugs and radiation can lead to cell damage
and thus turn on genes that lead to apoptosis. Apoptosis sometimes can be viewed
as a self-protection strategy employed by the host to eliminate abnormal or dam-
aged cells. Abnormalities of genes regulating apoptosis can lead to uncontrolled
cell growth and increase the incidence of cancer. For example, amplification of
genes that are antiapoptotic, such as bcl-2, can lead to decrease in apoptosis and
therefore promote tumor growth [57]. On the other hand, mutation/deletion of
genes that are proapoptotic, such as p53, can also lead to decrease of apoptosis
and therefore promote cancer formation [58]. In fact, both overexpression of bcl-
2 or mutation of p53 are quite common in human cancer. Because of this, it is
rational to think that agents aimed at modifying these genetic abnormalities can
be eﬀective in cancer therapy. Currently, many studies are underway to explore
the possibility of manipulating apoptotic pathways in cancer therapy. For exam-
ple, a drug named GenasenseTM or oblimersen sodium is currently under phase
III study [59]. It is a bcl-2 antisense oligonucleotide. Proteins are made accord-
ing to transcribed codes in DNA. Protein are synthesized from mRNA created
during transcription from DNA. Antisense oligonucleotides work by binding to
the mRNA, therefore blocking its translation into protein, in this case bcl-2 pro-
tein.
(3) Targeting tumor angiogenesis. In the early 1970s, Dr. Judah Folkman pioneered
the research to help understand the mechanisms of angiogenesis (new blood ves-
sel formation) and its potential application in clinical medicine. But it was not
until the 1990s that this field finally took oﬀ. Many new agents, either inhibitors
of proangiogenesis molecules or antiangiogenesis agents, are in various phases of
research and clinical trials. The principle behind antiangiogenesis therapy is that
in order for a tumor to grow, it must have suﬃcient blood supply. Many tumors
are able to induce new blood vessel formation in order to obtain enough blood
to support their rapid growth. By inhibiting the formation of new blood vessels,
the cancer cells starve. Currently, there are a few such drugs that are either al-
ready approved or are on the verge of approval for anticancer therapy. For exam-
ple, thalidomide, once a notorious drug implicated in causing birth defects when
taken by pregnant women and hence removed from the market, was revived be-
cause it was found that it had antiangiogenesis properties. In fact, the reason why
it caused fetus deformities was probably due to its antiangiogenesis property. Cur-
rently, thalidomide is found to be eﬀective in treating multiple myeloma and thus
was approved for this use by the FDA [60]. Of course, its use needs to be closely
monitored because of this teratogenic eﬀect. Newer generations of drugs that work
in a way similar to thalidomide (so-called IMiDs, or immunomodulating drugs)
are being developed. One of them known as Revlimid is currently in late-phase
clinical trial and looks very promising. Another example for drugs with antiangio-
genesis property is bevacizumab (AvastinTM). It is a monoclonal antibody against
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a very important molecule for new
392 Cancer genomics, proteomics, and clinic applications
blood vessel formation. In a recent clinical trial, bevacizumab in combination with
chemotherapy has been shown to be superior to chemotherapy alone in patients
with metastatic colon cancer [61]. Bevacizumab has recently been approved by the
FDA for treatment of metastatic colon cancer in combination with chemotherapy.
Clinical trials for the use of bevacizumab in other types of cancers are on going.
(4) Targeting growth factors and their receptors. Growth factors to cells are like fu-
els to automobiles. They are essential for cell survival and growth. One instinctive
feature of cancer cells is uncontrolled growth and loss of contact inhibition. Many
types of cancer cells have excessive or aberrant growth factor receptors on their
surface which lead to this unregulated growth. Targeting growth factors and their
receptors thus represent an important notion. Some growth factor inhibitors are
starting to be used in clinical practice. For example, Cetuximab (also known as Er-
bitux or C225) is a monoclonal antibody against epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) [62]. It binds EGFRs and inhibits their activation. Another example, Gefi-
tinib (also known as Iressa) is a small molecule also inhibit EGFR activation (refer
to details later in the chapter). It is suﬃcient to say that inhibitors for growth fac-
tors and their receptors are major targets for future development of new cancer
therapies.
(5) Targeting intracellular signal pathways. Signal transduction pathways are es-
sential channels that cells rely on to communicate with the outside environment.
Once activated, they relay environmental stimuli into the cells via signaling path-
ways and allow cells to react properly to diﬀerent stimuli. They are highly regulated
so that cells are constantly instructed to act according to appropriate guidelines. In
contrast to normal cells, signal transduction in cancer cells are often disregulated.
For example, a component of the signal transduction pathway can be constitutively
activated and this leads to uncontrolled and unregulated cell growth. This is the
case with the oncogene ras in many types of cancers. Ras is a guanine nucleotide-
binding protein. When in its active form, it binds guanine triphosphate (GTP) and
leads to hydrolysis of GTP to guanine diphosphate (GDP) and thus becomes in-
active. When the ras gene is mutated at certain positions, it can no longer induce
the GTP to GDP conversion. It stuck with GTP and remains constitutively ac-
tive. This leads to uncontrolled activation of this signal transduction pathway and
subsequent cancer growth. Research aimed at targeting numerous diﬀerent signal
transduction pathway components. Farnesyl transferase inhibitor for the ras onco-
gene is one of the examples of drugs targeting signal transduction and is currently
under investigation.
(6) Interfering intracellular protein synthesis, transport, and breakdown. The in-
tegrity of cells is maintained by many intracellular proteins. This protein network
is tightly regulated through controlled synthesis and breakdown. Excessive pro-
teins or constitutive activation or deactivation of certain proteins can contribute
to the development of cancer. New generations of cancer therapy also target some
of the key pathways in protein synthesis and degradation. It is well known that
NF-κb is one of the transcription factors important for normal and cancerous cell
X. Steve Fu et al. 393
growth and survival. It normally exists in the cytoplasm of cells and is bound to
I-κb, an inhibitor of NF-κb, thus remaining inactive. Degradation of I-κb can free
NF-κb from I-κb and lead to cell growth. Bortezomib (also known as Valcade or
PS341) represents a new class of therapeutic called the proteosome inhibitor. It
acts essentially by blocking proteosome from doing its job, protein degradation.
It is thought that at least part of the anticancer mechanism for Valcade is due to
the inhibition of I-κb degradation and thus indirectly causes more inhibition of
NF-κb. In the pivotal trial that led to its approval, Valcade has been shown to be
remarkably eﬀective even on patients with refractory multiple myeloma who have
gone through regimens [63, 64]. It is reasonable to believe that more anticancer
therapeutic agents of this class will be developed in the future.
11.3.2. New agents and approaches
(1) Monoclonal antibody. Substances foreign to the body, such as disease-causing
bacteria, viruses and other infectious agents, known as antigens, are recognized by
the body’s immune system as invaders. One kind of natural defense against these
infectious agents are antibodies, proteins that seek out the antigens and recruit fac-
tors that eventually destroy the foreign substance. Antibodies have two very use-
ful characteristics. First, they can be very specific; that is, each antibody typically
binds to and attacks one particular antigen, either directly or indirectly. Second,
some antibodies continue to confer resistance against specific disease for life; clas-
sic examples are the antibodies to the childhood diseases chickenpox and measles.
The second characteristic of antibodies makes it possible to develop vaccines. A
vaccine is a preparation of killed or weakened bacteria or virus that, when intro-
duced into the body, stimulates the production of antibodies against the antigens
it contains.
Although each kind of antibody reacts to one particular kind of antigen in
many of the circumstances, many antibodies can be generated by a single dis-
ease entity. Not all are useful as therapy and it is diﬃcult to reproduce a pure and
highly specific antibody in large quantity. The conventional method of producing
an antibody was to inject a laboratory animal with an antigen and after antibodies
had formed, collect those antibodies from the blood serum (antibody-containing
blood serum is called antiserum). There are two problems with this method: it
yields antiserum that contains contaminants, and it provides a very small amount
of usable antibody. Monoclonal antibody technology uses a diﬀerent approach to
produce antibodies. By fusing antibody-producing B-cell with a kind of immor-
talized cell, a hybridoma is produced [65]. Many clones of these hybridomas are
isolated and tested for antibody production. Those clones that produce large quan-
tities of pure antibodies are then expanded in cell culture dishes.
Monoclonal antibodies have been produced for diﬀerent clinical uses and
many have been proven to be more eﬀective than conventional drugs in fight-
ing disease. Monoclonal antibodies attack the target molecule more specifically,
thus greatly diminishing the side eﬀects associated with many of the conventional
drugs. Some examples of monoclonal antibodies include Rituximab, an anti-CD20
394 Cancer genomics, proteomics, and clinic applications
antibody that is approved for treatment of B-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
(NHL) and also used oﬀ label for other clinical entities; Trastuzumab, also known
as herceptin, is another kind of monoclonal antibody against Her2/neu. It is used
to treat a sub-population of breast cancer. The specificity of monoclonal anti-
bodies makes them valuable in the laboratory as well as in clinical medicine. Not
only can antibodies be used therapeutically to fight against disease, they can also
help to diagnose a wide variety of illness, and can detect the presence of drugs,
viral and bacterial products, and other unusual or abnormal substances in the
blood.
(2) Designed small molecules. Unlike antibody-based therapies, small molecules
oﬀer some advantages, at least partially by the virtue of their size. The smaller size
allows easier synthesis, better delivery, and potentially better eﬃcacies in tumor
penetration. Small molecules can also be specifically designed to function like a key
to a lock, exerting a function either positively or negatively by turning on or oﬀ a
molecular pathway. Below are examples of small-molecule-based cancer therapies.
(i) Imatinib. In 2001, the FDA approved the oral medication imatinib
(GleevecTM) for CML, a type of leukemia that accounts for 7–20% of all adult
leukemias. Imatinib is one of the first small molecule drugs approved for clini-
cal use in cancer treatment. It is designed uniquely to interact with a class of re-
ceptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) including PDGFR (platelet-derived growth factor
receptor), c-kit (CD-117), and bcr-abl tyrosine kinases, a family of important en-
zymes crucial for cell signaling. Receptors that possess tyrosine kinase activities are
called RTKs. In CML, over 95% of the cancer cells express bcr-abl tyrosine kinase.
This tyrosine kinase is a hybrid protein resulting from chromosomal transloca-
tion. This unique marker for CML cells allows for the specific targeting of cancer
cells while sparing normal cells. It works at the molecular level by blocking the
phosphorylation and subsequent activation of bcr-abl tyrosine kinase, eﬀectively
shutting down what drives the abnormal growth of CML cells. Response rate for
treatment of CML are up to 80–90%, a great improvement from traditional reg-
imens [66]. Equally amazing is how fast imatinib works. Imaging studies taken a
few days after initiation of therapy have shown complete silencing of tumor ac-
tivity [67]. So far, the side eﬀects of the drug are well tolerated. Additional in-
vestigations have shown it is also eﬀective against a previously untreatable form
of gastrointestinal cancer called gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) because it
inhibits another RTK, expressed by a majority of the GIST cells [68]. Currently,
imatinib is being tested in a variety of tumors that overexpress PDGFR. Its use in
cancer may be further expanded depending on the results of future clinical tri-
als.
(ii) Gefitinib. Gefitinib (Iressa) is another type of small molecular that works
by blocking the RTK that is associated with tumor growth. It works by inhibit-
ing a diﬀerent type of RTK called EGFR. Gefitinib has recently been approved for
third-line therapy for nonsmall cell lung cancer [69, 70]. It has also been widely
tested for treatment of many other types of cancer. It is important to point out
that Gefitinib only produced a response rate of 10–20% as second- or third-line
X. Steve Fu et al. 395
therapy for lung cancer, and so far, the level of EGFR expression did not corre-
spond with the degree of response. Recently, mutations in EGFR were identified
that appear to correlate responses to Gefitinib [71]. This again suggests the impor-
tance of newer strategies in determining drug responses and selecting patients for
treatment.
(3)Radioimmunotherapy. Radiation is one of themost important treatmentmod-
alities widely used in almost every type of cancer. It can be given externally by fo-
cusing a “beam” of radiation on cancer or cancer involved organ from outside the
body. This is commonly referred as external beam radiation. Alternatively, radia-
tion can also be given by implanting radioactive seeds inside the cancer-containing
organ (such as prostate gland). This is commonly referred as brachytherapy. Ra-
dioimmunotherapy, on the other hand, is the delivery of radioactivity through im-
munotargeting. It essentially delivers radiation via coupling of radioactive isotope
with Monoclonal antibodies. Monoclonal antibodies bind target cells more specif-
ically, therefore they can guide the radioisotope to specific locations on a cellular
level. Radioimmunotherapy in cancer treatment targets tumor cells throughout
the body, but it remains considerably toxic.
Radiation therapies given by external beam or by brachytherapy requires that
the tumors are geographically limited to a region that can be eﬃciently targeted.
It cannot be used if the tumor is widely disseminated. Too large of a radiation
field also significantly increases toxicity and limits the tolerance of the host. Ra-
dioimmunotherapy, on the other hand, uses antibodies to seek for tumor cells in
various locations throughout the body. It is therefore more useful for tumors that
are widely distributed, such as leukemia or lymphoma.
Radioimmunotherapeutic agents are like double-edged swords. Monoclonal
antibodies can aﬀect the cancer cells by themselves even without linkage to ra-
dioisotope. They can inhibit tumor cell growth and induce apoptosis. With the
addition of radioisotope, it adds more “firepower” by delivery of radiation to the
target cell at the same time. This dual-action eﬀect renders this therapy more po-
tent and eﬀective in cancer treatment.
Currently, there are two radioimmunologic agents approved by the FDA for
radioimmunotherapy for NHL: Ibritumomab Tiuxetan (Zevalin) and Tusitom-
omab (Bexxar). Both utilize the power of diﬀerent radiation particles called iso-
topes. The radioactive particles in Zevalin emit beta radiation, which travels over
a relatively short distance. The radioactive particles in Bexxar give oﬀ beta and
gamma radiation. The gamma radiation travels a longer distance.
Both Zevalin and Bexxar are dual-action drugs that pair the tumor-targeting
and killing ability of monoclonal antibodies (anti-CD20) and therapeutic radia-
tion (Yttrium-90 and Iodine-131, respectively). Combined, these agents are much
more potent than either anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies or radiotherapy alone
for NHL [72, 73, 74]. Although monoclonal antibodies confer specificity for tu-
mor cell targeting, it is unavoidably that they also aﬀect some normal cells due to
the fact that normal cells can express CD-20 and the radioisotope aﬀects “innocent
bystanders.”
396 Cancer genomics, proteomics, and clinic applications
In addition to the increasing use of radioimmunotherapy in cancer treat-
ments, radioimmunologic agents can also be used for cancer diagnosis.
(4) New invasive therapeutic modalities. Although current research on cancer di-
agnosis and treatment weigh heavily toward less traumatic and invasive approach-
es, this does not mean that the invasive methods are of less value. Actually, newer
and better tolerated invasive therapies are becoming increasingly available as tech-
nologies advance. More and more interventions are done by an interventional ra-
diologist under imaging guidance. These new strategies are also being applied to
cancer diagnosis and treatment. Radiofrequency ablation ( RFA) is a relatively new
therapy for cancer treatment. It is a treatment strategy based on the application of
heat energy [75]. RFA causes the cellular destruction of tissues by heating them.
Using various imaging methods (ultrasound, CT scan, or MRI) as guidance, the
procedure involves placing a needle through the skin and into the tumor under
local anesthesia. Once positioned in the targeted treatment area, an umbrella-
like array of electrodes is deployed and radio waves are generated through ag-
itation caused by alternating electrical current (radiofrequency energy) moving
through the tissue. The heat generated in this fashion results in local cell coagu-
lation and demise. Normal tissues surrounding the lesion are usually spared due
to the limited range of heating. Destroyed cells are reabsorbed by the body over
time.
In RFA, since the patient’s body is only penetrated with a special needle, it
is minimally invasive and the procedure is performed under local anesthesia and
conscious sedation, therefore most patients will be able to return home the day
of the procedure. There are other advantages of RFA besides better tolerance. For
example, patients with oligometastasis (a few lesions rather than many lesions)
in both lobes of the liver could not undergo resection, RFA would then be a rea-
sonable option. Another example, a patient with a single, solitary kidney tumor
who is too ill to tolerate a surgical procedure, could choose to have RFA instead.
Other applications of RFA include symptom management such as relieving pains
caused by tumor growth. In some circumstances, chemotherapy can be given in
conjunction with RFA to maximize the eﬃcacy and increase the range of tumor
cell killing.
Despite the advantages mentioned above, there are still many limitations to
RFA treatment. First, the tumor has to be accessible by needle. This means that
tumors located deep inside the human body may not be amendable to this treat-
ment. Second, it will not be able to kill tumors more than 5 cm in diameter due
to the limitation of heat travel and dissipation. Third, multiple lesions, typically
more than 3 lesions, cannot be eﬀectively treated by RFA. Fourth, potential risk
including bowel perforation, or damage to other important structures, makes it
important to select the patient carefully. Fifth, improvement of survival is possible
as a result of RFA but has not been definitively proven.
RFA is not intended to replace surgery and/or chemotherapy. Instead, it is
designed to work in conjunction with these modalities. Its current application still
remains as adjunct to other treatment strategies.
X. Steve Fu et al. 397
In summary, RFA is a minimally invasive method that can be used to treat
multiple types of cancers. It is ideal for treating oligotumor lesions (usually not
more than 3), and relieving the symptoms caused by tumor growth. RFA has been
proven to be a very valuable strategy in the toolkit of cancer therapy and give pa-
tients another therapeutic option.
11.4. Nanotechnology in cancer study
Nanotechnology has been an emergent multidisciplinary research topic with ap-
plications in many areas, such as nano-electro-mechanical systems (NEMSs) [76],
nanocomputers, and nanoscale medicine [77]. In this subsection, we will elaborate
how nanotechnology can be applied in cancer study.
A nanometer is one billionth of a meter—1/80 000, which is the width of a
human hair, or about the combined diameter of ten hydrogen atoms. Nanotech-
nology is about how to create useful materials, devices, or systems through the
manipulation of miniscule matter. It will also greatly impact biotechnology. For
instance, two grams of DNA can hold as much information as the whole Library
of Congress. A carbon-nanotube-based nanoprobe on the 1 nm scale enables us
to process the information encoded in DNA. The interdisciplinary nature of nan-
otechnology involves scientists from many diﬀerent disciplines such as physics,
chemistry, engineering, biology, and even sociology.
Currently, nanotechnology is a nascent research area. Nanoscale fabrication is
far from mature. Most of the research focuses on basic material preparation, such
as making diﬀerent carbon nanotubes and molecular devices [78, 79]. There are
two basic approaches to creating nanostructures. The first method is “top-down”
approach, which involves molding or etching materials into small components.
This approach has traditionally been used in making computer and electronic de-
vices. The second approach is “bottom-up” approach. The bottom-up approach
involves assembling structures atom-by-atom or molecule-by-molecule. Protein
synthesis by ribosome is a good example of a bottom-up approach. Diﬀerent self-
assembly techniques are currently being investigated in order to reach a better un-
derstanding of how to integrate nanoscale building blocks [80].
Material behaves diﬀerently on the nanometer scale than it does on larger
scale. Physical properties governing larger systems do not necessarily apply to na-
noscale systems. Electron propagates as a wave instead of as a single particle, thus
quantum eﬀects have to be taken into design considerations [81]. Because nano-
material, such as carbon nanotube, has large surface area relative to its volume,
phenomena like friction become more important at the nanometer level than in
larger systems. These physical property diﬀerences will aﬀect nanosystem design
for biomedical applications.
Nanostructures are so tiny that they may be easily washed away before they
can take eﬀect in cancer diagnosis or imaging. On the other hand, larger nanopar-
ticles may accumulate in vital organs and can potentially cause the discomfort of
patients, sometimes even resulting in toxicity. Scientists are trying to find the so-
lutions of these problems. They study how nanostructures will behave in human
body and attempt to create devices that can easily adapt to in vivo circumstance.
398 Cancer genomics, proteomics, and clinic applications
11.4.1. Applying nanotechnology in handling tumor cells
Most animal cells are 10 000 to 20 000 nm in diameter. This means that nanoscale
devices (having at least one dimension less than 100 nm) can enter cells and or-
ganelles inside cells. These devices can interact with DNAs and proteins because
the DNA double helix is 0.5 nm in diameter and the distance between each base
pair is about 1.5–2 nm. Nanotechnology tools are very sensitive and are able to
detect disease by using a very small amount of cells or tissues. These tools may
even be able to enter cells and monitor cell activities. This provides a vital solution
for us to study cancer genomics and proteomics, enabling us to understand cancer
mechanisms more precisely.
With respect to tumor diagnosis, prognosis and treatment, miniaturization
becomes necessary because nanoscale tools for many diﬀerent tests need to be
mounted on a same small device. This makes it possible to run multiple diagnostic
tests simultaneously.
Cancer detection at its early stage is critical in improving cancer treatment.
Cancer detection and diagnosis to date depend on the detection of abnormalities
at tissue or organ level by physical examinations or imaging studies. Patients’ mor-
tality is often due to late finding and ineﬀective curative therapy. Ideally, scientists
would much prefer to make it possible to detect cancer when the earliest molec-
ular changes are present, long before it is large enough to be detected by physical
examination or imaging technology. To do this is not an easy task, which needs
a new set of tools at the very least. Nanotechnology is very promising in meeting
these challenges based on the following reasons.
(i) To successfully detect cancer at its earliest stages, scientists must be able
to detect molecular changes even when they occur only in a small per-
centage of cells. This means the nanotechnology tools must be extremely
sensitive. The potential for nanostructures to enter and analyze single
cells suggests they could meet this challenge.
(ii) Many nanotechnology tools will make it possible for clinicians to run
tests without physically altering cells or tissues taken from a patient. This
is important because the amount of samples that clinicians use to screen
for cancer are often limited. Scientists would like to perform tests with-
out altering cells, so they can be used again if further tests are needed.
Reduction in the size of tools means that many tests can be run on a
single small device. This will make screening fast and cost-eﬃcient.
The following are some specific nanotechnology tools developed for early tu-
mor detection.
(1) Cantilever. The cantilever is one of the nanotechnology tools with potential
to aid cancer diagnosis. Nano-scale cantilevers are based on the simple mechanic
concept: disparate materials bond together causing a mechanical reaction, much
as bimetallic strips used in peltier coolers. Tiny bars anchored at one end of can-
tilever can be engineered to bind tomolecules associated with cancer, or refer to [3]
Protiveris’ microcantilever technology (see www.protiveris.com). They may bind
X. Steve Fu et al. 399
to altered DNA sequences or proteins that are present in certain types of cancer.
When the cancer-associated molecules bind to cantilevers, changes in surface ten-
sion cause cantilevers to bend. This nanoscale tool is very sensitive and is able to
distinguish microreflections. Based on the observation, scientists can determine
whether cancer molecules are present even when the altered molecules are present
in very low concentrations. This tool is useful in detecting early molecular muta-
tions during the course of cancer development.
(2)Nanopores. Nanopore device is another type of nanotechnology tools for read-
ing genetic code on single strands of DNA. The idea was originally proposed by
D. Branton group at Harvard University. Nanopores are tiny holes that connect
two liquid compartments that are positively charged at one side and negatively
charged at the other. The electrical field helps to ionize the single-strand DNA and
makes it easy for DNA to pass through the nanopore. We can imagine DNA nu-
cleotides (A, T, C, and G) look like beads on a string. As a DNA passes through
a nanopore one nucleotide at a time, it causes a subtle electrical current diﬀer-
ence (at the scale of 10−12A). Based on the diﬀerent readings of four diﬀerent base
pairs that make up genetic code, scientists can decipher encoded DNA informa-
tion, including mutations in DNA known to be associated with certain type of
cancers. One of the major advantages to use nanopore design is that it makes long
DNA sequencing possible. The conventional for DNA sequencing in biology is
slow and only can handle short DNA sequence. The eﬃcient nanopore design will
significantly reduce lab work and make real-time in vivo DNA sequencing possi-
ble.
(3) C60 bulky balls and nanotubes. Since the discovery a decade ago [78, 82], both
C60 and carbon nanotube have emerged as promising candidates for nanomed-
icine. C60 has been applied for drug delivery by encapsulating drug within C60
structure. By attaching diﬀerent chemical compounds to the C60, researchers are
able to use it for cancer and AIDS treatments [83]. Nanotubes—carbon rods about
half the diameter of a DNA molecule—also help identify DNA changes associated
with cancers. Nanotubes are even smaller in diameter than nanopores. In addition
to detecting the presence of altered genes, these materials may help researchers
to pinpoint the exact location of these changes. For instance, mutated regions
associated with a cancer are first tagged with bulky C60 molecules. These bulky
molecules identify regions where mutations are present. These techniques will be
important in predicting diseases. Once a target region is located, we can use a
nanotube assembled on the needle tip of a record player to trace DNA’s physical
shape and its sequence. We can translate collected information into a topograph-
ical map, and compare the DNA reading with a database for cancer diagnosis and
treatment at the genome level. Both C60 bulky balls and nanotubes are biologi-
cally inert materials that should not cause any side eﬀects during diagnosis and
treatment.
Besides biological applications, carbon nanotube is also very useful in nano-
electronic circuit design because of their unique electronic properties [84] and fine
1D structures. They exhibit either metallic or semiconducting behavior depending
400 Cancer genomics, proteomics, and clinic applications
on the diameter and helicity of tubes [85, 86]. It can also conduct current ballisti-
cally without associated heat dissipation [87]. They are very strong and insensitive
to a wide range of processing temperatures and treatments.
(4) Quantum dots. Researchers would like to detect the early signs or precursors
of a cancer in cells without removing them from body. One nanoscale tool that will
allow scientists to detect critical DNA changes in vivo is via quantum dots. Quan-
tum dots, tiny crystals that are much smaller than conventional fluorescent dyes,
glow when they are stimulated by UV light [3]. Interestingly, the wavelength or the
color of the emitting light depends on quantum dot size. Latex beads filled with
these crystals can be designed to bind to specific DNA sequences.When crystals are
stimulated by light, colors they emit act as dyes that light up the DNA sequences
of interest. By mixing diﬀerent-sized quantum dots within a single bead, scientists
can create probes that release a distinct spectrum of various colors with diﬀer-
ent light intensities, serving as a sort of spectral bar code. To detect cancer, quan-
tum dots can be designed to bind cancer DNA sequences. Based on the unique
bar codes or labels, we can make critical cancer-associated DNA sequences visi-
ble. The vast number of possible combinations of quantum dots also means that
many unique labels can be created simultaneously [88]. It is important in cancer
diagnosis because it allows us to detect and interpret results from many diﬀerent
mutations within a cell.
(5)Nanoparticles and nanoshells. A number of nanoparticles have been developed
to facilitate drug delivery. Researchers have developed an innovative way to encap-
sulate drug in gold nanoshells. These nanoshells are miniscule beads coated with
gold. By manipulating the thickness of diﬀerent layers making up nanoshells, a
gold nanoshell can absorb specific wavelengths of light. Themost useful nanoshells
are those that absorb near-infrared light, which can easily penetrate several cen-
timeters of human tissue. Light absorption by nanoshells creates an intense heat
that is lethal to cancer cells. In laboratory cultures, heat generated by light-
absorbing nanoshells has successfully killed tumor cells while leaving neighbor-
ing cells intact. To make nanoshells target at specific cancer, nanoshells can be
linked to cancer-specific antibodies. Such a design can be envisioned as a “bio-
logical bomb” because these nanoshells can seek out their cancerous targets and
bind with high aﬃnity. When we apply near-infrared light, we can kill the tumor
cells.
With state-of-the-art nanoscale fabrication techniques, some useful nanopar-
ticles are developed for pharmaceutical, medical, chemical, and engineering ap-
plications. Cost-eﬀective, reproducible, and scalable processes to engineer cell-
or tissue-targeted nanoparticles are sought to deliver potent drugs as new ther-
apies in the pharmaceutical field. A natural and spontaneous method to engineer
nanoparticles has been developed through the use of microemulsions in which
dispersed phase droplets serve as “nanotemplates” to directly form stable nanopar-
ticles.
The other well-knownmeans is “organic dendrimer” [3]. The useful feature of
dendrimers is their branching shape that gives them vast amounts of surface area.
X. Steve Fu et al. 401
Therefore, it enhances the chance of delivery therapeutic agents or other biolog-
ically active molecules to desired locations. Because of the tiny branch geometry,
it can also reach spots where a conventional drug cannot. A single dendrimer can
carry a certain molecule that recognizes specific cancer cells. A therapeutic agent
thus can kill these cells, and then another molecule can be applied to detect cell
death. Researchers hope to manipulate dendrimers that can release their contents
only when a certain type of cancer is present. Dendrimers may also feedback in-
formation about targeted tumor cells’ apoptosis after drug released.
11.4.2. Case study: current application of nanotechnology
in cancer management
The determination of a patient’s cancer stage is of paramount importance in can-
cer therapy. It is important to determine whether a cancer has spread to a patient’s
lymph nodes or not in order to determine the diseases stage, and to design the
best treatment to increase survival chance. Let us consider prostate cancer. If the
cancer has spread to lymph nodes or bones, and the rogen-deprivation therapy is
often needed for cancer therapy. Men whose prostate cancer is still confine within
their prostate gland can select a range of loco-regional therapies, including radi-
cal prostatectomy by having the prostate removed along with the seminal vesicles
and ductus deferens, radiotherapy (external beam or seeds), or watchful waiting
(closely monitoring but deferring treatment until necessary).
MRI provides images with excellent anatomical detail and soft-tissue con-
trast. It is, however, relatively insensitive to detect lymph-node metastases. To im-
prove the MRI results, diﬀerent contrast agents and acquisition techniques can
be applied. For instance, contrast agents, such as gadolinium, are routinely used
to increase the accuracy of cancer staging by the MRI. Nanotechnology is very
promising in this field, in particular, the use of lymphotropic superparamagnetic
nanoparticles. These nanoparticles have a monocrystalline, inverse spinel, super-
paramagnetic iron oxide core, and contain a dense packing of dextrans to prolong
their time in circulation. They are also avidly taken up by lymph nodes in animals
and humans. Nanoparticles are slowly extravasated from the vascular into the in-
terstitial space, from which they are transported to lymph nodes by lymphatic ves-
sels. Within lymph nodes, lymphotropic superparamagnetic nanoparticles are in-
ternalized by macrophages, and these intracellular iron-containing particles cause
changes in magnetic properties that is detectable by the MRI.
Accurate detection of lymph-node metastases in prostate cancer is an essen-
tial component of initial nanomedicine study. It can also be applied to other can-
cers. The means to identify men with clinically occult lymph-node metastases is
greatly needed because of the adverse prognostic implications it confers. Highly
lymphotropic superparamagnetic nanoparticles, which gain access to lymph nodes
by means of interstitial-lymphatic fluid transport, have been used in conjunction
with high-resolutionMRI to reveal small nodal metastases [89]. It is demonstrated
that high-resolution MRI injection with magnetic nanoparticles allows the detec-
tion of small and otherwise unsuspected lymph nodes involved in cancer progres-
sion.
402 Cancer genomics, proteomics, and clinic applications
Nanotechnology has promising potential for us to develop ways in eradicating
cancer cells without harming healthy surrounding normal cells. Scientists hope to
use nanotechnology to create therapeutic agents that target at specific cells while
reduce toxic side eﬀects in a controllable manner. The ultimate goal is to create an
integrated solution that is able to both detect cancer and deliver treatment only
to aﬀected cells. In an ideal situation, nanoparticles that will circulate through the
body could detect cancer-associated molecular changes, release therapeutic agent,
and then monitor the eﬀectiveness of intervention.
11.5. Conclusion and future directions
Medicine is evolving from what was essentially an observational science a cen-
tury ago to what is largely a molecular science. The pace of this evolution is still
accelerating. With this fascinating progress, a single disciplinary approach to un-
derstand cancer is no longer suitable. Collaboration between multiple areas of ex-
pertise such as scientists, engineers and physicians has become a hallmark of this
new era. Not only is it important to have a team consisting of experts from various
fields, it is also vital for each of these members in the team to understand their
counterparts to maximize collaboration.
In this chapter, we reviewed the current understanding of cancer from a mo-
lecular point of view. Cancer genomics and proteomics form the backbone of our
current knowledge. Microarray technology has fundamentally changed our ap-
proach to cancer in the past few years. It is safe to say that it will not be long
before we will need to reclassify many types of malignancies according to data
from gene profiling. More highly specific therapies against cancer would also be
available as a result of our improved knowledge. As we focus our eﬀorts in the
microstructure of cells and their DNA, protein makeup as well as function, bet-
ter tools for cancer detection, assessment and therapeutic delivery are important.
Nanoparticles boast the advantages of being both extremely tiny and being biolog-
ically inert. The potential of having nanoparticles penetrating into the microstruc-
tures inside cells and performingmultiple tasks will undoubtedly bring us to a new
horizon.
Our multidisciplinary research focuses on two aspects: (1) a stochastic frame-
work for modeling genomic/proteomic network structure and dynamics in p53-
induced apoptosis; (2) carbon nanotubes as a remotely activated cytotoxic agent
in tumor-suppression therapy.
11.5.1. Stochastic framework for modeling genomics/proteomics
in p53-induced apoptosis network
The goal is to develop a holistic mathematical framework for understanding, eval-
uating and validating the regulatory network of p53-induced apoptosis. A poten-
tial impact of the proposed research is to be able to predict cancer-developing pro-
cesses from the proposed stochastic modeling and analysis, as a result to aid in
early cancer diagnosis and prediction.
X. Steve Fu et al. 403
p53 plays a critical role in the suppression of tumorgenesis. Subsequent stud-
ies demonstrated that p53 is a transcription factor with tumor-suppressor activity.
Human p53 structural gene is mutated in more than 50% of primary human tu-
mors, including tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. p53 normally acts as a tumor-
suppressor gene by inducing genes that can cause cell cycle arrest or apoptosis and
also by inhibiting angiogenesis (new blood vessel formation) [2]. Also, p53 may
play other roles in the apoptosis network [90]. As reviewed in earlier chapters, a
wide variety of formalisms for the inference of genetic regulatory networks has
been studied in the literature. We will mainly focus on Baysian network approach.
Based on data sources from genomic and proteomic levels, the tentative plan to
carry out the p53 apoptosis network study are as follows: exploring the protein-
protein interactive network; learning the genomic and proteomic network struc-
ture and dynamics of the p53-induced apoptosis in cancer cells; and designing
experimental observations to evaluate and refine the model.
11.5.2. Carbon nanotubes in tumor-suppression therapy
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) uses laser light in the spectrum of 630 nm to activate
porphyrin compounds (sensitive to this frequency) administered intravenously
and collected within tumor sites. The excited porphyrin structure can then transfer
its energy to ground-state tripletO2 which in turn is excited into its highly reactive
excited singlet state. This relatively new therapy is quite promising but has some
significant limitations.
One of the most significant clinical limitations of PDT with porphyrin com-
pounds is the high-serum protein aﬃnity and the modest diﬀerential selectivity of
uptake of the photosensitizing dye into tumor sites. Though human tissue shows
a greater permittivity to visible light in the range of 600 nm, its absorption of this
wavelength is still quite large and greatly attenuates the amount of activating radi-
ation that is actually applied to the porphyrin dye. Clinical limitations here are the
amount of light that can be administered selectively to the tumor site without ac-
tivating porphyrin dye in the peripheral tissue or damaging peripheral tissue with
high level of light energy (burning). In addition to these limitations, the side ef-
fects of porphyrin compounds (which include hemoptysis and acute anemia) pre-
clude its use as an adjunctive therapy with other chemotherapy regimens, as many
common chemotherapeutic agents suppress hematopoiesis which would further
exacerbate the anemia/neutropenia/leukopenia.
Our current research uses the relatively inert carbon nanotube structures to
induce a cytotoxic radical activity cascade. The research is carried out specifically
at the following aspects.
(i) Analyzing the quantum states of nanotubes under certain magnetic or
electrical field conditions. Furthermore, we would determine the possi-
bility for the electrons in carbon nanotube structures to transfer energy
in such a manner as to excite the ground-state radical (triplet) O2 into
its nonradical excited singlet state. We are also investigating the eﬀect
404 Cancer genomics, proteomics, and clinic applications
of phonon energy transfer into other biologically available compounds
that have some cytotoxic eﬀects.
(ii) Exploring the means to excite nanotubes remotely to induce a cyto-
toxic cascade. This would be an incredible medical/biological tool in that
magnetic fields are not attenuated to the degree that light radiation is.
This would allow the activation of our cytotoxic agent (nanotubes) even
in the deepest most inaccessible tumor sites.
(iii) Developing a method to deliver our cytotoxic nanotubes to specific tu-
mor sites. This will be absolutely necessary as there will be no way to
form highly localized magnetic fields within an organism. In the pres-
ence of our activating magnetic field, all of our nanotubes will become
cytotoxic so we will need to ensure that they are localized to the tumor
site.
Bibliography
[1] R. T. Greenlee, M. B. Hill-Harmon, T. Murray, and M. Thun, “Cancer statistics,” CA. Cancer J.
Clin., vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 15–36, 2001.
[2] K. W. Kinzler and B. Vogelstein, Colorectal Cancer, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, USA, 2001.
[3] A. P. Feinberg, Genomic Imprinting and Cancer, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, USA, 2001.
[4] M. O. Hengartner, “The biochemistry of apoptosis,”Nature, vol. 407, no. 6805, pp. 770–776, 2000.
[5] A. E. Guttmacher and F. S. Collins, “Welcome to the genomic era,” N. Engl. J. Med., vol. 349, no.
10, pp. 996–998, 2003.
[6] F. S. Collins, E. D. Green, A. E. Guttmacher, and M. S. Guyer, “A vision for the future of genomics
research,” Nature, vol. 422, no. 6934, pp. 835–847, 2003.
[7] F. S. Collins, M. Morgan, and A. Patrinos, “The human genome project: lessons from large-scale
biology,” Science, vol. 300, no. 5617, pp. 286–290, 2003.
[8] F. S. Collins, A. Patrinos, E. Jordan, A. Chakravarti, R. Gesteland, and L. Walters, “New goals for
the U.S. human genome project: 1998–2003,” Science, vol. 282, no. 5389, pp. 682–689, 1998.
[9] P. Hieter and M. Boguski, “Functional genomics: it’s all how you read it,” Science, vol. 278, no.
5338, pp. 601–602, 1997.
[10] H. P. Harding, Y. Zhang, H. Zeng, et al., “An integrated stress response regulates amino acid
metabolism and resistance to oxidative stress,” Mol. Cell., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 619–633, 2003.
[11] M. P. Washburn, A. Koller, G. Oshiro, et al., “Protein pathway and complex clustering of corre-
lated mRNA and protein expression analyses in Saccharomyces cerevisiae,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA, vol. 100, no. 6, pp. 3107–3112, 2003.
[12] S. P. Gygi and R. Aebersold, “Absolute quantitation of 2-D protein spots,”Methods Mol. Biol., vol.
112, pp. 417–421, 1999.
[13] A. Pandey and M. Mann, “Proteomics to study genes and genomes,” Nature, vol. 405, no. 6788,
pp. 837–846, 2000.
[14] W. A. Tao and R. Aebersold, “Advances in quantitative proteomics via stable isotope tagging and
mass spectrometry,” Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 110–118, 2003.
[15] S. Gu, S. Pan, E. M. Bradbury, and X. Chen, “Precise peptide sequencing and protein quantifi-
cation in the human proteome through in vivo lysine-specific mass tagging,” J. Am. Soc. Mass.
Spectrom., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 1–7, 2003.
[16] E. P. Diamandis, “Mass spectrometry as a diagnostic and a cancer biomarker discovery tool: op-
portunities and potential limitations,”Mol. Cell Proteomics, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 367–378, 2004.
[17] A. Cho and D. Normile, “Nobel prize in chemistry. Mastering macromolecules,” Science, vol. 298,
no. 5593, pp. 527–528, 2002.
[18] R. Aebersold and M. Mann, “Mass spectrometry-based proteomics,” Nature, vol. 422, no. 6928,
pp. 198–207, 2003.
X. Steve Fu et al. 405
[19] S. P. Gygi, B. Rist, S. A. Gerber, F. Turecek, M. H. Gelb, and R. Aebersold, “Quantitative analysis
of complex protein mixtures using isotope-coded aﬃnity tags,” Nat. Biotechnol, vol. 17, no. 10,
pp. 994–999, 1999.
[20] S. Pan, S. Gu, E.M. Bradbury, and X. Chen, “Single peptide-based protein identification in human
proteome throughMALDI-TOFMS coupled with amino acids codedmass tagging,”Anal. Chem.,
vol. 75, no. 6, pp. 1316–1324, 2003.
[21] N. L. Anderson, M. Polanski, R. Pieper, et al., “The human plasma proteome: a nonredundant
list developed by combination of four separate sources,” Mol. Cell Proteomics, vol. 3, no. 4, pp.
311–326, 2004.
[22] G. Di Chiro, R. L. DeLaPaz, R. A. Brooks, et al., “Glucose utilization of cerebral gliomas measured
by [18F] fluorodeoxyglucose and positron emission tomography,” Neurology, vol. 32, no. 12, pp.
1323–1329, 1982.
[23] S. P. Robinson, S. J. Barton, P. M. McSheehy, and J. R. Griﬃths, “Nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy of cancer,” Br. J. Radiol., vol. 70, pp. S60–S69, 1997.
[24] E. Olavarria, E. Kanfer, R. Szydlo, et al., “Early detection of BCR-ABL transcripts by quantita-
tive reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction predicts outcome after allogeneic stem cell
transplantation for chronic myeloid leukemia,” Blood, vol. 97, no. 6, pp. 1560–1565, 2001.
[25] E. Schrock, S. du Manoir, T. Veldman, et al., “Multicolor spectral karyotyping of human chromo-
somes,” Science, vol. 273, no. 5274, pp. 494–497, 1996.
[26] T. Ried, M. Liyanage, S. du Manoir, et al., “Tumor cytogenetics revisited: comparative genomic
hybridization and spectral karyotyping,” J. Mol. Med., vol. 75, no. 11-12, pp. 801–814, 1997.
[27] W. A. Bonner, H. R. Hulett, R. G. Sweet, and L. A. Herzenberg, “Fluorescence activated cell sort-
ing,” Rev. Sci. Instrum., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 404–409, 1972.
[28] C. Cooper, “Review: Application of microarray technology in breast cancer research,” Breast Can-
cer Res., vol. 3, pp. 158–175, 2001.
[29] L. Joos, E. Eryuksel, and M. H. Brutsche, “Functional genomics and gene microarrays—the use
in research and clinical medicine,” Swiss. Med. Wkly., vol. 133, no. 3-4, pp. 31–38, 2003.
[30] M. Gabig and G. Wegrzyn, “An introduction to DNA chips: principles, technology, applications
and analysis,” Acta. Biochim. Pol., vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 615–622, 2001.
[31] R. J. Lipshutz, S. P. Fodor, T. R. Gingeras, and D. J. Lockhart, “High density synthetic oligonu-
cleotide arrays,” Nat. Genet., vol. 21, Suppl 1, pp. 20–24, 1999.
[32] T. R. Hughes, M. Mao, A. R. Jones, et al., “Expression profiling using microarrays fabricated by
an ink-jet oligonucleotide synthesizer,” Nat. Biotechnol., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 342–347, 2001.
[33] D. G. Wang, J. B. Fan, C. J. Siao, et al., “Large-scale identification, mapping, and genotyping of
single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the human genome,” Science, vol. 280, no. 5366, pp. 1077–
1082, 1998.
[34] Y. Takahashi, Y. Ishii, T. Nagata, M. Ikarashi, K. Ishikawa, and S. Asai, “Clinical application of
oligonucleotide probe array for full-length gene sequencing of TP53 in colon cancer,” Oncology,
vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 54–60, 2003.
[35] T. R. Golub, D. K. Slonim, P. Tamayo, et al., “Molecular classification of cancer: class discovery
and class prediction by gene expression monitoring,” Science, vol. 286, no. 5439, pp. 531–537,
1999.
[36] C. M. Perou, S. S. Jeﬀrey, M. van de Rijn, et al., “Distinctive gene expression patterns in human
mammary epithelial cells and breast cancers,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 96, no. 16, pp. 9212–
9217, 1999.
[37] A. A. Alizadeh, M. B. Eisen, R. E. Davis, et al., “Distinct types of diﬀuse large B-cell lymphoma
identified by gene expression profiling,” Nature, vol. 403, no. 6769, pp. 503–511, 2000.
[38] U. Alon, N. Barkai, D. A. Notterman, et al., “Broad patterns of gene expression revealed by clus-
tering analysis of tumor and normal colon tissues probed by oligonucleotide arrays,” Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 96, no. 12, pp. 6745–6750, 1999.
[39] C. Debouck and P. N. Goodfellow, “DNA microarrays in drug discovery and development,” Nat.
Genet., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 48–50, 1999.
[40] D. V. Nguyen and D. M. Rocke, “Tumor classification by partial least squares using microarray
gene expression data,” Bioinformatics, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 39–50, 2002.
406 Cancer genomics, proteomics, and clinic applications
[41] G. Bloom, I. V. Yang, D. Boulware, et al., “Multi-platform, multi-site, microarray-based human
tumor classification,” Am. J. Pathol., vol. 164, no. 1, pp. 9–16, 2004.
[42] J. C. Chang, E. C. Wooten, A. Tsimelzon, et al., “Gene expression profiling for the prediction of
therapeutic response to docetaxel in patients with breast cancer,” Lancet, vol. 362, no. 9381, pp.
362–369, 2003.
[43] L. J. van’t Veer, H. Dai, M. J. van de Vijver, et al., “Gene expression profiling predicts clinical
outcome of breast cancer,” Nature, vol. 415, no. 6871, pp. 530–536, 2002.
[44] U. Scherf, D. T. Ross, M. Waltham, et al., “A gene expression database for the molecular pharma-
cology of cancer,” Nat. Genet., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 236–244, 2000.
[45] M. J. Marton, J. L. DeRisi, H. A. Bennett, et al., “Drug target validation and identification of
secondary drug target eﬀects using DNA microarrays,” Nat. Med., vol. 4, no. 11, pp. 1293–1301,
1998.
[46] T. R. Hughes, M. J. Marton, A. R. Jones, et al., “Functional discovery via a compendium of ex-
pression profiles,” Cell, vol. 102, no. 1, pp. 109–126, 2000.
[47] M. Orr, A. Williams, and L. Vogt, Discovery of 830 Candidate Therapeutic Targets and Diagnostic
Markers for Breast Cancer Using OligonucleotideMicroarray Technology, Nature Publishing Group,
London, 2001.
[48] F. S. Collins, M. S. Guyer, and A. Charkravarti, “Variations on a theme: cataloging human DNA
sequence variation,” Science, vol. 278, no. 5343, pp. 1580–1581, 1997.
[49] J. H. Schiller, D. Harrington, C. P. Belani, et al., “Comparison of four chemotherapy regimens for
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer,” N. Engl. J. Med., vol. 346, no. 2, pp. 92–98, 2002.
[50] N.W. Kim,M. A. Piatyszek, K. R. Prowse, et al., “Specific association of human telomerase activity
with immortal cells and cancer,” Science, vol. 266, no. 5193, pp. 2011–2015, 1994.
[51] D. Kipling, The Telomere, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 1995.
[52] K. C. Healy, “Telomere dynamics and telomerase activation in tumor progression: prospects for
prognosis and therapy,” Oncol. Res., vol. 7, no. 3–4, pp. 121–130, 1995.
[53] W. C. Hahn, S. A. Stewart, M. W. Brooks, et al., “Inhibition of telomerase limits the growth of
human cancer cells,” Nat. Med., vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 1164–1170, 1999.
[54] C. B. Harley and N. W. Kim, “Telomerase and cancer,” in Important Advances Oncology, V. T.
De Vita, S. Hellmann, and S. A. Rosemberg, Eds., pp. 57–67, Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia,
USA, 1996.
[55] M. M. Kim, M. A. Rivera, I. L. Botchkina, R. Shalaby, A. D. Thor, and E. H. Blackburn, “A low
threshold level of expression of mutant-template telomerase RNA inhibits human tumor cell pro-
liferation,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 98, no. 14, pp. 7982–7987, 2001.
[56] J. F. Kerr, A. H. Wyllie, and A. R. Currie, “Apoptosis: a basic biological phenomenon with wide-
ranging implications in tissue kinetics,” Br. J. Cancer, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 239–257, 1972.
[57] J. M. Adams and S. Cory, “The Bcl-2 protein family: arbiters of cell survival,” Science, vol. 281, no.
5381, pp. 1322–1326, 1998.
[58] M. Hollstein, D. Sidransky, B. Vogelstein, and C. C. Harris, “p53 mutations in human cancers,”
Science, vol. 253, no. 5015, pp. 49–53, 1991.
[59] B. Jansen, V. Wacheck, E. Heere-Ress, et al., “Chemosensitisation of malignant melanoma by
BCL2 antisense therapy,” Lancet, vol. 356, no. 9243, pp. 1728–1733, 2000.
[60] S. Singhal, J. Mehta, R. Desikan, et al., “Antitumor activity of thalidomide in refractory multiple
myeloma,” N. Engl. J. Med., vol. 341, no. 21, pp. 1565–1571, 1999.
[61] H. Hurwitz, L. Fehrenbacher, T. Cartwright, et al., “Bevacizumab (a monoclonal antibody to vas-
cular endothelial growth factor) prolongs survival in first-line colorectal cancer (CRC): results of
a phase III trial of bevacizumab in combination with bolus IFL (irinotecan, 5-fluoruracil, leucov-
orin) as first-line therapy in subjects with metastatic CRC,” in Proc. American Society of Clinical
Oncology (ASCO ’03), vol. 3646, Chicago, Ill, USA, 2003.
[62] D. Cunningham, Y. Humblet, S. Siena, et al., “Cetuximab (C225) alone or in combination
with irinotecan (CPT-11) in patients with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-positive,
irinotecan-refractory metastatic colorectal cancer (MCRC),” Proc. Am. Soc. Clin. Oncol., vol. 22,
pp. 252, 2003.
X. Steve Fu et al. 407
[63] P. G. Richardson, B. Barlogie, J. Berenson, et al., “A phase 2 study of bortezomib in relapsed,
refractory myeloma,” N. Engl. J. Med., vol. 348, no. 26, pp. 2609–2617, 2003.
[64] P. G. Richardson, J. Berenson, D. Irwin, et al., “Phase II study of PS-341, a novel proteasome
inhibitor, alone or in combination with dexamethasone in patients with multiple myeloma who
have relapsed following front-line therapy and are refractory to their most recent therapy,” Blood,
vol. 98, no. 11, pp. 3223, 2001.
[65] H. Lemke, G. J. Hammerling, C. Hohmann, and K. Rajewsky, “Hybrid cell lines secreting mon-
oclonal antibody specific for major histocompatibility antigens of the mouse,” Nature, vol. 271,
no. 5642, pp. 249–251, 1978.
[66] S. G. O’Brien, F. Guilhot, R. A. Larson, et al., “Imatinib compared with interferon and low-dose
cytarabine for newly diagnosed chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia,” N. Engl. J. Med., vol.
348, no. 11, pp. 994–1004, 2003.
[67] H. Joensuu, P. J. Roberts, M. Sarlomo-Rikala, et al., “Eﬀect of the tyrosine kinase inhibitor STI571
in a patient with a metastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumor,” N. Engl. J. Med., vol. 344, no. 14,
pp. 1052–1056, 2001.
[68] G. D. Demetri, M. von Mehren, C. D. Blanke, et al., “Eﬃcacy and safety of imatinib mesylate in
advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumors,” N. Engl. J. Med., vol. 347, no. 7, pp. 472–480, 2002.
[69] M. Fukuoka, S. Yano, G. Giaccone, et al., “Multi-institutional randomized phase II trial of gefi-
tinib for previously treated patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer,” J. Clin. Oncol.,
vol. 21, no. 12, pp. 2237–2246, 2003.
[70] M. G. Kris, R. B. Natale, R. S. Herbst, et al., “Eﬃcacy of Gefitinib, an inhibitor of the epidermal
growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase, in symptomatic patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer,”
JAMA, vol. 290, no. 16, pp. 2149–2158, 2003.
[71] T. J. Lynch, D. W. Bell, R. Sordella, et al., “Activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor
receptor underlying responsiveness of non-small-cell lung cancer to gefitinib,” N. Engl. J. Med.,
vol. 350, no. 21, pp. 2129–2139, 2004.
[72] G. A. Wiseman, L. I. Gordon, P. S. Multani, et al., “Ibritumomab tiuxetan radioimmunotherapy
for patients with relapsed or refractory non-Hodgkin lymphoma and mild thrombocytopenia: a
phase II multicenter trial,” Blood, vol. 99, no. 12, pp. 4336–4342, 2002.
[73] M. S. Kaminski, K. R. Zasadny, I. R. Francis, et al., “Radioimmunotherapy of B-cell lymphoma
with [131I]anti-B1 (anti-CD20) antibody,” N. Engl. J. Med., vol. 329, no. 7, pp. 459–465, 1993.
[74] M. S. Kaminski, A. D. Zelenetz, O. W. Press, et al., “Pivotal study of iodine I 131 tositumomab
for chemotherapy-refractory low-grade or transformed low-grade B-cell non-Hodgkin’s lym-
phomas,” J. Clin. Oncol., vol. 19, no. 19, pp. 3918–3928, 2001.
[75] A. Dickson and S. Calderwood, Thermosensitivity of Neoplastic Tissues in Vivo. Hyperthermia in
Cancer Therapy, K. Storm, ed., GK Hall, Boston, Mass, USA, 1983.
[76] S. E. Lyshevski, MEMS and NEMS: Systems, Devices, and Structures, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Fla,
USA, 2002.
[77] R. A. Freitas Jr., Nanomedicine, Vol. I: Basic Capabilities, Landes Bioscience, Georgetown, Tex,
USA, 1999.
[78] S. Iijima, “Helical microtubules of graphitic carbon,” Nature, vol. 354, no. 6348, pp. 56–58, 1991.
[79] M. A. Reed, J. Chen, A. M. Rawlett, D. W. Price, and J. M. Tour, “Molecular random access mem-
ory cell,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 78, no. 23, pp. 3735–3737, 2001.
[80] C. Zhou, M. R. Deshpande, M. A. Reed, L. Jones II, and Tour J. M., “Nanoscale metal/self-
assembled monolayer/metal heterostructures,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 71, no. 5, pp. 611–613,
1997.
[81] S. Datta, Electronic Transport in Mesoscopic Systems, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK,
1995.
[82] R. F. Curl and R. E. Smalley, “Probing C60,” Science, vol. 242, no. 4881, pp. 1017–1022, 1988.
[83] Z. Zhu, D. I. Schuster, and M. E. Tuckerman, “Molecular dynamics study of the connection be-
tween flap closing and binding of fullerene-based inhibitors of the HIV-1 protease,” Biochemistry,
vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 1326–1333, 2003.
[84] S. J. Wind, J. Appenzeller, and P. Avouris, “Lateral scaling in carbon-nanotube field-eﬀect transis-
tors,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 91, no. 5, pp. 058301, 2003.
408 Cancer genomics, proteomics, and clinic applications
[85] J. W. G. Wildoer, L. C. Venema, A. G. Rinzler, R. E. Smalley, and C. Dekker, “Electronic structure
of atomically resolved carbon nanotubes,” Nature, vol. 391, no. 59, pp. 59–62, 1998.
[86] T. W. Odom, J. Huang, P. Kim, and C. M. Lieber, “Atomic structure and electronic properties of
single-walled carbon nanotubes,” Nature, vol. 391, pp. 62–64, 1998.
[87] S. Frank, P. Poncharal, Z. L. Wang, and W. A. Heer, “Carbon nanotube quantum resistors,” Sci-
ence, vol. 280, no. 5370, pp. 1744–1746, 1998.
[88] G. Stix, “Little big science. Nanotechnology,” Sci. Am., vol. 285, no. 3, pp. 32–37, 2001.
[89] M. G. Harisinghani, J. Barentsz, P. F. Hahn, et al., “Noninvasive detection of clinically occult
lymph-node metastases in prostate cancer,” N. Engl. J. Med., vol. 348, no. 25, pp. 2491–2499,
2003.
[90] G. M. Wahl and A. M. Carr, “The evolution of diverse biological responses to DNA damage:
insights from yeast and p53,” Nat. Cell. Biol., vol. 3, no. 12, pp. E277–E286, 2001.
[91] A. Meller, L. Nivon, and D. Branton, “Voltage-driven DNA translocations through a nanopore,”
Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 86, no. 15, pp. 3435–3438, 2001.
X. Steve Fu: The Corvallis Clinic, 3680 NW Samaritan Dr., Corvallis, OR 97330, USA
Email: steve.fu@corvallis-clinic.com
Chien-an A. Hu: School of Medicine, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA
Email: ahu@salud.unm.edu
Jie Chen: Division of Engineering, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, USA
Email: jie chen@brown.edu
Z. Jane Wang: Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada
Email: zjanew@eee.ubc.ca
K. J. Ray Liu: Communication and Signal Processing Laboratory, Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
Email: kjrliu@eng.umd.edu
