Subunit assembly modulates the activities of
the Type III restriction–modification
enzyme PstII in vitro
Alice Sears and Mark D. Szczelkun*
DNA-Protein Interactions Unit, Department of Biochemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TD, UK
Received June 16, 2005; Revised July 18, 2005; Accepted August 8, 2005
ABSTRACT
We demonstrate that, like other Type III restriction
endonuclease, PstII does not turnover such that a
DNA substrate is only fully cleaved at a Res2Mod2-
to-site ratio of 1:1. However, unlike other Type III
enzymes, the cleavage rate profiles varied with pro-
tein concentration: using 5 nM DNA and 25 nM PstII,
approximately half of the DNA was cut at a fast rate
while the remainder was cut 24 times more slowly; in
comparison, with 100 nM PstII cleavage occurs at a
single fast rate. The inclusion of the methyl donor
S-adenosyl methionine does not alter the rates with
100 nM PstII but with 25 nM PstII the reaction stopped
after completion of the initial fast cleavage phase
owing to methylation. Concentration-dependent
rates were also observed in methylation assays: at
100 nM PstII, a single slow rate was measured while
at lower PstII concentrations both fast and slow rates
were measured. We propose a model in which the
intact Res2Mod2 complex favoured at high PstII
concentrations is a fast endonuclease/slow methyl-
transferase while the various subassemblies which
coexist at lower concentrations are fast methyltrans-
ferases. A potential role for disassembly in control of
restriction activity in vivo is discussed.
INTRODUCTION
To function as an efficient restriction–modification (RM)
system, the newly characterized Type III RM enzyme PstII (1)
must be able to accurately control its methyltransferase and
endonuclease activities so that double strand breaks are intro-
duced into infecting phage DNA yet not into the host DNA.
Just how accurate is this control? It is well established that
some RM enzymes can be transferred to recipient cells in
which the chromosomal DNA is unmodified (2,3). It is
also well established that a temporary loss of restriction
proficiency, called restriction alleviation (RA), can occur in
response to DNA damage (4–6). This suggests that temporal
and/or spatial enzyme control is being exercised. For the het-
erooligomeric Type I and III enzymes, which catalyse both
RM functions within the same complex (4,7), this poses two
related problems: what is to prevent a multifunctional complex
cutting ‘self’ DNA before modifying it, and what is to prevent
the same multifunctional complex modifying ‘foreign’ DNA
before cleaving it? The relatively simple answer is that modu-
lation of the subunit composition of a Type I or III complex
determines whether a DNA site is modified or cleaved (8).
How do bacterial cells regulate the protein assembly of
Types I and III RM enzymes? In neither system is there any
evidence of transcriptional regulation (3,9–11). For some
Type I enzymes (e.g. EcoKI and EcoAI), disruption of a
DNA cleavage event can be triggered by an ATP-dependent
protease complex, ClpXP, in response to RA signals (4–6).
The protease is targeted to endonucleases on genomic DNA
which are in the process of DNA cleavage (5); proteolysis
of the HsdR subunit during DNA translocation prevents the
reaction from proceeding to completion. General RA indepen-
dent of the protease may also occur due to the packaging and
condensation of the genomic DNA, conditions that disfavour
translocation (12). ClpXP does not target endonuclease com-
plexes translocating on phage DNA—this may be because
translocation is unencumbered on the naked bacteriophage
genome and is too rapid for proteolysis to occur (12). There
is also some evidence that Type III enzymes could be con-
trolled by RA (13). For plasmid-borne Type I enzymes the
assembly of a fully active endonuclease is limited by the
affinity of the HsdR subunits for the core complex (10,14,
15). This may allow the methyltransferase activity to act in
advance of the endonuclease activity (8). Although this can
explain transmission of RM activity into new hosts, it can less
readily explain RA phenomena. For the Type III enzymes
EcoP15I and EcoPI there is evidence that the availability of
the endonuclease subunit Res is controlled both at the
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +44 117 928 7439; Fax: +44 117 928 8274; Email: mark.szczelkun@bristol.ac.uk
 The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
4788–4796 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 15
doi:10.1093/nar/gki788
 Published online August 24, 2005
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 6, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
translational level and by the associated Mod subunit (11).
EcoP15I and EcoPI are freely transferable from cell to cell
by phage infection, conjugation and transformation [(11) and
references therein], and this may be due to these controls on
Res. In contrast, horizontal transfer of the Type III enzyme
StyLTI results in cell death (16). It, therefore, appears that
different Type III enzymes may utilize different mechanisms,
or levels, of RM control.
In the accompanying paper (1) we show that PstII has
endonuclease activities characteristic of a Type III enzyme
and that it can function in vivo as an RM system. We have
also observed that PstII is difficult to establish in a new cell
line (when a cell line is transformed using a high copy number
plasmid expressing the PstII operon from natural promoters).
Given that the PstII is assembled from Res and Mod subunits,
does the protein composition of the complex affect the relative
RM activities? From the data in this study we suggest that
while the intact Res2Mod2 tetramer is a fast endonuclease and
slow methyltransferase, thereby favouring DNA cleavage,
subassemblies of PstII in which the Res subunits have disso-
ciated are more efficient methyltransferases. DNA cleavage by
these lower molecular weight species may only occur if suf-
ficient HsdR associates to form a Res2Mod2 tetramer before
methylation occurs. This dynamic association of Res and Mod
might play a key role in the control of PstII activity in vivo.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
DNA and proteins
The construction and preparation of the DNA substrates and
the purification of PstII are described in the accompanying
paper (1).
Analytical gel filtration
Gel filtration was carried out using a 24 ml Superose 6 column
plumbed into an AKTA FPLC (Amersham Biociences). The
system was pre-equilibrated at 0.4 ml/min with either NEB 4
(20 mM Tris–acetate, pH 7.9, 10 mM Mg acetate, 50 mM
potassium acetate and 1 mM DTT) or NEB 4 plus 0.02%
(v/v) Triton X-100. A 100 ml loop was filled with protein
sample in storage buffer [19 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, 0.4 mM
EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 0.4 mM DTT and 50% (v/v) glycerol]
supplemented where necessary with 0.02% (v/v) Triton X-
100. Protein was eluted with the equilibration buffer at
0.4 ml/min and was monitored by measuring the A280 using
an averaging time (sensitivity) setting of 1.3 s. Fractions
(333 ml) were collected and aliquots analysed by SDS–
PAGE. Gels were stained using Bio-Safe Coomasie (Bio-
Rad), destained in water overnight and digital images captured
on a Kodak Image Station 440CF without editing and using a
linear intensity scale. The percentage of Res and Mod was
calculated from the relative band intensities using ImageQuant
software (Molecular Dynamics) and assuming a linear rela-
tionship between protein size and dye intensity. The Superose
column was calibrated using at least five molecular weight
standards.
Cleavage reactions
Cleavage reactions contained 5 nM 3H-labelled pLJP11b and
4 mM ATP in NEB 4 supplemented with 100 mM AdoMet
and/or 0.02% (v/v) Triton X-100 where indicated. Cleavage
was initiated by addition of PstII (concentrations are given in
the figure legends/text). Reactions were carried out at 37C
and either left for 1 h or aliquots removed at the indicated time
points. Cleavage was stopped by the addition of 0.5 vol of
STEB buffer [0.1 M Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 0.2 M EDTA, 40%
(w/v) sucrose and 0.4 mg/ml bromophenol blue]. The DNA
substrate and product fragments were separated by agarose gel
electrophoresis and the percentage of DNA in each band was
evaluated by scintillation counting as in Sears et al. (1).
Apparent methylation rates from inhibition of cleavage
3H-labelled pLJP11b (5 nM) was pre-incubated with varying
concentrations of PstII in NEB 4 plus 0.02% (v/v) Triton
X-100 supplemented with 100 mM AdoMet. Methylation
was allowed to proceed at 37C. At the time points indicated
20 ml aliquots were removed from the master reaction and
mixed with ATP and the appropriate amount of PstII so
that the final reaction conditions were 129 nM PstII mix
and 4 mM ATP. These reactions were then incubated for a
further hour at 37C and cleavage stopped by the addition of
STEB as above. The DNA substrate and product fragments
were separated by agarose gel electrophoresis and the percent-
age of DNA in each band evaluated by scintillation counting.
RESULTS
The subunit stoichiometry of PstII and the effect of
Triton X-100
In the accompanying paper we describe the purification of
PstII, a new Type III enzyme from Provdencia stuartii (1).
The ratio of Res to Mod subunits in the purified PstII samples
was estimated from densitometry of SDS–PAGE gels as
1:3 (Materials and Methods). All protein concentrations
are quoted in terms of this ratio, although this is not considered
an active species but as a ‘PstII mix’. Previous analysis of
EcoPI and EcoP15I demonstrated that for each enzyme the Res
and Mod subunits were in equal proportion and that the com-
plexes assembled into stable tetramers with the subunit
stoichiometry Res2Mod2 (17). No evidence for intermediates
in the assembly pathway (e.g. Res1Mod2) was obtained. Maxi-
mum endonuclease activity only arises when each site of a pair
of indirectly repeated sites is bound by a Res2Mod2 tetramer
(18). The most probable reason for the under-representation of
Res in our PstII samples is that during anion exchange chro-
matography on DEAE–Sepharose (1), the Res subunit eluted
across a broader range of Cl ion concentrations than Mod
(data not shown). The fractions that were pooled for further
purification were those which contained both Res and Mod;
the samples containing Res alone were contaminated with
significant levels of co-eluted proteins and were discarded.
Therefore, the purification protocol depleted the preparation
of Res subunits. Depletion of an RM complex during purifica-
tion has also been observed with the Type I enzyme EcoR124I
(14). When purified from cells transformed with the complete
EcoR124I operon, the resulting purified protein had only
one HsdR subunit per methyltransferase complex. Since two
HsdR subunits are needed for cleavage, full endonuclease
activity was only observed with an 7-fold molar excess of
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 15 4789
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 6, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
EcoR124I over DNA sites, where additional HsdR subunits are
provided from the excess of unbound complexes in solution
(14,15,19).
To investigate further the subunit composition of our PstII
preparations, we analysed samples using analytical gel filtra-
tion under one set of volumetric and flow conditions. The most
rigorous method for determining subunit assembly is sedi-
mentation equilibrium analysis (17). However, for technical
reasons we were unable to use this technique with our PstII
preparations. There are a number of limitations in the inter-
pretation of gel filtration data, particularly in relating the spe-
cies observed during chromatography to those present under
reactions conditions. However, our goal with these experi-
ments was to observe the changes in subunit assembly as a
function of conditions and to try to relate the observations in
general terms to changes in activity in solution; i.e. does activ-
ity change as the subunit assembly changes?
Scouting experiments indicated that the endonuclease activ-
ity of PstII required Mg+ ions and ATP, CTP or GTP (1) but
was not affected by the composition of monovalent ions in the
buffer (data not shown). We used a standard K+ ion-based
buffer (NEB 4; Materials and Methods) for all subsequent
experiments described here and in the accompanying paper
(1). An aliquot of 100 ml of a 1.2 mM PstII mix sample
was loaded onto a 24 ml Superose 6 column (Amersham
Biosciences) pre-equilibrated in NEB 4 and the sample eluted
at 0.4 ml/min. Elution was monitored by continuous measure-
ment at A280 and by SDS–PAGE of 333 ml fractions
(Figure 1A). The percentage of Res and Mod in each fraction
was estimated by gel densitometry (Materials and Methods
and figure legend). The PstII sample eluted across a broad
range of apparent molecular weights (600 to 80 kDa)
with two distinct peaks at 330 and 165 kDa (Figure 1A).
The Kav of the main peak (at14 ml) coincides almost exactly
with that calculated for a Res2Mod2 complex (343 999 Da).
The fractions corresponding to this peak (e.g. 2 and 3) had a
Res/Mod ratio of 1:3. It may be difficult to capture a clear-
cut Res2Mod2 complex under these conditions owing to mass
transport effects (dissociation of Res may occur during
elution).
The apparent molecular weight of the second peak lies half-
way between the calculated values for a Res1Mod2 complex
(235 722 Da) and a Mod2 methyltransferase complex (127 446
Da). However, the fractions corresponding to this peak (e.g. 6)
had significantly more Mod than Res (10- to 20-fold), which
suggests that the second peak may represent the Mod2 com-
plex eluting with an anomalous Kav. The Mod subunits of both
the EcoPI and EcoP15I enzymes have been shown to assemble
Figure 1. Subunit assembly of PstII and the effect of Triton X-100. Gel filtra-
tion of PstII was carried out in (A) NEB 4 or (B) NEB 4 plus 0.02% Triton X-
100, as described in the text and in Materials and Methods. Elution profiles are
shown from 12.5 to 16.5 ml following PstII injection. Fractions 1–9 (333 ml)
were collected and aliquots analysed by gel densitometry following SDS–
PAGE assuming a linear relationship between staining intensity and polypep-
tide size. The percentage of Res and Mod in each fraction is indicated. With the
exception of the aggregate, the open arrows indicate ideal Kav values calculated
from the theoretical MW of each species (M ¼ Mod, R ¼ Res) and using the
calibration curve specific to the individual Superose 6 column. (C) The effect
of different concentrations of Triton X-100 on DNA cleavage by PstII: 5 nM
pLJP11b (10 nM sites) were incubated for 1 h in NEB 4 with 15 nM PstII mix
as indicated and with Triton X-100 at the concentrations shown.
4790 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 15
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 6, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
as active dimers (20,21). A smaller peak was also observed
eluting across a broad range of high molecular weights centred
at 520 kDa (Figure 1A). The composition of the fractions
around this peak are over-represented in Mod (5-fold excess
over Res). We suggest that this is an inactive aggregated state,
possibly driven by self-association of the excess methyl-
transferase subunits.
It would appear from our gel filtration analysis of PstII in
NEB 4 that there are more than two enzyme species present; a
methyltransferase (Mod2) followed by several higher order
assemblies with Res. Given the similarity of PstII in enzymatic
terms to EcoPI and EcoP15I, we fully expect that the active
PstII species on DNA is a Res2Mod2 complex. We propose
that under the conditions here, the endonuclease and methyl-
transferase forms are in dynamic equilibrium as:
Mod2 þ 2 · Res !Kd1 Res1Mod2 þ Res !Kd2 Res2Mod2 1
Equation 1 assumes that the Res subunits assemble as mono-
mers onto a dimeric methyltransferase. This model is based on
similar models suggested for the assembly of Type I restriction
enzymes (8). Type III endonuclease activity can be reinstated
by mixing separate Mod and Res fractions in vitro (22), which
suggests that assembly does not rely on protein folding and/or
chaperone activity. A discrete PstII peak corresponding to
the Res1Mod2 intermediate was not observed (Figure 1A)
although its presence may have been masked. From the
relative proportions of Res and Mod in Fractions 3–5, it is
perfectly possible that this species is present.
Our initial attempts to characterize the endonuclease activ-
ity of PstII using NEB 4 alone were hampered by a low
apparent specific activity (data not shown). Given the gel
filtration data, this is most probably due to both partial subunit
assembly and protein aggregation (albeit at different concen-
trations of total protein). We, therefore, investigated a number
of changes to our buffer conditions (e.g. adding glycerol,
spermidine, detergents) to try to improve the DNA cleavage
activity (data not shown). The most useful additive—that
which recovered the endonuclease activity to expected
levels—was Triton X-100 at a concentration of >0.02%
(v/v) (Figure 1C). This detergent concentration (0.5 mM)
is well below the critical micelle concentration of Triton
X-100 (25 mM). Triton X-100 is a common additive to
commercial restriction enzyme buffers and can improve
endonuclease activity and specificity (23), most probably
through a disruption of aggregated states (24). The effect of
the detergent on the assembly of PstII was analysed using
analytical gel filtration as above. A clear difference in the
elution profile was observed (Figure 1B). The distribution
of eluted species is narrower than seen with NEB 4 buffer
alone and is dominated by a single peak with a Kav corre-
sponding to a Res2Mod2 tetramer. However, the relative pro-
portions of Res and Mod in Fractions 1–4 are still not equal as
would be expected for a Res2Mod2 tetramer. This may repre-
sent inaccuracy in the densitometry and/or equilibrium
redistribution during chromatography. There are still lower
molecular weight species present, most probably correspond-
ing to the Res1Mod2 and Mod2 forms (Fractions 5–9), but
these are less prevalent than in Figure 1A. Addition of Triton
X-100 has also disrupted the putative aggregate observed in
Figure 1A.
Given a scheme such as Equation 1 in which there is a
dynamic equilibrium between four protein species (Res,
Mod2, Res1Mod2 and Res2Mod2), the analysis of gel filtration
profiles is made more difficult by associations/dissociations of
the components in the gel matrix during elution. Nonetheless,
adding Triton X-100 has two clear effects on PstII assembly: in
stabilizing higher order assemblies that correspond, in molecu-
lar weight terms at least, with a Res2Mod2 tetramer and in
preventing the appearance of high molecular weight species
(most probably inactive aggregates). We suggest that the
improvement in DNA cleavage activity observed in
Figure 1C as a function of Triton X-100 may also correspond
to similar changes in the subunit interactions at the lower
enzyme concentrations used in the cleavage assays. For
PstII, conditions which favour the higher order structures
also favour DNA cleavage. We will investigate this in more
detail below. Attempts to purify PstII using buffers supple-
mented with Triton X-100 proved unsuccessful (data not
shown). Consequently, PstII was purified in normal buffers
and then analysed in NEB 4 supplemented with 0.02% (v/v)
Triton X-100. Given the Res/Mod ratio of 1:3 in the purified
samples, we suggest that the equilibrium as indicated by
Equation 1 will lie more to the left. Therefore, DNA cleavage
will require an apparent excess of PstII to supply the requisite
number of subunits per site; in same manner, assembly of
active EcoR124I complexes on DNA can be driven by the
association of endonuclease subunits from solution (14,15,19).
Efficient DNA cleavage by PstII is dependent on
subunit assembly
Cleavage of 5 nM pLJP11b [10 nM sites, (1)] at a range of PstII
concentrations was analysed after incubation for 1 h in buffer
NEB 4 plus Triton X-100 (Figure 2A). This DNA substrate
contains two indirectly repeated sites and is thus a substrate for
the endonuclease (1). All components except PstII were pre-
incubated at 37C. After 2 min, enzyme was added, DNA
cleavage was allowed to proceed for 1 h, the reactions were
stopped by the addition of EDTA and the products were
analysed by gel electrophoresis (Materials and Methods).
Cleavage of pLJP11b followed a roughly linear dependence
on enzyme concentration until maximum activity was
achieved at a Res/site ratio of 2:1 and a Mod/site ratio of
6:1. Only one of the two sites was ever cleaved and the
addition of further enzyme did not result in cleavage of the
remaining site. No endonuclease turnover following cleavage
was observed (data not shown) although ATPase activity con-
tinued regardless (1). If DNA cleavage requires the long-range
interaction of two sites by separate enzyme molecules, one
bound at each site, and the conditions are such that DNA–
protein binding is not limiting, then the cleavage profile should
saturate at an enzyme/site ratio of 1:1 (25). Addition of further
enzyme should not, per se, inhibit or enhance the reaction.
This is what we observed in a previous study using the hetero-
tetrameric form of EcoPI (17). In contrast, if DNA cleavage
requires the long-range interaction of two DNA sites by a
single enzyme molecule then cleavage will saturate at an
enzyme/site ratio of 1:2 (25). Addition of excess enzyme
will then inhibit the reaction. This is what we observed in a
previous study using the tetrameric Type II restriction enzyme
SfiI (26). We have assumed above that our PstII preparations
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 15 4791
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 6, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
do not represent a single species but are a continuum of
assembled states as described by Equation 1. From the rela-
tive proportions of Res and Mod (1:3), a Res1Mod2 complex
could readily form on DNA but to form the tetrameric species
would require further PstII to be added. It would be difficult to
accommodate the PstII data with a model in which a single
Res2Mod2 complex interacted with two sites simultaneously.
Furthermore, we do not believe that the DNA is bound by a
Res2Mod6 complex. The more plausible explanation of the
PstII data in Figure 2A, and one which would coincide with
the EcoPI data (1,17), is that separate Res2Mod2 complexes
must bind at each site before an interaction occurs but this will
only occur under conditions where there will also be an excess
of non-interacting Mod subunits. We do not believe that these
subunits play any direct role in the reaction.
In Figure 1A we showed that in NEB 4 buffer alone, PstII
disassembles. The efficiency of DNA cleavage is also reduced
under these conditions (Figure 1C). Nonetheless, if Res sub-
units can be obtained from unbound PstII complexes in solu-
tion then elevating the concentration of PstII should eventually
restore full activity by supporting the assembly of DNA-bound
tetramers. To examine this suggestion we repeated our titration
experiments using NEB 4 alone (Figure 2B). Cleavage at low
enzyme concentrations was less efficient than in equivalent
conditions with Triton X-100 and the data were noticeably
sigmoidal in shape suggesting that a threshold is reached
before active species are formed. However, by adding a suf-
ficient excess of PstII, full DNA cleavage was restored.
The experiments in Figure 2A and B report on cleavage
after 1 h of incubation but the kinetics of PstII assembly cannot
be inferred from the gel filtration data in Figure 1. If assembly/
disassembly were rapid then the Res2Mod2 state may be vis-
ited numerous times even if it was under-occupied on average.
Therefore, although 100% cleavage can be achieved at a given
apparent PstII concentration, the steady-state concentration of
the Res2Mod2 species may actually be significantly lower.
This point is addressed in the next section on the rates of
DNA cleavage.
In previous assays of EcoPI, the cofactor AdoMet was
shown to play three roles in a Type III reaction: as a methyl
donor during methylation, as an allosteric activator of DNA–
protein interactions and as a specificity factor preventing
cleavage of inappropriate DNA substrates (18). However
under relaxed reaction conditions (K+ ion-based buffers)
and using a DNA substrate with a pair of head-to-head
sites, AdoMet had no affect on the cleavage profiles; maximal
cleavage activity was obtained at a tetramer/site ratio of 1:1
both in the presence and absence of the cofactor (18). In
contrast, the addition of AdoMet to PstII titrations altered
the reaction profiles compared with those described above
(Figure 2A). In NEB 4 supplemented with 0.02% (v/v) Triton
X-100 and 100 mM AdoMet, the titration was markedly linear
with maximal DNA cleavage only observed upon the addition
of a large excess of enzyme (Figure 2B). A similar reaction
profile was observed if Triton X-100 was omitted from the
buffer (Figure 2B). These results contrast with the results in
the absence of AdoMet where Triton X-100 enhances the
reaction (Figures 1C, 2A and 2B).
It is well established that AdoMet can inhibit Type III
cleavage reactions owing to competition between methylation
and cleavage activities. This is distinct from the Type I
enzymes where the rate of methylation of unmodified DNA
is significantly slower than the rate of DNA cleavage (4,8). For
EcoPI this is not a significant problem as the stable Res2Mod2
complex cuts the majority of the DNA before significant
co-methylation can occur [assuming that the enzyme is
added last to the in vitro assays (18), as also done here].
However, given that PstII most probably separates into differ-
ent species, even in the presence of Triton X-100, the
Figure 2. Stoichiometry of pLJP11b cleavage by PstII as a function of Triton X-
100 and AdoMet: 5 nM DNA (10 nM sites) was incubated for 1 h with 0–129 nM
PstII mix in NEB 4. Where indicated Triton X-100 was included at 0.02% (v/v)
and AdoMet was included at 100 mM. (A) Full cleavage profiles in NEB 4 plus
Triton X-100. The covalently closed circular DNA substrate (CCC, open circle)
was separated from the nicked intermediate (OC, open squares) and full length
linear product cut at one site (FLL, closed circles) by agarose gel electrophoresis
(data not shown). Fragments were excised and the percentages of the 3H-
labelled DNA fragments were quantified by scintillation counting. (B) Changes
in the reaction profile with buffer conditions. As above, the percentage of FLL
was determined in NEB 4 alone (closed circles), NEB 4 plus AdoMet (closed
squares) and NEB 4 plus AdoMet plus Triton-X100 (open circles). The FLL
profile from (A) is shown for comparison as a dashed line.
4792 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 15
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 6, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
possibility of co-methylation may be increased due to the
presence of species with methyltransferase activities greater
than their endonuclease activities. Although Triton X-100
appears to facilitate DNA cleavage by PstII, the inhibitory
effect of AdoMet appears to be greater. Regardless of the
detergent, as the concentration of PstII is increased then the
amount of inhibition decreases. This suggests that increasing
the concentration of PstII favours a form of the enzyme which
cuts the DNA rather than methylating it.
Relative cleavage/methylation rates dictates the
extent of restriction
In Figure 2A we showed that at a concentration of 1
Res2Mod2 complex per site, pLJP11b is completely cleaved
after 1 h of incubation with PstII. However, if PstII exists as a
mixture of different complexes then the kinetics of cleavage
may reflect the relative activities of each species. To investi-
gate this we examined the rate of cleavage of 5 nM pLJP11b
(10 nM sites) using 33 nM PstII mix (Figure 3), conditions at
which maximum DNA cleavage is observed after 1 h. In the
absence of AdoMet, the cleavage profile as judged by the
appearance of the FLL product DNA is characterized by
two distinct rates with roughly equal amplitudes; an initial
fast rate followed by an 30-fold slower rate. Although
50% of the DNA is cut within 60 s, cleavage of the remainder
of the DNA is only completed after >60 min. In the presence of
AdoMet, the profile becomes monophasic as the reaction is
inhibited by co-methylation after completion of the initial fast
phase. In additional reactions where we either raised or low-
ered the concentration of the PstII mix, the amplitude of the
fast cleavage phase was also raised or lowered, respectively
(data not shown). In the accompanying paper (1) we show that
by elevating the PstII concentration to 129 nM, cleavage pro-
ceeds at a single fast rate to 100% completion independent of
AdoMet. These results suggest that high PstII concentrations
favour a form of the enzyme which can cleave DNA quickly
before methylation can occur. At lower enzyme concentrations
however, while some complexes can also cleave the DNA at a
rate substantially faster than the methylation rate, the reaction
outcome for the remaining complexes is dependent upon the
reaction conditions; in the presence of AdoMet, methylation
and cleavage will be in competition. The slower cleavage rate
observed in the absence of AdoMet in Figure 3 may reflect an
intrinsically slower rate or a slow protein rearrangement/
assembly step (Discussion).
PstII species with fast cleavage rates have slow
methylation rates and vice versa
The results described above suggest that the initial rate of
DNA cleavage can be modulated by changing the concentra-
tion of PstII. We, therefore, investigated the rate of DNA
methylation using an indirect approach (Figure 4A). Fixed
concentrations of PstII were pre-incubated with 5 nM
pLJP11b for different lengths of time in the absence of
ATP but presence of AdoMet. Under these first conditions,
enzyme complexes with methyltransferase activity can pro-
ceed to modify the DNA while cleavage by any species is
prevented. At the end of each pre-incubation period (t ¼ n,
Figure 4A), we added ATP (and extra PstII if necessary) so
that the final mixtures contained 5 nM DNA (a mixture of
methylated and unmethylated molecules), 129 nM PstII mix,
4 mM ATP and 100 mM cofactor (a mixture of AdoMet and the
cofactor product S-adenosyl homocysteine). The reactions
were then allowed to proceed for a further hour. Under
these second conditions, namely a high concentration of
PstII, substrates with two unmodified sites will be rapidly
cleaved (1) whilst DNA methylated at one or other site (or
both) will remain intact. The amount of methylation during the
initial incubation of PstII and DNA can then be judged by the
amount of FLL DNA that remains at the end of the reaction:
the greater the amount of FLL DNA remaining, the greater the
amount of methylation that must have occurred during
pre-incubation (t ¼ n).
Data from reactions using initial PstII mix concentrations of
7, 32 and 129 nM are shown in Figure 4B. At 129 nM PstII the
co-methylation rate appears to be slow—even after 60 min
pre-incubation with AdoMet, <50% of the DNA molecules are
resistant to cleavage. At the same PstII concentrations, DNA
cleavage would be completed in 10 s (1). This explains why
AdoMet does not adversely affect the cleavage rate at high
enzyme concentrations (1); cleavage will always occur in
preference to methylation owing to the >700-fold difference
in the relative rates. As the concentration of PstII was lowered,
however, the profiles revealed two distinct phases which var-
ied in amplitude with enzyme concentration (Figure 4B). At
32 nM PstII,40% of the DNA is inhibited within 5 min. This
indicates a fast methylation rate. The remaining 60% of the
DNA is then methylated at a slow rate, comparable with the
rate at 100 nM PstII. At 7 nM PstII, 70% of the DNA is
inhibited within 10 min. This matches the fast rate seen at
32 nM PstII. The remaining 30% of the DNA is then methy-
lated at a slow rate comparable to that at 32 and 129 nM PstII.
The rapid methylation rate seen at low enzyme concentrations
is faster than the accompanying slow cleavage rate. It is
therefore unsurprising that AdoMet inhibits the PstII cleavage
reactions at low enzyme concentrations.
Figure 3. Rate of DNA cleavage at low PstII concentrations as a function of
AdoMet. pLJP11b (5 nM) was incubated in NEB 4 plus Triton X-100 with
32 nM PstII mix and 4 mM ATP for various times at 37C (see main text for full
details). Where indicated AdoMet was included at 100 mM. The percentage of
FLL product (indicated as circles) was quantified as in Figure 2.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 15 4793
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 6, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
DISCUSSION
In many respects, the enzyme activity of PstII is very similar to
other Type III enzymes [this study, (1)]. However, our analysis
indicates that unlike EcoPI and EcoP15I, the association of the
Mod and Res subunits of PstII is dynamic. This is reflected in
the concentration dependence of the relative rates of restriction
and modification. In Figure 5A we illustrate a model (based on
Equation 1) which offers a possible explanation of our results.
We envisage an equilibrium on DNA between the methyl-
transferase (Mod2) and the Res subunits which leads to the
stepwise assembly of Res1Mod2 and Res2Mod2 species. With a
fixed concentration of DNA (e.g. in this study 5 nM plasmid
DNA and 10 nM sites), the assembly of the higher order
species can be driven by simply increasing the PstII concen-
tration. This will increase the pool of available Res subunits
which can associate with the specific DNA-bound species.
This is the only way a Res2Mod2 complex can form because
the Res subunit is under-represented in the PstII prepara-
tions. In a similar manner, some partially assembled, and
thus inactive, Type I restriction endonucleases, such as
EcoR124I and EcoAI, can be rescued by increasing the
pool of free HsdR subunits (14,15,19). In Figure 5A we pro-
pose that the effect of Triton X-100, in addition to preventing
protein aggregation, is to stabilize the formation of the higher
order species. Each species is then allocated kinetic properties
as a function of the relative proportions of Res and Mod. The
Mod2 species does not have any endonuclease motifs and
thus can only act as an efficient methyltransferase. We have
preliminary evidence that this is the case (A. Sears and
M. D. Szczelkun, unpublished data). From the cleavage rate
data in the accompanying paper [Figure 5 in Ref. (1)], the
Res2Mod2 species favoured at high PstII concentrations is an
efficient endonuclease. In Figure 4 we demonstrate that this
species also has an accompanying methyltransferase activity.
However, the relative rate of the modification reaction is too
slow to effect the cleavage reaction. The question then is
which species confer(s) the slow endonuclease/intermediate
methyltransferase rates seen at lower PstII concentrations. The
different methylation rates observed could be explained if
Figure 4. Estimating the methylation rate of PstII species. (A) Experimental flow chart. pLJP11b (5 nM) was mixed with 7, 32 or 129 nM PstII in NEB 4 plus Triton
X-100 and the reactions executed as shown. (B) The percentage of FLL product was quantified as in Figure 2 for reactions pre-incubated with PstII as shown. See main
text for full details.
4794 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 15
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 6, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
binding of Res to the methyltransferase slowed the intrinsic
modification rate in a dose-dependent manner: binding of one
Res partially inhibiting the modification rate and binding of a
second Res inhibiting the rate further still. There are then two
possible explanations for the different cleavage rates. In the
first model, illustrated in Figure 5B, the Res1Mod2 complex
can still cut DNA but does so at a slower rate. In the presence
of AdoMet this slow rate could be exceeded by the methyla-
tion rate and the inhibition of cleavage would occur. In the
alternative model, illustrated in Figure 5C, the Res1Mod2
complex cannot cleave the DNA. Instead, it must first assem-
ble into a Res2Mod2 complex by the association of a Res
subunit. If the occupancy of the tetramer species were limited
kinetically (by slow Res binding and/or by fast Res dissocia-
tion), then the observed cleavage rate would be slower than
the intrinsic rate. As above, in the presence of AdoMet there
would be a competition between endonuclease and methyl-
transferase functions resulting in inhibition of cleavage at low
PstII concentrations.
It has been suggested that a simple control of RM activity
can be obtained on the basis of the affinities of the protein
subunits (8). An equilibrium between different PstII species
with different relative enzyme activities may therefore be
important to the control of its RM activity in vivo. Freely
dissociating Type I enzymes may have evolved where ele-
ments of the complex are genetically mobile (4,10,15). In
these cases new specificities can be generated by the free
exchange of genes between bacteria. The new system must
first establish its methylation pattern and a dynamic complex
assembly may allow this to occur. However, PstII is chromo-
somally expressed so genetic exchange may not play such an
important role. In fact, we have observed that PstII appears to
be difficult to establish in a new cell line (1). This is in contrast
to the EcoPI and EcoP15I enzymes, which are freely trans-
ferable in vivo [(11) and references therein] and which form
stable tetramer complexes in vitro (17). One caveat to our
observations is that expression from a high copy number plas-
mid (pMB1 origin plus rop) may result is an excess of PstII
Res protein such that Res2Mod2 complexes are formed before
all sites are methylated. Nonetheless, it would appear that at
least one Type III enzyme has evolved to allow modulation of
its RM activities through subunit assembly.
Figure 5. Proposed model for PstII assembly and its effect on enzyme activity. Mod (M) and Res (R) are shown as open and closed circles, respectively. (A) The effect
of increasing protein concentration and Triton X-100 on the equilibrium between different PstII species. The Mod2 species cannot cut DNA and has a methyl-
transferase activity in excess of that seen for any Res-bound species (A. Sears and M. D. Szczelkun, unpublished data). (B and C) Alternative models to explain the
slow cleavage rate seen at low PstII concentrations. See main text for full details.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 15 4795
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 6, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Elaine Davies for technical assistance and Steve
Halford, Louise Stanley and the Bristol DNA–Proteins
Interactions Group for discussions. This work was supported
by the Wellcome Trust and the BBSRC. M.D.S. is a Wellcome
Trust Senior Research Fellow in Basic Biomedical Sciences.
Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this
article was provided by The Wellcome Trust.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Sears,A., Peakman,L.J., Wilson,G.G. and Szczelkun,M.D. (2005)
Characterisation of the Type III restriction endonuclease PstII from
Providencia stuartii. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, 4775–4787.
2. Prakash-Cheng,A. and Ryu,J. (1993) Delayed expression of in vivo
restriction activity following conjugal transfer of Escherichia
coli hsdK (restriction–modification) genes. J. Bacteriol., 175,
4905–4906.
3. Prakash-Cheng,A., Chung,S.S. and Ryu,J. (1993) The expression and
regulation of hsdK genes after conjugative transfer. Mol. Gen.
Genet., 241, 491–496.
4. Murray,N.E. (2000) Type I restriction systems: sophisticated molecular
machines (a legacy of Bertani and Weigle). Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev.,
64, 412–434.
5. Makovets,S., Doronina,V.A. and Murray,N.E. (1999) Regulation of
endonuclease activity by proteolysis prevents breakage of unmodified
bacterial chromosomes by type I restriction enzymes. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA, 96, 9757–9762.
6. Makovets,S., Powell,L.M., Titheradge,A.J., Blakely,G.W. and
Murray,N.E. (2004) Is modification sufficient to protect a bacterial
chromosome from a resident restriction endonuclease? Mol. Microbiol.,
51, 135–147.
7. Bourniquel,A.A. and Bickle,T.A. (2002) Complex restriction enzymes:
NTP-driven molecular motors. Biochimie, 84, 1047–1059.
8. Dryden,D.T.F., Cooper,L.P., Thorpe,P.H. and Byron,O. (1997)
The in vitro assembly of the EcoKI type I DNA restriction/
modification enzyme and its in vivo implications. Biochemistry,
36, 1065–1076.
9. Loenen,W.A., Daniel,A.S., Braymer,H.D. and Murray,N.E. (1987)
Organization and sequence of the hsd genes of Escherichia coli K-12.
J. Mol. Biol., 198, 159–170.
10. Kulik,E.M. and Bickle,T.A. (1996) Regulation of the activity of the type
IC EcoR124I restriction enzyme. J. Mol. Biol., 264, 891–906.
11. Redaschi,N. and Bickle,T.A. (1996) Posttranscriptional regulation of
EcoP1I and EcoP15I restriction activity. J. Mol. Biol., 257, 790–803.
12. Keatch,S.A., Su,T.J. and Dryden,D.T. (2004) Alleviation of restriction by
DNA condensation and non-specific DNA binding ligands. Nucleic Acids
Res., 32, 5841–5850.
13. Efimova,E.P., Delver,E.P. and Belogurov,A.A. (1988) Alleviation of type
I restriction in adenine methylase (dam) mutants of Escherichia coli.
Mol. Gen. Genet., 214, 313–316.
14. Janscak,P., Abadjieva,A. and Firman,K. (1996) The type I restriction
endonuclease R.EcoR124I: over-production and biochemical properties.
J. Mol. Biol., 257, 977–991.
15. Janscak,P., Dryden,D.T.F. and Firman,K. (1998) Analysis of the subunit
assembly of the typeIC restriction–modification enzyme EcoR124I.
Nucleic Acids Res., 26, 4439–4445.
16. De Backer,O. and Colson,C. (1991) Transfer of the genes for the StyLTI
restriction–modification system of Salmonella typhimurium to strains
lacking modification ability results in death of the recipient cells and
degradation of their DNA. J. Bacteriol., 173, 1328–1330.
17. Janscak,P., Sandmeier,U., Szczelkun,M.D. and Bickle,T.A. (2001)
Subunit assembly and mode of DNA cleavage of the type III restriction
endonucleases EcoP1I and EcoP15I. J. Mol. Biol., 306, 417–431.
18. Peakman,L.J., Antognozzi,M., Bickle,T.A., Janscak,P. and
Szczelkun,M.D. (2003) S-adenosyl methionine prevents promiscuous
DNA cleavage by the EcoP1I type III restriction enzyme. J. Mol. Biol.,
333, 321–335.
19. Szczelkun,M.D., Dillingham,M.S., Janscak,P., Firman,K. and
Halford,S.E. (1996) Repercussions of DNA tracking by the type IC
restriction endonuclease EcoR124I on linear, circular and catenated
substrates. EMBO J., 15, 6335–6347.
20. Hadi,S.M., Bachi,B., Iida,S. and Bickle,T.A. (1983) DNA restriction–
modification enzymes of phage P1 and plasmid p15B. Subunit functions
and structural homologies. J. Mol. Biol., 165, 19–34.
21. Rao,D.N., Page,M.G. and Bickle,T.A. (1989) Cloning, over-expression
and the catalytic properties of the EcoP15 modification methylase from
Escherichia coli. J. Mol. Biol., 209, 599–606.
22. Bist,P., Sistla,S., Krishnamurthy,V., Acharya,A., Chandrakala,B. and
Rao,D.N. (2001) S-adenosyl-L-methionine is required for DNA cleavage
by type III restriction enzymes. J. Mol. Biol., 310, 93–109.
23. Conlan,L.H., Jose,T.J., Thornton,K.C. and Dupureur,C.M. (1999)
Modulating restriction endonuclease activities and specificities using
neutral detergents. Biotechniques, 27, 955–960.
24. Jobbagy,Z., Izsvak,Z. and Duda,E. (1992) Positive co-operative
interaction between the subunits of CeqI restriction endonuclease.
Biochem. J., 286, 85–88.
25. Halford,S.E., Welsh,A.J. and Szczelkun,M.D. (2004) Enzyme-mediated
DNA looping. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct., 33, 1–24.
26. Szczelkun,M.D. and Halford,S.E. (1996) Recombination by resolvase to
analyse DNA communications by the SfiI restriction endonuclease.
EMBO J., 15, 1460–1469.
4796 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 15
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 6, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
