430
 2007 by JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH, Inc. ● Vol. 33 ● March 2007
All rights reserved. 0093-5301/2007/3304-0002$10.00
Jack of All Trades or Master of One? Product
Differentiation and Compensatory Reasoning in
Consumer Choice
ALEXANDER CHERNEV*
This research examines consumer reactions to two common positioning strategies:
a specialized-positioning strategy in which an option is described by a single fea-
ture, and an all-in-one strategy in which an option is described by a combination
of features. The empirical data reported in this article demonstrate that a product
specializing on a single attribute is perceived to be superior on that attribute relative
to an all-in-one option, even when this attribute is exactly the same for both options.
It is further shown that the observed devaluation of the all-in-one option can be
mitigated by introducing another attribute on which the all-in-one option is inferior
to the specialized option.
When designing their products, companies often chooseone of two positioning strategies: a narrower, spe-
cialized positioning in which products are described by a
single attribute and a broader, all-in-one positioning in which
products are described by a combination of attributes. To
illustrate, Era is positioned by Procter and Gamble as the
detergent with “powerful stain removal,” Cheer promises to
“help protect against fading,” Gain offers “great cleaning
power,” and, finally, Tide combines all of the above features.
Combining these positioning strategies raises the question
of how consumers evaluate specialized options in the pres-
ence of an all-in-one option, and vice versa.
From a conceptual standpoint, combining specialized and
all-in-one options raises several issues: (1) whether and how
the perceived performance of the attributes differentiating
an all-in-one option would change in the presence of options
specialized on each of these attributes (e.g., the change in
the perceived stain-removal and fading-prevention perfor-
mance of Tide in the presence of Era and Cheer); (2) whether
and how the perceived performance of the differentiating
attribute of a specialized option would change in the pres-
ence of an all-in-one option (e.g., the change in the perceived
stain-removal performance of Era and the fading-prevention
*Alexander Chernev is associate professor of marketing, Kellogg School
of Management, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208 (ach@
northwestern.edu). The author thanks Gregory Carpenter, Pierre Chandon,
Ryan Hamilton, the editor, associate editor, and the three anonymous re-
viewers for their constructive comments. This research has benefited from
seminars at the University of Pennsylvania and Cornell University.
Dawn Iacobucci served as editor and Durairaj Maheswaran served as
associate editor for this article.
Electronically published January 22, 2007
performance of Cheer in the presence of Tide); and (3)
whether and how the perceived performance of nondiffer-
entiating attributes of a specialized option would change in
the presence of an all-in-one option (e.g., the change in the
perceived fading-prevention performance of Era and the
stain-removal performance of Cheer in the presence of
Tide). Despite their conceptual importance and practical rel-
evance, these issues have not been explicitly addressed in
the marketing literature.
This research examines consumer reactions to specialized
and all-in-one product positioning strategies. In particular,
it is argued that when a specialized option is compared with
an all-in-one option, the perceived performance of the spe-
cialized option on its focal attribute is enhanced relative to
when it is considered in isolation. In contrast, the perceived
performance of the all-in-one option is likely to decrease
when it is compared with a specialized product relative to
when it is considered in isolation. The logic for this pre-
diction and the empirical analyses are discussed in more
detail in the following sections.
COMPENSATORY REASONING IN
CONSUMER CHOICE
The concept of compensation has been used in psychol-
ogy, decision making, and marketing in different contexts.
In psychology literature, the term “compensation” has been
used to describe a psychological mechanism by which an
individual attempts to make up for some personal deficiency
by developing or stressing another ability (e.g., Adler 1924).
In decision research, “compensation” has been used in ref-
erence to the nature of the decision processes underlying an
individual’s choice strategies, particularly involving the
PRODUCT DIFFERENTIATION AND COMPENSATORY REASONING IN CHOICE 431
ability of an option’s strength on one attribute to make up
for a deficiency on another (Johnson and Meyer 1984;
Payne, Bettman, and Johnson 1993). In this context, com-
pensatory decision strategies, represented by multiattribute
utility models (Keeney and Raiffa 1976), imply that an op-
tion’s strong performance on one attribute can compensate
for poor performance on another, whereas in noncompen-
satory strategies, such as elimination by aspects (Tversky
1972), a good value on one attribute cannot make up for a
poor value on another.
Most recently, the notion of compensation has been ad-
vanced in a somewhat different context: as a specific in-
ference-making mechanism based on consumers’ intuitions
of market efficiency (Chernev and Carpenter 2001). In this
context, market efficiency reflects the belief that offerings
are priced at value parity, such that the benefit-cost trade-
offs are constant across options; as a result, higher priced
products are also of better quality, and vice versa. To illus-
trate, a consumer considering two equally priced alternatives
might infer that the option superior on the observed attrib-
utes is likely to be inferior on some of the unobservable
attributes. Thus, the concept of market efficiency reflects
the notion that firms behave rationally, resulting in offerings
that are value equivalent. Compensatory inferences derived
from consumers’ market efficiency beliefs aim to resolve a
salient incongruity between the intuitively expected and the
observed relationships among options in a given choice set,
whereby extreme values on one dimension are associated
with inferior performance on another.
Conceptually, compensatory inferences can be linked to
consumers’ covariation beliefs, which reflect their intui-
tions about the degree of relationship between two or more
factors. Two types of covariation beliefs can be identified:
attribute-specific covariation and context-dependent co-
variation. Most of the extant research has focused on at-
tribute-specific covariation that is confined to pairs of par-
ticular factors such as price and quality (Baumgartner 1995;
Bettman, John, and Scott 1986; Raghubir and Corfman
1999; Shiv, Carmon, and Ariely 2005), brand name and
quality (Allison and Uhl 1964; Janiszewski and Van Os-
selaer 2000; Rao and Monroe 1989; Wernerfelt 1988), and
reliability and warranty (Dick, Chakravarti, and Biehal
1990). To illustrate, consumers might believe that higher
quality products are also more expensive (Lichtenstein and
Burton 1989) and that more reliable products are likely to
offer a longer warranty (Broniarczyk and Alba 1994).
Unlike attribute-based covariation, in which an option’s
performance on a particular attribute is inferred from its
performance on other attributes, in the case of context-based
covariation an option’s values are derived from the decision
context defined by the other alternatives in the set. Examples
of such context-based covariation are given by prior research
on preference formation, documenting that consumer infer-
ences of product performance are derived from the char-
acteristics of the other alternatives in the set (Prelec, Wer-
nerfelt, and Zettelmeyer 1997; Wernerfelt 1995). In the same
vein, prior research has documented that consumer response
to marketing programs and promotional offers is a function
of the degree to which these activities fit the preferences of
target customers better than of the typical customer in the
population (Kivetz and Simonson 2003).
Building on prior findings, this research extends the no-
tion of compensatory reasoning beyond attribute-specific
covariation to a scenario in which inferences are drawn from
the decision context defined by the other alternatives in the
set, rather than from this option’s performance on a partic-
ular attribute. These context-based compensatory inferences
stem from a consumer’s belief that options in a given choice
set are balanced in a way that advantages on one dimension
are compensated for by disadvantages on another, even in
the absence of prior attribute-specific covariation beliefs.
Thus, an option that excels on a particular attribute can be
inferred to be inferior on some of the other attributes even
in the absence of an inherent covariation among its attributes
(e.g., static prevention and stain removing in a laundry de-
tergent).
In this research, the decision strategy reflecting individ-
uals’ belief that alternatives in a given choice set are bal-
anced in their overall performance is referred to as the “zero-
sum heuristic.” The term “zero-sum heuristic” is derived
from the zero-sum-game assumption in game theory, which
implies that the wins and losses in a game will add up to
zero for each set of strategies chosen (Von Neumann and
Morgenstern 1953). Simply put, a zero-sum game implies
that one player’s winnings should equal the other player’s
losses. The concept of zero-sum heuristic advanced in this
article is conceptually similar to that of a zero-sum game
in that it implies a closed system in which all options are
balanced; thus, for each of the options, the advantages on
one attribute must be compensated for by disadvantages on
another. Thus, the zero-sum heuristic is not contingent on
prior covariation beliefs and, instead, is a function of the
dispersion of attribute values across choice alternatives. In
this context, when consumers who expect options in a given
choice set to be comparable in terms of their overall per-
formance are presented with a choice set in which the all-
in-one option appears to dominate the others, they are likely
to draw compensatory inferences devaluing the apparently
more attractive all-in-one option.
The zero-sum heuristic can be related to the notion of
trade-off consistency in choice (Simonson and Tversky
1992). The trade-off consistency of a given choice set is
usually characterized by the rate of exchange between at-
tributes, so that in sets with a constant rate of exchange
between attributes the advantages and disadvantages of each
option are balanced. In this context, the zero-sum heuristic
implies that when evaluating sets comprising options with
varying rates of exchange between attributes, consumers are
likely to interpret ambiguous attribute values in a way that
decreases the observed trade-off contrasts and equates the
rate of exchange across attributes.
This research argues that when evaluating sets comprising
specialized and all-in-one options, consumer reasoning is
often guided by the zero-sum heuristic, which predicts that
432 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
the sum of advantages and disadvantages is constant across
the choice options. In this context, it is argued that con-
sumers are likely to interpret the values of the choice al-
ternatives in a way that equates the overall performance of
the all-in-one and the specialized options, leading to a com-
pensatory devaluation of the perceived performance of the
all-in-one option and enhancement of the perceived perfor-
mance of the specialized options. This idea is further artic-
ulated in a series of research hypotheses in the following
section.
RESEARCH HYPOTHESES
Consider a set of three alternatives, each described on
two attributes as follows: option A is differentiated by at-
tribute 1, option B is differentiated by attribute 2, and option
C is differentiated by both attributes. To illustrate, consider
three shaving creams, one emphasizing its moisturizing ef-
fect, the second one promoting its skin-protection effec-
tiveness, and the third one claiming to be effective in both
skin moisturizing and skin protection. In the absence of
compensatory inferences, consumers are likely to view op-
tion C as superior on both attributes (i.e., andc 1 b c 11 1 2
), as illustrated in figure 1A.a2
The use of the zero-sum heuristic, however, is likely to
lead to compensatory inferences that balance the overall
attractiveness of options A, B, and C, making these options
trade-off equivalent. In particular, compensatory reasoning
is likely to lead to a devaluation of the all-in-one option C
(DC in fig. 1B) and a polarization of attribute values of the
specialized options A and B (DA and DB). In this context,
compensatory inferences can be represented as having a
threefold effect. First, the all-in-one option is likely to be
devalued, such that the perceived performance of the at-
tributes differentiating an all-in-one option will decrease in
the presence of options specialized on these attributes (com-
pensatory devaluation effect denoted by Dc1 and Dc2 in fig.
1B).
In addition to discounting the performance of the all-in-
one option C, consumers might also draw inferences about
the specialized options A and B, such that the perceived
performance of the attributes of a specialized option will
become more polarized in the presence of an all-in-one op-
tion. In particular, the perceived performance of the differ-
entiating attribute of a specialized option will increase in
the presence of an all-in-one option (compensatory en-
hancement effect denoted by Da1 and Db2 in fig. 1B). At
the same time, consumers might also discount the perfor-
mance of specialized options A and B on their secondary
attributes in the presence of an all-in-one option, leading to
a downshift in their perceived performance (compensatory
devaluation effect denoted by Da2 and Db1 in fig. 1B).
An important assumption of the zero-sum heuristic is that
the choice problem is viewed as fully identified, such that
the number of attributes used to define choice alternatives
is constant and all attribute values are readily available.
This assumption raises the question of how the presence
of attributes on which options’ performance is not readily
observable influences compensatory reasoning. Generally
speaking, there are two possibilities. First, consumers might
infer that all options have equal values on the unobservable
attribute—a scenario that should not influence consumers’
use of compensatory reasoning and their reliance on the
zero-sum heuristic. The second possibility is that consumers
infer that options vary in their performance on the unob-
servable attribute. In this case, the strength of the zero-sum
heuristic is likely to be a function of the pattern of these
inferences: it should be stronger when the inferred values
are consistent with the readily available dispersion of at-
tribute values and should be weaker (or even disappear)
when the inferred attribute values are inconsistent with the
dispersion of the values of the readily available attributes.
To illustrate, consider the earlier scenario involving three
shaving creams, one emphasizing the moisturizing effect
(option A), the second promoting skin-protection effective-
ness (option B), and the third claiming to be effective for
both skin moisturizing and skin protection (option C). Now
imagine that an additional attribute (e.g., price, skin con-
ditioning) on which the options’ performance is unobserv-
able is part of consumers’ evaluation of these options. In
this context, it can be argued that the options’ performance
on the two differentiating attributes (moisturizing and pro-
tection) is likely to be a function of their perceived perfor-
mance on the attribute on which the options’ performance
is unobservable. In particular, consumers who perceive the
all-in-one option C to be inferior on the unobservable at-
tribute will be less likely to infer a compensatory relation-
ship between the options’ values on featured attributes than
consumers who perceive option C to dominate the others
on the unobservable attribute.
Overall, this research posits that when evaluating choice
sets comprising both all-in-one and specialized alternatives,
consumers are likely to adopt a zero-sum heuristic, which
equates the overall attractiveness of choice alternatives and
evaluates the available information in a compensatory fash-
ion. In particular, two types of compensatory effects can be
identified: compensatory devaluation, which lowers the per-
ceived performance of the all-in-one option, and compen-
satory polarization, which enhances the perceived perfor-
mance of the specialized option on the differentiating
attribute, while detracting from its performance on the sec-
ondary attribute. It is further proposed that the strength of
the compensatory inferences across the attributes differen-
tiating choice alternatives is a function of the presence of
salient attributes on which options’ performance is not read-
ily observable. Thus, in the presence of a salient attribute
on which options’ values are unobservable, compensatory
inferences are predicted to be less pronounced than in the
case when options’ values on all salient attributes are readily
observable. Furthermore, when consumers are explicitly
asked to make inferences about options’ performance on
unobservable attributes, compensatory effects are predicted
to be less pronounced when the inferred performance is
inconsistent with the readily available attribute information.
These predictions are tested in the following experiment.
PRODUCT DIFFERENTIATION AND COMPENSATORY REASONING IN CHOICE 433
FIGURE 1
COMPENSATORY ENHANCEMENT AND DEVALUATION EFFECTS IN CHOICE
NOTE.—A and B are the specialized options, and C is the all-in-one option. A′, B′, and C′ reflect the perceived performance of options A, B, and C in the presence
of compensatory inferences. Da1 and Db2 depict compensatory enhancement, whereby the value of options A and B is enhanced by compensatory inferences. In
contrast, Da2, Db1, Dc1, and Dc2 depict compensatory devaluation, whereby attribute values of options A, B, and C are decreased by compensatory inferences.
EXPERIMENT 1
The goal of this experiment was to empirically examine
how attribute performance of an all-in-one option is influ-
enced by the presence of specialized options, and vice versa.
The specifics of the experimental stimuli and research design
are presented in more detail in the following sections.
Method
The respondents, 227 Northwestern University students,
were recruited to participate in a study on consumer decision
making and were informed that the choice task involved
making hypothetical purchase decisions. Five product cat-
egories were used as stimuli: laundry detergent, toothpaste,
434 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
shaving cream, cold relief medicine, and vitamin supple-
ments. Similar categories have been successfully used in
prior research (Carpenter and Nakamoto 1989; Simonson
1989). Choice sets consisted of either two or three options,
each described by either one attribute (in case of specialized
options) or two attributes (in case of all-in-one options) as
shown in the appendix, table A1. For all product categories,
options A and B were described by a single attribute (e.g.,
prevents cavities), and option C was described by a com-
bination of features describing options A and B (e.g., pre-
vents cavities and whitens teeth).
Choice alternatives were organized into four scenarios: a
trinary set ABC and three binary sets AB, AC, and BC.
Respondents were randomly assigned to one of these sce-
narios, and each respondent was given five choice problems,
one per product category. For each problem, respondents
were shown the alternatives and were asked to rate their
attribute performance. To illustrate, in the toothpaste cate-
gory respondents were first asked to rate the performance
of the options in the set on the first attribute (e.g., “How
would you rate the cavity-prevention properties of tooth-
paste A?”) and then asked the same question with respect
to the other option(s) in the set. Next, respondents were
asked to rate the options’ performance on the second at-
tribute (i.e., teeth whitening). All ratings were collected us-
ing a nine-point scale (1 p low, 5 p average, 9 p high).
Following the rating task, respondents were asked to make
two choices, conditional on one of the attributes having
primary importance. To illustrate, respondents were first
asked to choose a toothpaste assuming that cavity prevention
is the more important attribute (e.g., “Which of the two
products would you choose if your primary concern is cavity
protection?”) and then to make a choice assuming that teeth
whitening was the more important attribute.
In addition to varying the composition of the choice set,
this experiment also manipulated the salience of options’
pricing. For that purpose, prior to evaluating the options’
attribute performance, some of the respondents were asked
to indicate how they would expect these options to be priced.
Respondents could choose between indicating that a partic-
ular option was more expensive than the others or that all
options were equally priced (“All options will be equally
priced; option A will be the most expensive one; option B
will be the most expensive one; or option C will be the
most expensive one”). The goal of this manipulation was
to test the proposition that in the presence of an attribute
on which options’ performance is not readily observable the
strength of compensatory inferences is a function of options’
perceived performance on this attribute.
Overall, there were eight scenarios corresponding to the
conditions of the experimental design (4 choice sets # 2
price-inference conditions). The entire procedure took 10
minutes, on average. At the end of the experiment respon-
dents were debriefed and paid $5.00 for participating.
Results Overview
Each of the 227 respondents evaluated one set of alter-
natives in each of the five product categories, which yielded
1,135 sets. In each of these sets, respondents rated the per-
formance of each option on both attributes, which yielded
six attribute-specific ratings for each trinary set ABC and
four attribute-specific ratings for each of the binary sets AB,
AC, and BC. Thus, the total number of attribute ratings was
5,156 (four missing data points). Respondents in each of
the four scenarios (ABC, AB, AC, and BC) were further
assigned into two groups. Some were asked to evaluate
relative prices of the options prior to rating their perfor-
mance on nonprice attributes; others were given the attrib-
ute-rating task without being asked to compare the options
on price. Based on a random assignment, there were 114
respondents in the first condition (569 observations) and
113 in the second (565 observations). Of the 569 responses,
380 indicated that the all-in-one option was likely to be
priced higher than the other option(s), while the remaining
189 respondents indicated that either (1) one of the spe-
cialized options was likely to be higher priced or (2) that
all options were likely to be at price parity. This assignment
of respondents into one of the two inferred-price conditions
was later used to examine how the presence of attributes on
which options’ performance is not readily observable influ-
ences the strength of compensatory reasoning effects.
A summary of the mean attribute ratings (averaged across
product categories) is given in table 1. The attribute per-
formance of choice options is consistent with the represen-
tation depicted in figure 1, such that option A is differen-
tiated by attribute 1 and option B is differentiated by
attribute 2. The significance of the data patterns shown in
table 1 was validated by testing a model in which attribute
ratings were given as a function of the choice set, inferred-
price dispersion, product category, and all interactions. Be-
cause not all observations were truly independent from one
another (the same individual rated several product categories
and also rated different options within the choice set), the
statistical analyses controlled for the within-subject nature
of certain aspects of the data (Winer, Brown, and Michels
1991). Because product category did not significantly in-
teract with the dependent variables of interest, for presen-
tation purposes the data are aggregated across categories.
Due to the complex nature of the focal effects and the pos-
sibility of response biases and/or measurement errors, each
of the effects was examined using multiple empirical tests.
The data analyses are presented in more detail in the fol-
lowing sections.
Devaluation of the All-in-One Option
This research argues that the perceived performance of
the all-in-one option will decrease in the presence of spe-
cialized options (Dc1, Dc2). There are three strategies to test
this proposition. The first test involves comparing the ratings
of the all-in-one option C to the ratings of the specialized
options A and B in the set ABC. The second strategy is to
PRODUCT DIFFERENTIATION AND COMPENSATORY REASONING IN CHOICE 435
TABLE 1
ATTRIBUTE RATINGS AS A FUNCTION OF THE COMPOSITION OF THE CHOICE SET AND PRICE INFERENCES
Salience of unobservable attributes
Choice
option Attribute
Choice sets
ABC AC BC AB
Scenario 1: Options evaluated only on
featured attributes (no-inference
condition) A 1 7.59 7.55 7.10
2 2.77 2.94 3.58
B 1 2.93 2.61 3.50
2 7.43 7.47 6.74
C 1 6.21 6.23 7.24
2 6.31 7.09 6.37
N 145 140 145 135
Scenario 2A: Options evaluated on an
unobservable attribute (price)—option C
expected to be the most expensive
(high price condition) A 1 7.72 7.48
2 2.34 2.48
B 1 2.60 2.50
2 7.87 7.35
C 1 7.18 6.81 6.92
2 7.31 7.06 6.98
N 122 124 134
Scenario 2B: Options evaluated on an
unobservable attribute (price)—option C
not expected to be the most expensive
(equal/low price condition) A 1 7.40 7.56 6.89
2 2.60 2.94 3.89
B 1 2.72 3.10 3.69
2 7.67 7.29 6.78
C 1 6.40 6.25 6.23
2 6.51 6.83 5.87
N 43 36 31 79
NOTE.—Options’ attribute performance is consistent with the representation in fig. 1: option A is differentiated by attribute 1; option B is differentiated by attribute
2, and option C is the all-in-one option. Attribute values of choice options are given in the appendix. Numbers in each cell represent mean averages for all observations
aggregated across categories and across respondents. The number of observations in each set is given by N. Cells in which observations could not be obtained
by virtue of the experimental design (e.g., the attractiveness of option C could not be evaluated in context of the set AB) are left blank.
compare the ratings of the all-in-one option across the binary
and trinary choice sets—a strategy that compares the ratings
of option C in the set ABC to the ratings of option C in
sets AC and BC. Finally, the third strategy involves com-
paring the attribute ratings of the all-in-one option across
the two binary sets AC and BC. The data analyses corre-
sponding to these three strategies are presented in more
detail below.
The first test of the prediction that the perceived perfor-
mance of the all-in-one option will decrease in the presence
of specialized options compared the individual-specific at-
tribute ratings of option C to the attribute ratings of options
A and B in the set ABC. In particular, this prediction implies
that and , where C1ABC is theC1 ! A1 C2 ! B2ABC ABC ABC ABC
rating of option C on attribute 1 in the set ABC and C2ABC
is the rating of option C on attribute 2 in the same set. The
data show that the mean ratings were versusM p 6.21C1(ABC)
( ; ) when comparingM p 7.59 tp 9.6 p ! .001A1(ABC)
C1ABC and A1ABC and versusM p 6.31 M pC2(ABC) B2(ABC)
( ; ) when comparing C2ABC and7.43 tp 6.7 p ! .001
B2ABC. The difference in the attribute ratings of option C
was nonsignificant, indicating that the devaluation effect
was symmetric across attributes ( versusM p 6.21C1(ABC)
; ). These data are consistent withM p 6.31 p 1 .20C2(ABC)
the experimental predictions.
A further test of the impact of specialized options on
the all-in-one option compared the ratings of the all-in-
one option C in the trinary set ABC and its ratings in the
binary sets AC and BC. Of particular interest are the at-
tribute-rating comparisons across scenarios with and with-
out a specialized option: C1ABC versus C1BC and C2ABC
versus C2AC. It was proposed that adding option A to the
set BC should lead to a devaluation of option C on attribute
1 because option A is specialized on this attribute, as well
as a devaluation of option C on attribute 2, on which option
B is specialized. The data show that option C had lower
attribute ratings in the trinary set than in either of the
binary sets. The mean rating of option C on attribute 1 in
the set ABC was , significantly lower thanM p 6.21C1(ABC)
its rating of in the set BC (M p 7.24 F(1, 166)pC1(BC)
; ). Similarly, the mean rating of option C21.97 p ! .001
on the second attribute in the set ABC was M pC2(ABC)
, significantly lower than its rating of6.31 M pC2(AC)
in the set AC ( ; ).7.09 F(1, 165)p 13.27 p ! .001
436 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
The third test of the prediction that the perceived per-
formance of the all-in-one option will decrease in the pres-
ence of specialized options compared the attribute ratings
of option C across the two binary sets AC and BC. Con-
sistent with the experimental predictions, the presence of a
specialized alternative in each of the sets AC and BC should
lead to asymmetric devaluation of option C on the attribute
featured by the specialized option. Thus, option C’s ratings
on attribute 1 should be lower in the set AC than in the set
BC, and vice versa for attribute 2. The data show that the
mean rating of option C on attribute 1 was significantly
lower in the set AC than in the set BC (M p 6.23C1(AC)
versus ; ; ). Sim-M p 7.24 F(1, 159)p 21.09 p ! .001C1(BC)
ilarly, the mean rating of option C on the second attribute
was significantly lower in the set BC than in the set AC
( vs. ; ;M p 6.37 M p 7.09 F(1, 159)p 10.63C2(BC) C2(AC)
).p ! .005
Considered together, the three tests offer converging em-
pirical evidence in support of the proposition that specialized
alternatives lead to a compensatory devaluation of the all-
in-one option.
Polarization of the Specialized Options
This research argued that the attribute ratings of a spe-
cialized option are polarized by the presence of an all-in-
one option in a way that enhances the perceived performance
of the specialized option on its differentiating attribute (Da1,
Db2) and detracts from its perceived performance on the
secondary attribute (Da2, Db1). This proposition was tested
by comparing the attribute ratings of the specialized options
A and B as a function of the presence of an all-in-one option.
The test of the compensatory enhancement effect com-
pared the ratings of options A and B on their differentiating
attributes across sets ABC and AB. The data show that the
mean rating of option A in the set ABC was M pA1(ABC)
, which was significantly greater than this option’s rat-7.59
ings in the absence of the all-in-one option M pA1(AB)
; ( ; ). Similarly, option B7.10 F(1, 127)p 4.11 p ! .05
was rated significantly higher on its differentiating attri-
bute in the presence of the all-in-one option C than when
option C was absent ( vs. ;M p 7.43 M p 6.74B2(ABC) B2(AB)
; ). A further test of the compen-F(1, 127)p 8.23 p ! .01
satory enhancement effect compared the attractiveness of
options A and B across sets AB and AC/BC. In this context,
the specialized options A and B are predicted to be perceived
as more attractive on their differentiating attributes in the
presence of an all-in-one alternative. The data were con-
sistent with this prediction: option A was perceived to be
more attractive on its differentiating attribute in the set AC
than in the set AB ( vs. ;M p 7.55 M p 7.10A1(AC) A1(AB)
; ). Similarly, option B was ratedF(1, 120)p 3.91 pp .05
higher on its differentiating attribute in the set BC than in the
set AB ( vs. ;M p 7.47 M p 6.74 F(1, 121)pB2(BC) B2(AB)
; ).7.99 p ! .01
The test of the compensatory devaluation effect com-
pared the ratings of options A and B on their nondiffer-
entiating attributes across sets ABC and AB. The data show
that option A was perceived as less attractive on its non-
differentiating attribute in the set ABC than in the set AB
( vs. ; ;M p 2.77 M p 3.58 F(1, 127)p 9.55A2(ABC) A2(AB)
). Similarly, option B was perceived as less attrac-p ! .005
tive on its nondifferentiating attribute in the absence of the
all-in-one option than when the all-in-one option was pres-
ent ( vs. ; ;M p 2.93 M p 3.50 F(1, 127)p 4.68B1(ABC) B1(AB)
). A further test of the compensatory devaluationp ! .005
effect compared the attractiveness of options A and B across
sets AB and AC/BC. The data show that the nondifferen-
tiating attribute of option A received lower ratings in the
set AC than in the set AB ( vs.M p 2.94 M pA2(AC) A2(AB)
; ; ). Similarly, the nondiffer-3.58 F(1, 120)p 4.86 p ! .05
entiating attribute of option B was rated less attractive in
the set BC than in the set AB ( vs. MB1(AB)pM p 2.61B1(BC)
3.50; ; ).F(1, 121)p 9.95 p ! .005
Overall, the experimental data support the proposition that
adding an all-in-one option to a choice set comprising spe-
cialized options is likely to lead to a compensatory enhance-
ment of the performance of the specialized options on dif-
ferentiating attributes and a compensatory devaluation of
the performance of the specialized options on nondifferen-
tiating attributes.
Inferring Options’ Performance on Unobservable
Attributes
This research argued that the strength of compensatory
inferences is a function of the perceived performance of the
options on unobservable attributes. In particular, the deval-
uation of the all-in-one option in the presence of specialized
alternatives was predicted to be less pronounced when the
all-in-one option is perceived to be inferior on the unob-
servable attribute. This prediction was tested by making one
of the unobservable attributes (price) salient and examining
the impact of consumers’ price perceptions on the strength
of the compensatory inferences. In this context, it was ex-
pected that respondents who expected the all-in-one option
to be higher priced would be less likely to devalue this
option than respondents who expected the all-in-one option
to be priced at parity or lower than the specialized options.
Recall that respondents were randomly assigned to either
the no-inference condition or the price-inference condition.
Based on their responses, individuals in the price-inference
condition were further assigned to two groups: a “high price”
group made up of respondents who inferred that the all-in-
one option was likely to be the most expensive option in
the set and a “low price” group made up of respondents
who expected the all-in-one option to be priced at parity or
less than the other options. In this context, the impact of
price inferences on the strength of the compensatory rea-
soning effects was tested by comparing the dispersion of
attribute ratings across the control and “high price” condi-
tions, whereby the compensatory devaluation of the all-in-
one option should be greater in the control than in the high
price condition. The strategy for testing this prediction was
similar to the strategy used in testing the devaluation of the
PRODUCT DIFFERENTIATION AND COMPENSATORY REASONING IN CHOICE 437
all-in-one option: the impact of price inferences on the dis-
persion of attribute ratings of options was evaluated (1)
within the set ABC, (2) across sets ABC and AC/BC, and
(3) across sets AC and BC.
A comparison of attribute ratings of the all-in-one option
C between the high price and no-inference conditions
shows that in the set ABC option C was rated higher on
both attributes when it was perceived to be higher priced
( and ) than when no priceM p 7.18 M p 7.31C1(ABC) C2(ABC)
inferences were drawn ( andM p 6.21 M pC1(ABC) C2(ABC)
). The difference in attribute evaluations of option C6.31
was significant for both attributes ( ;F(1, 86)p 19.37 p !
for attribute 1 and ; for at-.001 F(1, 86)p 16.93 p ! .001
tribute 2). Similarly, in sets AC and BC, option C had
higher attribute ratings when inferred to be higher priced
( and ) than when there wasM p 6.81 M p 6.98C1(AC) C2(BC)
no price inference ( and ;M p 6.23 M p 6.37C1(AC) C2(BC)
; and ; ).F(1, 79)p 6.18 p ! .05 F(1, 80)p 5.55 p ! .05
Furthermore, inferred-price ranking influenced not only the
ratings of the all-in-one option C but also its relative at-
tractiveness vis-a`-vis the specialized options A and B. Thus,
the difference in attractiveness of options A and C was
in the high price condition, comparedDM p .54A1C1(ABC)
with in the no-inference conditionDM p 1.38A1C1(ABC)
( ; ). Similarly, the difference inF(1, 86)p 12.56 p ! .005
attractiveness of options B and C was DM p .56B2C2(ABC)
in the high price condition, compared with DM pB2C2(ABC)
in the no-inference condition ( ;1.12 F(1, 86)p 4.32 p !
). These data show that the devaluation of the all-in-one.05
option was mitigated by the inferred price-inferiority (i.e.,
higher price) of this option—a finding consistent with the
experimental predictions.
The impact of price inferences on the strength of the
compensatory reasoning effects was further tested by com-
paring the attribute ratings of the all-in-one option C in the
set ABC to its ratings in sets AC and BC across the high
price and the no-inference conditions. The data show that
the difference in attractiveness of option C across sets ABC
and AC was in the high price con-DM p .26C2(ABC)C2(AC)
dition, compared with in the no-DM p .78C2(ABC)C2(AC)
inference condition ( ; )—a findingF(1, 165)p 9.85 p ! .005
consistent with the experimental predictions. Similarly, the
difference in attractiveness of option C across sets ABC and
AB was in the high price condition,DM p .26C1(ABC)C1(BC)
compared with in the no-infer-DM p 1.02C1(ABC)C1(BC)
ence condition ( ; ).F(1, 86)p 18.04 p ! .001
The impact of price inferences on the strength of the
compensatory reasoning effect was also tested by comparing
the attribute ratings of option C in sets AC and BC across
the high price and the no-inference conditions. The data
show that the difference in attractiveness of option C across
sets AC and BC was in the highDM p .12C1(AC)C1(BC)
price condition, compared with inDM p 1.01C1(AC)C1(BC)
the no-inference condition ( ; ).F(1, 159)p 8.32 p ! .005
Similarly, the difference in attractiveness of option C across
sets ABC and BC was in the highDM p .08C2(BC)C2(AC)
price condition, compared with inDM p .71C2(BC)C2(AC)
the no-inference condition ( ; ).F(1, 165)p 3.32 p ! .10
The potential artifacts of the price-inference manipulation
were also tested by examining the strength of the compen-
satory reasoning effects across the two price-inference con-
ditions. In this context, this research argued that the com-
pensatory devaluation effect will be weaker for respondents
who rated option C as being the highest priced than for
respondents who did not infer option C to be the most ex-
pensive. The data show that option C was rated higher in
the high price condition ( andM p 7.18 M pC1(ABC) C2(ABC)
; ; ) than in the equal/low price7.31 F(1, 86)p 5.65 p ! .05
condition ( and ; F(1, 86)pM p 6.40 M p 6.51C1(ABC) C2(ABC)
6.99; ). Further analysis shows that the differencep ! .05
in the attractiveness of option C and options A and B was
also less pronounced for respondents in the high price
condition than for those in the equal/low price condition.
Thus, in the high price condition the difference in attribute
evaluations across options A and C was DM pA1C1(ABC)
and across options B and C. In.54 DM p .56B2C2(ABC)
contrast, in the equal/low price condition the difference in
attribute evaluations was greater: andDM p 1.00A1C1(ABC)
. The combined effect of the differencesDM p 1.16B2C2(ABC)
in the devaluation effect was significant ( ;F(2, 86)p 3.84
), lending further support to the proposition that thep ! .05
devaluation of the all-in-one option is mitigated by the in-
ferred inferiority of this option on price.
Considered together, the above findings support the prop-
osition that the compensatory devaluation of the all-in-one
option will be less pronounced when this option is perceived
to be inferior on an attribute with not readily observable
values. This prediction was further tested by analyzing re-
spondents’ choices across experimental conditions. Recall
that respondents were asked to make two contingent choice
decisions (one assuming attribute 1 to be most important,
and one assuming attribute 2 to be most important). The
pattern of dispersion of choice shares across the experi-
mental conditions was consistent with the attribute ratings
shown in figure 1, and the relevant differences across the
experimental conditions were significant, replicating the rat-
ings data. These findings support the experimental predic-
tions and further document compensatory effects across dif-
ferent preference-elicitation procedures (ratings and choice).
Discussion
The data furnished by experiment 1 support the propo-
sition that consumers evaluate the specialized and all-in-one
options in a compensatory fashion. In particular, the attrac-
tiveness of the attributes differentiating the all-in-one option
was found to decrease in the presence of specialized options.
The data further show that compensatory reasoning also
leads to polarization of the attributes describing specialized
options: it enhances the attractiveness of the differentiating
attribute of a specialized option and devalues this option on
its secondary attributes. Moreover, the strength of compen-
satory inferences was shown to be a function of consumer
inferences about the option’s performance on unobservable
438 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
attributes. Thus, merely asking respondents to infer options’
performance on an unobservable attribute resulted in a sig-
nificant decrease in compensatory devaluation effects. In
this context, the compensatory effects were pronounced
when the inferred performance was inconsistent with the
readily available attribute information than when the in-
ferred performance was consistent with the available infor-
mation.
A further test of the compensatory reasoning hypothesis
can be offered by examining the dispersion of attribute rat-
ings across choice alternatives as a function of price. Prior
research on price-quality inferences has shown that increas-
ing the price of an option is also likely to increase its per-
ceived performance on nonprice attributes (Huber and
McCann 1982; Johnson 1987; Johnson and Levin 1985;
Lichtenstein and Burton 1989). Building on these findings,
consumers’ reliance on the zero-sum heuristic can be further
tested by examining the impact of a price increase on the
relative attractiveness of the all-in-one and the specialized
options.
The logic of the argument that varying price is likely to
have a differential impact on the perceived performance of
the specialized and all-in-one options is derived from the
concavity of the value function, which implies that an in-
crease in an object’s value on a particular attribute is as-
sociated with a decrease in this attribute’s marginal utility
(Bernoulli 1738; Kahneman and Tversky 1979; Tversky and
Kahneman 1991). The principle of diminishing sensitivity,
implied by the concavity of the value function, is consistent
with the psychophysical principle that sensitivity to changes
along a particular attribute is reduced as the magnitude of
that attribute increases (Torgerson 1958). In marketing, the
diminishing sensitivity argument has been demonstrated in
the context of new product development, whereby new prod-
uct features have been shown to contribute more value to
relatively inferior products than to relatively superior prod-
ucts (Nowlis and Simonson 1996; see also Chernev and
Hamilton 2007).
The differential impact of varying price on the perceived
performance of the specialized and all-in-one options is il-
lustrated in figure 2. In the absence of compensatory infer-
ences, both options A and C are perceived to have equal
ratings on attribute 1, as shown in figure 1A. Therefore, in
the absence of compensatory enhancement and devaluation
effects, the impact of raising price on options’ perceived
performance should be the same for the all-in-one and the
specialized options, as shown in figure 2A. In contrast, com-
pensatory reasoning and the associated devaluation and en-
hancement effects are likely to make the specialized option
A more attractive than the all-in-one option C on attribute
1 (see fig. 1B). If this indeed is the case, then pricing each
of these options at a premium should have a differential
impact on their perceived performance. In particular, the
diminishing sensitivity argument predicts that the increase
in the relative attractiveness of the devalued option C will
be greater than the increase in the enhanced option A (see
fig. 2B).
The essence of the above argument is that if the zero-
sum heuristic leads to a polarization of an option’s perfor-
mance on differentiating attributes then increasing the price
of each of these options by the same amount should have
an asymmetric impact on the options’ performance on non-
price attributes; this, in turn, will lead to a greater improve-
ment in attribute performance of the all-in-one alternative
relative to specialized options. Because the difference in
options’ attribute performance is a prerequisite for the pre-
dicted asymmetric impact of price, the presence of a sig-
nificant asymmetric impact of price can be viewed as evi-
dence supporting the zero-sum heuristic. The validity of this
prediction is tested in the following experiment.
EXPERIMENT 2
The goal of this experiment was to further test the com-
pensatory reasoning hypotheses and, in particular, to test the
proposition that the perceived attractiveness and choice
share of the all-in-one option can be increased by pricing
this option at a premium in relation to the specialized op-
tions. This prediction was tested by employing four exper-
imental conditions: a base condition in which all options
were priced at parity and three conditions in which one of
the options was priced higher than the others. The experi-
mental method and empirical results are presented in more
detail in the following sections.
Method
Respondents, 74 Northwestern University students, were
recruited to participate in a study on consumer decision
making and were informed that the choice task involved
making hypothetical purchase decisions. Four product cat-
egories were used as stimuli: laundry detergent, shaving
cream, toothpaste, and vitamin supplements. Choice alter-
natives were described on either one (for specialized op-
tions) or two (in case of the all-in-one option) attributes and
priced as shown in the appendix, table A2.
Respondents were randomly assigned to one of the four
experimental conditions that differed in terms of the distri-
bution of options’ prices. All sets were made up of three
options: two specialized options (A and B) and an all-in-
one option (C). Options in one of the conditions (control
condition) were all priced at parity, while in the other three
conditions one of the options was priced higher than the
others (ABC, A+BC, AB+C, ABC+, with the higher priced
option marked with a +). Each respondent made four
choices, one in each product category.
For each product category, respondents were asked to
choose one of the three options and then rate all the options’
performance on each of the two attributes on a nine-point
scale (same as in the first experiment). At the end of the
experiment, respondents were debriefed and paid for par-
ticipating.
PRODUCT DIFFERENTIATION AND COMPENSATORY REASONING IN CHOICE 439
FIGURE 2
COMPENSATORY ENHANCEMENT AND DEVALUATION EFFECTS IN CHOICE: COMPENSATORY REASONING AS A FUNCTION
OF PRICE INFORMATION
NOTE.—The graph reflects options’ performance on one of the two attributes differentiating choice alternatives (attribute 1 in fig. 1). Option A is the specialized
option and option C is the all-in-one option. Options A+ and C+ denote the higher priced versions of options A and C.
Results
The Impact of Price Dispersion on Attribute Infer-
ences. Each of the 74 respondents evaluated one set of
alternatives in each of the four product categories, which
yielded 296 sets. For each set, respondents rated the per-
formance of each option on both attributes, yielding a total
of 1,776 observations (six attribute-specific ratings for each
set).
A summary of the mean attribute ratings (averaged across
product categories) is given in table 2. The significance of
the data patterns shown in the table was validated by testing
a model in which attribute ratings were given as a function
of price dispersion, option type (specialized vs. all-in-one),
product category, and their interactions. The data analyses
are presented in more detail in the following sections.
Consistent with the compensatory reasoning argument,
the data show that when options were priced at parity, re-
440 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
TABLE 2
ATTRIBUTE RATINGS AS A FUNCTION OF PRICE
DISPERSION (EXPERIMENT 2)
Option/attribute
Price
Equal C+ A+ B+
A1 7.53 7.38 7.97 7.04
A2 2.73 3.14 3.12 3.11
B1 2.91 2.95 2.96 3.42
B2 7.42 7.62 7.09 7.91
C1 5.99 6.89 5.72 6.5
C2 6.14 7.01 6.39 5.72
NOTE.—Option A is differentiated by attribute 1 (A1), option B is differentiated
by attribute 2 (B2), and option C is the all-in-one option differentiated by both
attributes (C1 and C2). Numbers in each cell represent mean averages for all
observations aggregated across categories and across respondents. In each
set, N p 74.
TABLE 3
CHOICE SHARE AS A FUNCTION OF PRICE DISPERSION
(EXPERIMENT 2)
Option
Price
Equal C+ A+ B+
A 25.7 14.9 24.3 16.2
B 20.3 10.8 14.9 25.7
C 54.1 74.3 60.8 58.1
NOTE.—Percentages in each of the cells indicate the choice share of the
corresponding option. For all cells, .Np 74
spondents were likely to devalue the all-in-one option rel-
ative to the specialized options. In particular, the compen-
satory reasoning argument implies that andC ! A C !1 1 2
, where C1 is the rating of option C on attribute 1 and C2B2
is the rating of option C on attribute 2. Consistent with this
prediction, the data show that versusM p 5.99 M pC1 A1
( ; ) when comparing C1 and A1,7.53 tp 10.07 p ! .001
and versus ( ; )M p 6.14 M p 7.42 tp 7.78 p ! .001C2 B2
when comparing C2 and B2.
The data further show that higher price was also as-
sociated with an increase in the perceived performance
of the all-in-one option on both attributes (M pC1(ABC)
vs. ; ; ,5.99 M p 6.89 F(1, 219)p 28.34 p ! .001C1(ABC+)
and vs. ;M p 6.124 M p 7.01 F(1, 219)pC2(ABC) C2(ABC+)
; ). A similar increase in perceived perfor-19.03 p ! .001
mance occurred when the higher priced option was one of
the specialized alternatives. Thus, respondents were more
likely to rate the specialized option A as superior on the
differentiating attribute A1 when it was priced at a premium
than in a scenario where all options were priced at parity
( vs. ; ;M p 7.53 M p 7.97 F(1, 219)p 6.94A1(ABC) A1(ABC+)
). In the same vein, option B was rated superior onp ! .01
the differentiating attribute B2 when priced at premium than
when priced at parity ( vs.M p 7.42 M pB2(ABC) B2(ABC+)
; ; ).7.91 F(1, 219)p 5.80 p ! .05
More important, the compensatory reasoning argument
predicts that the enhancement from premium pricing is likely
to be more pronounced for the all-in-one option than for
either of the specialized options. This prediction is tested
by comparing the magnitude of the increase in attractiveness
of the all-in-one and the specialized options. For that pur-
pose, for each respondent the increase in the perceived at-
tractiveness of the premium-priced option on the differen-
tiating attribute was compared across the specialized and
the all-in-one option. In particular, the average increase in
the attractiveness of the specialized option differentiated by
attribute 1 was less pronounced than the increase in the
attractiveness of the all-in-one option on the same attribute
when this option was higher priced ( vs.M p .44A1(A+BC)
). The corresponding effect for the secondM p .90C1(ABC+)
attribute displayed a similar pattern ( vs.M p .49B2(AB+C)
), and the asymmetric nature of the en-M p .88C2(ABC+)
hancement effect was significant across the two attributes
( ; ). This finding provides furtherF(1, 219)p 7.06 p ! .01
support for the proposed compensatory reasoning mecha-
nism of the observed effects.
The Impact of Price Dispersion on Choice. Each of
the 74 respondents selected one of the alternatives in each
of the four sets, which yielded 296 observations. The choice
shares of options A, B, and C in each of the four conditions
are summarized in table 3. The data show that the choice
share of the all-in-one option was greater when one of the
options was priced at a premium than when all options were
priced at parity. In particular, the choice share of the all-in-
one option C was greater when its price exceeded that of
the specialized options than when it was priced at parity
with the other options (54.1% vs. 74.3%; ;2x (1)p 6.47
). This finding is consistent with the notion that thepp .01
attractiveness of the all-in-one option on the differentiating
attributes is likely to increase when this option is priced at
a premium. More important, the increase in the choice share
of the all-in-one option (relative to the price-parity condi-
tion) was significantly greater when this option was the
highest priced option than when either of the specialized
options was highest priced (54.1% vs. 74.3% vs. 60.8% vs.
58.1%; ; ).2x (1)p 6.05 pp .01
Furthermore, the impact of parity pricing on choice shares
of the alternatives was asymmetric for the all-in-one and the
specialized options. In particular, while increasing the price
of the all-in-one option resulted in an increase in its choice
share, the impact of increasing the price of the specialized
options was less consistent, leading to a minor decrease in
the share of the higher priced option A (25.7% vs. 24.3%)
and an increase in the share of the higher priced option B
(20.3% vs. 25.7%). In this context, the increase in the choice
share of the all-in-one option was significantly greater than
the increase in the share of the specialized options
( ; ), lending further support for the2x (1)p 15.64 p ! .001
experimental predictions.
Discussion
The data furnished by this experiment show that the per-
ceived attribute performance of the all-in-one option is likely
PRODUCT DIFFERENTIATION AND COMPENSATORY REASONING IN CHOICE 441
to be greater when this option is priced at a premium relative
to specialized options than when it is priced at parity. More
important, the increase in the perceived attribute perfor-
mance associated with premium pricing was greater for the
all-in-one option than for specialized options. This asym-
metric nature of the impact of price on performance ratings
and choice suggests that the observed effects cannot be ac-
counted for solely by price-quality inferences. Indeed, in the
absence of devaluation of the all-in-one option, it is difficult
to account for the asymmetric increase in the attractiveness
of the all-in-one versus the specialized options. Overall, this
data pattern is consistent with the proposition that increasing
the price of the all-in-one option introduces a dimension on
which this option is deficient, which, in turn, eliminates the
basis for compensatory reasoning and decreases the likeli-
hood of consumers devaluing that option.
An important consideration raised by the pricing manip-
ulation is that the dispersion of options’ prices might have
changed the nature of the trade-offs made by respondents.
Indeed, when all options are priced at parity and option C
is perceived to be inferior on the attributes dominated by
specialized options, consumers are faced with a trade-off
between maximizing the performance on a particular attrib-
ute (choosing one of the specialized options) and settling
for moderate quantities of each attribute (choosing the all-
in-one option). In contrast, when the all-in-one option is
priced at a premium (and hence is less likely to be devalued),
it will be perceived as combining the “good” features of the
specialized options, which then eliminates the need for trad-
ing off the two performance-related attributes. Instead, the
decision now involves a trade-off between performance and
price. The expected increase in the share of the all-in-one
option in this case is consistent with the research docu-
menting consumer preference for performance (quality) over
price (Carmon and Simonson 1998; Hardie, Johnson, and
Fader 1993; Simonson, Nowlis, and Lemon 1993; Simonson
and Tversky 1992). In this context, choosing the all-in-one
alternative eliminates the need to trade off two performance-
related attributes and instead positions the all-in-one option
as the price-based compromise. It is important to note, how-
ever, that because the actual attribute values of the special-
ized and the all-in-one options are identical, the proposition
that varying price might have changed the nature of the
trade-offs is meaningful only in the presence of compen-
satory inferences.
GENERAL DISCUSSION
This research examines consumer reactions to two com-
mon positioning strategies: a specialized strategy in which
an option is differentiated by a single feature, and an all-
in-one strategy in which an option is differentiated by a
combination of features. It was proposed that when making
choices from sets comprising both specialized and all-in-
one options, consumers are likely to adopt a zero-sum heu-
ristic, in which they equate the overall attractiveness of
choice alternatives and evaluate ambiguous information in
a compensatory fashion.
Two empirical studies reported in this article demonstrate
that the perceived attractiveness of the attributes differen-
tiating the all-in-one option tends to decrease in the presence
of specialized options. In contrast, adding an all-in-one op-
tion to a set made up of specialized options tends to polarize
the perceived performance of these options: it enhances the
attractiveness of the attributes differentiating each of the
specialized options, while devaluing the performance of
these options on their secondary, nonfeatured attributes.
These compensatory enhancement and devaluation effects
were shown to be a function of options’ perceived perfor-
mance on unobservable attributes, such that these effects
were less pronounced when the options’ performance on
unobservable attributes was inferred to be inconsistent with
their performance on the readily observed attributes.
To account for the reported effects, this research intro-
duced the zero-sum heuristic as a general mechanism for
drawing compensatory evaluations in choice. Here, the zero-
sum heuristic is defined as a context-based inference strategy
in which an option’s values are derived from the other al-
ternatives in the set. Thus, the zero-sum heuristic reflects
consumers’ belief that options in a given choice set are
balanced, such that advantages on one dimension are likely
to be compensated for by disadvantages on another. As a
result, when an all-in-one alternative is embedded among
specialized options, its attribute performance is likely to be
devalued so that it matches the overall performance of these
options. Similarly, the performance of specialized options
on their primary attributes is bolstered and their secondary
attributes are devalued so that their overall performance
matches that of the all-in-one option.
Research reported in this article contributes to the decision
literature by applying the notion of compensatory inferences
to explain the devaluation and enhancement effects asso-
ciated with evaluating specialized and all-in-one options.
Building on the findings reported by Chernev and Carpenter
(2001), who examine market efficiency inferences as a func-
tion of price, the research presented in this article documents
a different type of compensatory inference that is not nec-
essarily contingent on the availability of price information.
Indeed, because drawing inferences about overall value is
difficult in the absence of price information, the availability
of price information is a necessary condition for market
efficiency intuitions to occur. In contrast, the zero-sum heu-
ristic reported in this research offers a more general decision
strategy that is not necessarily contingent on the availability
of pricing information. Documenting the existence of com-
pensatory reasoning without explicitly available pricing in-
formation is an important contribution to the research on
consumer decision making and choice.
It is important to note that the observed effect of adding
an all-in-one option to a set comprising specialized options
(and vice versa) is conceptually different from the range
effects described by prior research (Janiszewski and Lich-
tenstein 1999; Lynch, Chakravarti, and Mitra 1991). Indeed,
in the case of range effects, adding an option to the choice
set changes the attribute-value scale describing choice al-
442 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
ternatives. In contrast, in the case of the compensatory ef-
fects reported in this research, adding either a specialized
or an all-in-one option does not change the scale describing
choice alternatives because both the specialized and the all-
in-one options are described by identical attribute values
(e.g., both offer “cavity prevention”).
The findings reported in this research also imply that the
widely used strategy of pricing specialized and all-in-one
options at parity might, in fact, be suboptimal. Thus, the
data show that the choice share of the all-in-one option is
likely to be greater when this option is priced higher than
when it is priced at parity with the specialized options. It
is important to note, however, that this increase in the share
of the all-in-one option when priced at a premium is not a
universal rule; it is contingent on a variety of other factors,
such as the price sensitivity of consumers. Thus, even though
increasing the price of the all-in-one option might mitigate
the devaluation effect, in cases when consumer price sen-
sitivity is high, the overall choice share might nevertheless
decrease.
An important issue raised by this research concerns iden-
tifying factors that facilitate the use of the zero-sum heuristic
vis-a`-vis alternative decision heuristics. In this context, three
important preconditions for the zero-sum heuristic can be
identified. The first one is that options in the choice set are
perceived as being a part of the same subset of alterna-
tives—for example, a part of a company’s product line or
a part of the assortment offered by a retailer. The second
precondition is the belief that all relevant information is
available and choice alternatives can be readily evaluated.
Finally, the third precondition is that consumers believe that
options in the choice set are balanced in terms of their overall
attractiveness. Such balance might be due to the perceived
market efficiency (in cases involving price and/or price pro-
motions; Chernev and Carpenter 2001; see also Simonson,
Carmon, and O’Curry 1994), technological constraints (such
as the relationship between size and weight; Hauser and
Shugan 1983), or commonly observed correlations (such as
reliability and warranty; Broniarczyk and Alba 1994). The
research presented in this article focused on documenting
the specific effects associated with the use of the zero-sum
heuristic and identifying some of its moderating factors,
without explicitly examining the influence of all the above
preconditions on the strength of the zero-sum heuristic. Iden-
tifying antecedents and the boundary conditions of the zero-
sum heuristic is an important and fruitful area for further
research.
APPENDIX
TABLE A1
STIMULI OVERVIEW (EXPERIMENT 1)
Product Option A Option B Option C
Cold relief medicine Relieves chest congestion Clears nasal stuffiness Relieves chest congestion and clears nasal stuffiness
Laundry detergent Prevents static Removes stains Prevents static and removes stains
Shaving cream Moisturizes Protects Moisturizes and protects
Toothpaste Prevents cavities Whitens teeth Whitens teeth and prevents cavities
Vitamin supplements Improve memory Reduce stress Improve memory and reduce stress
TABLE A2
STIMULI OVERVIEW (EXPERIMENT 2)
Product Option A Option B Option C Price*
Laundry detergent Protects color Removes stains Protects color and removes stains $7.99 ($9.99)
Shaving cream Moisturizes Protects Moisturizes and protects $2.99 ($3.99)
Toothpaste Prevents cavities Protects from tartar Prevents cavities and protects from tartar $1.99 ($2.99)
Vitamin supplements Ginseng Ginkgo biloba With ginseng and ginkgo biloba $6.99 ($8.99)
*Premium price is given in parentheses.
PRODUCT DIFFERENTIATION AND COMPENSATORY REASONING IN CHOICE 443
REFERENCES
Adler, Alfred (1924), The Practice and Theory of Individual Psy-
chology, 2nd rev. ed., London: Kegan Paul.
Allison, Ralph I. and Kenneth P. Uhl (1964), “Influence of Beer
Brand Identification on Taste Perception,” Journal of Mar-
keting Research, 1 (August), 36.
Baumgartner, Hans (1995), “On the Utility of Consumers’ Theories
in Judgments of Covariation,” Journal of Consumer Research,
21, 10.
Bernoulli, Daniel (1738), “Specimen Theoriae Novae de Mensura
Sortis,” Commentarii Academiae Scientiarum Imperialis Pe-
tropolitanae, 175–92; English translation in Bernoulli, Dan-
iel (1954), “Exposition of a New Theory on the Measure-
ment of Risk,” trans. Louise Sommer, Econometrica, 22,
23–36.
Bettman, James R., Deborah Roedder John, and Carol A. Scott
(1986), “Covariation Assessment by Consumers,” Journal of
Consumer Research, 13 (December), 316–26.
Broniarczyk, Susan M. and Joseph W. Alba (1994), “The Role of
Consumers’ Intuitions in Inference Making,” Journal of Con-
sumer Research, 21 (December), 393–407.
Carmon, Ziv and Itamar Simonson (1998), “Price-Quality Trade-
Offs in Choice versus Matching: New Insights into the
Prominence Effect,” Journal of Consumer Psychology, 7 (4),
323–43.
Carpenter, Gregory S. and Kent Nakamoto (1989), “Consumer
Preference Formation and Pioneering Advantage,” Journal of
Marketing Research, 26 (August), 285–98.
Chernev, Alexander and Gregory S. Carpenter (2001), “The Role
of Market Efficiency Intuitions in Consumer Choice: A Case
of Compensatory Inferences,” Journal of Marketing Re-
search, 38 (August), 349–61.
Chernev, Alexander and Ryan Hamilton (2007), “Too Much
of a Good Thing? Option Attractiveness and Assortment
Choice,” working paper, Kellogg School of Management,
Northwestern University, 2001 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL
60208.
Dick, Alan, Dipankar Chakravarti, and Gabriel Biehal (1990),
“Memory-Based Inferences during Consumer Choice,” Jour-
nal of Consumer Research, 17 (June), 82–93.
Hardie, Bruce G. S., Eric J. Johnson, and Peter S. Fader (1993),
“Modeling Loss Aversion and Reference Dependence Effects
on Brand Choice,” Marketing Science, 12, 17.
Hauser, John R. and Steven Shugan (1983), “Defensive Marketing
Strategies,” Marketing Science, 4 (Fall), 319–60.
Huber, Joel and John McCann (1982), “The Impact of Inferential
Beliefs on Product Evaluations,” Journal of Marketing Re-
search, 19 (August), 324–33.
Janiszewski, Chris and Donald R. Lichtenstein (1999), “A Range
Theory Account of Price Perception,” Journal of Consumer
Research, 25 (March), 353–68.
Janiszewski, Chris and Stijn M. J. Van Osselaer (2000), “A Con-
nectionist Model of Brand-Quality Associations,” Journal of
Marketing Research, 37, 331–50.
Johnson, Eric J. and Robert J. Meyer (1984), “Compensatory
Choice Models of Noncompensatory Processes: The Effect
of Varying Context,” Journal of Consumer Research, 11
(June), 528–41.
Johnson, Richard D. (1987), “Making Judgments When Infor-
mation Is Missing: Inferences, Biases, and Framing Effects,”
Acta Psychologica, 66 (1), 69–82.
Johnson, Richard D. and Irwin P. Levin (1985), “More Than Meets
the Eye: The Effect of Missing Information on Purchase Eval-
uations,” Journal of Consumer Research, 12 (September),
169–77.
Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky (1979), “Prospect Theory:
An Analysis of Decision under Risk,” Econometrica, 47
(March), 263–92.
Keeney, Ralph L. and Howard Raiffa (1976), Decisions with Mul-
tiple Objectives : Preferences and Value Tradeoffs. New York:
Wiley.
Kivetz, Ran and Itamar Simonson (2003), “The Idiosyncratic Fit
Heuristic: Effort Advantage as a Determinant of Consumer
Response to Loyalty Programs,” Journal of Marketing Re-
search, 40 (February), 454–67.
Lichtenstein, Donald R. and Scot Burton (1989), “The Relationship
between Perceived and Objective Price-Quality,” Journal of
Marketing Research, 26 (November), 429–43.
Lynch, John G., Dipankar Chakravarti, and Anusree Mitra
(1991), “Contrast Effects in Consumer Judgments: Changes
in Mental Representations or in the Anchoring of Rating
Scales?” Journal of Consumer Research, 18 (December),
284–97.
Nowlis, Stephen M. and Itamar Simonson (1996), “The Effect of
New Product Features on Brand Choice,” Journal of Mar-
keting Research, 33 (February), 36–46.
Payne, John W., James R. Bettman, and Eric J. Johnson (1993),
The Adaptive Decision Maker. New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Prelec, Drazen, Birger Wernerfelt, and Florian Zettelmeyer (1997),
“The Role of Inference in Context Effects: Inferring What
You Want from What Is Available,” Journal of Consumer
Research, 24 (June), 118–25.
Raghubir, Priya and Kim Corfman (1999), “When Do Price Pro-
motions Affect Pretrial Brand Evaluations?” Journal of Mar-
keting Research, 36, 211–22.
Rao, Akshay R. and Kent B. Monroe (1989), “The Effect of Price,
Brand Name, and Store Name on Buyers’ Perceptions of Prod-
uct Quality: An Integrative Review,” Journal of Marketing
Research, 26, 351–57.
Shiv, Baba, Ziv Carmon, and Dan Ariely (2005), “Placebo Ef-
fects of Marketing Actions: Consumers May Get What They
Pay For,” Journal of Marketing Research, 42 (November),
383–93.
Simonson, Itamar (1989), “Choice Based on Reasons: The Case
of Attraction and Compromise Effects,” Journal of Consumer
Research, 16 (September), 158–74.
Simonson, Itamar, Ziv Carmon, and Suzanne O’Curry (1994), “Ex-
perimental Evidence on the Negative Effect of Product Fea-
tures and Sales Promotions on Brand Choice,” Marketing
Science, 13 (1), 23–40.
Simonson, Itamar, Stephen Nowlis, and Katherine Lemon (1993),
“The Effect of Local Consideration Sets on Global Choice
between Lower Price and Higher Quality,” Marketing Science,
12 (4), 357–77.
Simonson, Itamar and Amos Tversky (1992), “Choice in Context:
Tradeoff Contrast and Extremeness Aversion,” Journal of
Marketing Research, 29 (August), 281–95.
Torgerson, Warren S. (1958), Theory and Methods of Scaling. Ox-
ford: Wiley.
444 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
Tversky, Amos (1972), “Elimination by Aspects: A Theory of
Choice,” Psychological Review, 79 (October), 281–99.
Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman (1991), “Loss Aversion in
Riskless Choice: A Reference-Dependent Model,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 106 (November), 1039–61.
Von Neumann, John and Oskar Morgenstern (1953), Theory of
Games and Economic Behavior, 3rd ed., New York: Wiley.
Wernerfelt, Birger (1988), “Umbrella Branding as a Signal of New
Product Quality: An Example of Signalling by Posting a
Bond,” Rand Journal of Economics, 19, 9.
——— (1995), “A Rational Reconstruction of the Compromise
Effect: Using Market Data to Infer Utilities,” Journal of Con-
sumer Research, 21 (March), 627–33.
Winer, B. J., Donald R. Brown, and Kenneth M. Michels (1991),
Statistical Principles in Experimental Design, 3rd ed., New
York: McGraw-Hill.
