 1999 Oxford University Press 29–34Nucleic Acids Research, 1999, Vol. 27, No. 1
KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
Hiroyuki Ogata, Susumu Goto, Kazushige Sato, Wataru Fujibuchi, Hidemasa Bono
and Minoru Kanehisa*
Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Uji, Kyoto 611-0011, Japan
Received September 8, 1998; Revised September 22, 1998; Accepted October 14, 1998
ABSTRACT
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) is
a knowledge base for systematic analysis of gene
functions in terms of the networks of genes and
molecules. The major component of KEGG is the
PATHWAY database that consists of graphical dia-
grams of biochemical pathways including most of the
known metabolic pathways and some of the known
regulatory pathways. The pathway information is also
represented by the ortholog group tables summarizing
orthologous and paralogous gene groups among
different organisms. KEGG maintains the GENES
database for the gene catalogs of all organisms with
complete genomes and selected organisms with
partial genomes, which are continuously re-annotated,
as well as the LIGAND database for chemical com-
pounds and enzymes. Each gene catalog is associated
with the graphical genome map for chromosomal
locations that is represented by Java applet. In
addition to the data collection efforts, KEGG develops
and provides various computational tools, such as for
reconstructing biochemical pathways from the com-
plete genome sequence and for predicting gene
regulatory networks from the gene expression pro-
files. The KEGG databases are daily updated and made
freely available (http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/ ).
INTRODUCTION
The progress in structural genomics will soon uncover the
complete genome sequences for hundreds and thousands of
organisms. However, roughly a half of the genes identified in
every genome thus far sequenced still remain unknown in terms
of their biological functions. New experimental and informatics
technologies in functional genomics are urgently required for
systematic identification of gene functions. Kyoto Encyclopedia
of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) is an effort to computerize the
current knowledge of biochemical pathways and other types of
molecular interactions that can be used as reference for systematic
interpretation of sequence data (1). At the same time, KEGG
attempts to standardize the functional annotation of genes and
proteins, and maintain gene catalogs for all complete genomes
and some partial genomes including mouse and human.
The basic concepts of KEGG (1) and underlying informatics
technologies (2,3) have already been published. KEGG is tightly
integrated with the LIGAND chemical database for enzyme
reactions (4,5) as well as with most of the major molecular
biology databases by the DBGET/LinkDB system (6) under the
Japanese GenomeNet service (7). The database organization
efforts require extensive analyses of completely sequenced
genomes, as exemplified by the analyses of metabolic pathways
(8) and ABC transport systems (9). In this article, we describe the
current status of the KEGG databases and discuss the use of
KEGG for functional genomics.
OBJECTIVES OF KEGG
In May 1995, we initiated the KEGG project under the Human
Genome Program of the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports
and Culture in Japan. We wish to automate human reasoning steps
for interpreting biological meaning encoded in the sequence data.
We consider the problem of predicting gene functions as a process
of reconstructing a functioning biological system from the
complete set of genes and gene products. Thus, it is critical to
understand how genes and molecules are networked to form a
biological system. Specifically, the objectives of KEGG are
summarized in the following four points.
First, KEGG aims at computerizing the current knowledge of
genetics, biochemistry, and molecular and cellular biology in
terms of the pathway of interacting molecules or genes. The
KEGG pathway database contains the information of how
molecules or genes are networked, which is complementary to
most of the existing molecular biology databases that contain the
information of individual molecules or individual genes. During
the first two years of the KEGG project we focused on the
metabolic pathways, but since July 1997 we have also been
collecting a large body of knowledge in the regulatory aspects of
cellular functions.
Second, KEGG maintains the gene catalogs for all organisms
with completely sequenced genomes and selected organisms with
partial genomes. Because the criteria of interpreting sequence
similarity are different for different authors, the quality of gene
function annotations varies significantly in GenBank (10).
KEGG’s gene catalogs are intended to provide consistent and
standardized annotations by linking individual genes to compo-
nents of the KEGG biochemical pathways.
Third, KEGG maintains the catalog of chemical elements,
compounds, and other substances in living cells as the LIGAND
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +81 774 38 3270; Fax: +81 774 38 3269; Email: kanehisa@kuicr.kyoto-u.ac.jp
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 20, 2013
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
 Nucleic Acids Research, 1999, Vol. 27, No. 130
Table 1. The summary of KEGG release 8.0 (October 1998)
*Additional links can be obtained by clicking on the entry name of each entry; in the case of a graphical pathway
map, by clicking on the title box.
database (4,5) and they are again linked to pathway components.
This is based on our view that both the genetic information
encoded in the genome and the chemical information encoded in
the cell are required for understanding cellular functions.
Fourth, in addition to the database efforts, KEGG aims at
providing new informatics technologies that combine genomic
and functional information towards predicting biological systems
and designing further experiments. For example, the KEGG
reference pathways can be used to uncover molecular interactions
and pathways that underlie gene expression profiles obtained by
microarray experiments (11).
THE KEGG DATABASES
All the data in KEGG can be accessed from the KEGG table
of contents page (http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/kegg2.html ),
which is divided into two broad categories: the pathway
(functional) information and the genomic (structural) informa-
tion. The user may enter the KEGG system top-down starting
from the pathway information or bottom-up starting from the
genomic information. In either case it should be easy to navigate
through KEGG since all the information is highly integrated. The
KEGG data are also linked with many other molecular biology
databases by the DBGET/LinkDB system. A summary of KEGG
data contents is shown in Table 1.
PATHWAY database
The KEGG/PATHWAY database is a collection of graphical
diagrams (pathway maps) for the biochemical pathways. Table 2
shows the current list of the KEGG biochemical pathways, which
is highly biased toward the metabolism. There are about 90
reference maps for the metabolic pathways that are manually
drawn and continuously updated according to biochemical
evidence. The organism-specific pathway maps are then auto-
matically generated by matching the EC numbers in the gene
catalogs and in the reference maps. The maps for the regulatory
pathways are drawn separately for each organism, since they are
too divergent to be represented in a single reference map.
Figure 1 shows an example of the KEGG metabolic pathway
map; citrate (TCA) cycle for Haemophilus influenzae and
Helicobacter pylori. A box is an enzyme (gene product) with the
EC number inside and a circle is a metabolic compound. They are
Table 2. The KEGG biochemical pathways (release 8.0, October 1998)
both clickable objects to retrieve detailed molecular information.
The enzymes (boxes) whose genes are identified in the genome
are colored green (shaded in Fig. 1) by the process of matching
the gene catalog and the reference pathway according to the EC
numbers. It is interesting to note that the two organisms seem to
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 20, 2013
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
31
Nucleic Acids Research, 1994, Vol. 22, No. 1Nucleic Acids Research, 1999, Vol. 27, No. 1 31
Figure 1. The KEGG pathway map of citrate (TCA) cycle for (a) Haemophilus influenzae and (b) Helicobacter pylori. A rectangle and a circle represent, respectively,
an enzyme and a compound. The enzymes whose genes are identified in the genome are shown by colored (shaded) rectangles.
have only the lower and upper half of the TCA cycle, respectively,
although a missing enzyme in H.pylori still needs be identified to
make the pathway continuous.
The PATHWAY database can be retrieved most conveniently
from the top menu of the KEGG table of contents page, metabolic
pathways and regulatory pathways that are categorized by the
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 20, 2013
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
 Nucleic Acids Research, 1999, Vol. 27, No. 132
Figure 2. The correlation of a physical unit and a functional unit of genes. (a) Starting from the KEGG genome map for Escherichia coli, (b) a chromosomal region
is selected in the zoom-up window. (c) By clicking on the ‘Pathway’ button, the user can examine if the biochemical pathway can be formed from a set of genes in
the zoom-up window.
hierarchical classification of Table 2. Alternatively, the PATH-
WAY database can be searched by the DBGET/LinkDB system.
GENES database and gene catalogs
The KEGG/GENES database is a collection of genes for all
organisms in KEGG that is organized as a flat-file database of
textual information. In fact, each organism is a primary database
and GENES is defined as a composite database of all organisms
under the DBGET/LinkDB system. An entry of the GENES
database contains the information: organism name, gene name,
functional description, functional hierarchy (KEGG pathway
classification), chromosomal position, codon usage, amino acid
sequence, and nucleotide sequence (Table 1). The genes in each
organism are hierarchically classified in the gene catalog
according to the KEGG pathways (Table 2) and they can be
viewed and searched as, what we call, hierarchical texts in
KEGG. The entire GENES database or each organism separately
can also be searched by the DBGET/LinkDB system.
The GENES database is maintained as follows. First the
information of all genes in an organism is automatically generated
from the complete genomes section of the GenBank database
(10). Then the EC number assignment is performed by GFIT (8)
and other programs with manual verification efforts. The gene
function annotations are continuously re-evaluated according to
the KEGG/PATHWAY database and by comparing with SWISS-
PROT (12) and other databases.
Genome maps and comparative genome maps
The genome map represents a one-dimensional network of genes
that are physically located in a circular or linear genome. The
gene order turns out to be extremely valuable information in
functional annotation, especially for bacteria and archaea. As
shown in Figure 2, the genome map is linked to the pathway map
by the Pathway button. The user can check if a physical unit of
closely located genes (e.g., genes in an operon) would form a
functional unit of related proteins that appear at close positions in
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 20, 2013
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
33
Nucleic Acids Research, 1994, Vol. 22, No. 1Nucleic Acids Research, 1999, Vol. 27, No. 1 33
Figure 3. The comparative genome map in KEGG. (a) An overview of
comparing Mycoplasma genitalium (horizontal) and Mycoplasma pneumoniae
(vertical) genomes is shown where each dot represents significant amino acid
sequence similarity of two genes. (b) The zoom-up window for the boxed area
in (a) is shown where each gene name can be identified and pre-calculated
homologous gene strings can optionally be displayed in color.
the pathway. By clicking on the List button in the genome map,
the user can also invoke a sequence similarity search to see if a
stretch of genes would match a functional unit in the pathway.
The co-linearity of genes between two genomes is quite useful
for identification of clusters of orthologous genes. KEGG
provides the comparative genome map for identification of such
clusters and for functional annotation of newly sequenced
genomes (Fig. 3). The comparative genome map is analogous to
the dot matrix for comparing two nucleotide or amino acid
sequences. Here, a dot represents significant sequence similarity
between two genes at the amino acid sequence level. To present
this map, the sequence similarity scores are pre-computed by
SSEARCH for all pairs of organisms and homologous gene
clusters are pre-identified so that they can be optionally
highlighted in the map.
Ortholog group tables
The ortholog group table is a summary table that represents
functional correlations in the pathway, physical (positional)
correlations in the genome, and evolutionary (sequence similar-
ity) correlations among species. Currently there are about 4800
genes that belong to about 140 groups of functional units. The
ortholog group table is most useful as a reference data set for
functional annotations. KEGG provides a computational tool to
search against the ortholog group tables for sequence similarity
of a set of query sequences (see below).
A case in point is the annotation of ABC transporters. A typical
ABC transporter consists of a substrate-binding protein, two
membrane proteins, and two ATP-binding proteins. The genes for
these molecular components usually form an operon, and there
are many paralogous genes that are responsible for the transport
of different substances. If a set of query sequences that are located
at physically close positions in the genome match against all
components, it is a good indication that the transporter unit is
correctly reconstructed. Since the KEGG ortholog group table for
ABC transporters is functionally categorized (9), the pattern of
matches and their similarity scores can be used to deduce
substrate specificity.
Molecular catalogs and LIGAND database
The KEGG molecular catalogs are intended to provide functional
and structural classifications of proteins, RNAs, other biological
macromolecules, chemical substances and molecular assemblies.
However, the organization is still rudimentary except for
enzymes. The information of chemical compounds, enzyme
molecules, and enzymatic and non-enzymatic reactions is stored
in the LIGAND database as described in the accompanying paper
(5). Based on this database KEGG provides several molecular
catalogs for classifications of enzymes and a preliminary
classification of chemical compounds.
FUNCTIONAL GENOMICS
Pathway reconstruction with reference maps
The KEGG reference maps for metabolic pathways represent
biochemical knowledge containing all chemically identified
reaction pathways. The constraint of the genome, i.e., a list of
enzymes encoded in the genome, will reconstruct organism-
specific pathways, which are represented by coloring of boxes in
the KEGG pathway maps (Fig. 1). Furthermore, the constraint of
operons will often predict functional units or conserved pathway
motifs, which are represented by additional coloring in the KEGG
pathway maps (Fig. 2). The operon information probably reflects
a regulatory unit of transcription. Thus, it is easy to see how the
information of gene expression profiles can be used as still
another constraint against the KEGG reference pathway maps. In
fact, KEGG provides a tool to color the pathway maps in order to
visualize, for example, the microarray patterns of gene expression
profiles.
Table 3 shows the list of currently available tools for search and
analysis of KEGG pathway maps and genome maps. The
user-interfaces for these tools can be accessed from the KEGG
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 20, 2013
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
 Nucleic Acids Research, 1999, Vol. 27, No. 134
Table 3. Computational tools in KEGG
table of contents page. The pathway reconstruction tools in the
category of prediction tools are based on sequence similarity
search that involves a set of query sequences at a time to see if a
pathway is correctly reconstructed. At the moment, there are two
versions of the reconstruction tools. One is to search against
the KEGG pathway maps: http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg-bin/
mk_homology_pathway_html , and the other is to search against
the ortholog group tables: http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg-bin/
srch_orth_html . The former contains a larger data set of
pathways but the search is made against single organisms. The
latter is limited to selected portions of the pathways (pathway
motifs or functional units), but the search is made against multiple
alignments of organisms and tends to produce better results.
Pathway reconstruction from binary relations
It is often the case that no homology can be found when searching
against the KEGG reference pathways, which suggests that the
current biochemical knowledge is not sufficient to predict a
pathway. If there is a missing portion in the reconstructed
metabolic pathway, KEGG provides a tool to predict alternative
paths with alternative enzymes. The tool actually computes all
possible reaction pathways between two compounds from a set of
substrate–product relations, i.e., from a set of enzymes (5):
http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg-bin/mk_pathcomp_html
This tool also has a feature called query relaxation to
incorporate grouping or hierarchy of relations. Whenever any
member of the group is identified in the genome by sequence
similarity (e.g., an enzyme in the same hierarchy of EC numbers),
the entire group is incorporated for computation (e.g., to represent
wider substrate specificity). This effectively increases the number
of substrate–product relations and expands possible reaction
pathways.
This type of computation, which we call pathway reconstruc-
tion from binary relations, can be performed in a more general
way. A binary relation can be a substrate–product relation in
metabolic pathways, a gene–gene interaction observed in gene
expression profiles, or a protein–protein interaction observed by
yeast two hybrid system experiments. In practice, the reconstruc-
tion from binary relations works better when the problem size is
not large. For example, if most of the pathway is reconstructed
from the reference but there still remain a few missing enzymes,
then the computation with binary relations may fill the missing
links of fragmented pathways. In addition to the substrate–
product binary relations, KEGG will provide tools to integrate
and compute different types of binary relations. Perhaps this is the
most challenging area of computational problems that have
become accessible by the KEGG project.
AVAILABILITY
The Internet version of KEGG can be accessed at the following
address:
http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/
For strictly academic purposes at academic institutions the
KEGG mirror server package may be installed. The package,
which also includes a minimal set of DBGET/LinkDB, can be
obtained from the KEGG anonymous FTP site:
ftp://kegg.genome.ad.jp/
The mirror package runs on a Solaris or IRIX machine. The
individual databases PATHWAY, GENES, and LIGAND can also
be obtained from this FTP site.
The CD version of KEGG was once distributed and a copy still
exists at the FTP site. However, since the database has become so
large and since the system is undergoing frequent revisions, the
CD version is not supported at the moment. We will redefine the
role of CD and hope to start distributing again. Finally, some of
the search tools are also available at the KEGG mail server:
mailto:pathway@genome.ad.jp
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the Grant-in-Aid for Scientific
Research on the Priority Area ‘Genome Science’ from the
Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture of Japan. The
computation time was provided by the Supercomputer Labora-
tory, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University.
REFERENCES
1 Kanehisa,M. (1997) Trends Genet., 13, 375–376.
2 Goto,S., Bono,H., Ogata,H., Fujibuchi,W., Nishioka,T., Sato,K. and
Kanehisa,M. (1997) Pacific Symp. Biocomput. 1997, 175–186.
3 Ogata,H., Goto,S., Fujibuchi,W. and Kanehisa,M. (1998) BioSystems, 47,
119–128.
4 Goto,S., Nishioka,T. and Kanehisa,M. (1998) Bioinformatics, 14, 591–599.
5 Goto,S., Nishioka,T. and Kanehisa,M. (1999) Nucleic Acids Res., 27,
377–379.
6 Fujibuchi,W., Goto,S., Migimatsu,H., Uchiyama,I., Ogiwara,A.,
Akiyama,Y. and Kanehisa,M. (1998) Pacific Symp. Biocomput. 1998,
683–694.
7 Kanehisa,M. (1997) Trends Biochem. Sci., 22, 442–444.
8 Bono,H., Ogata,H., Goto,S. and Kanehisa,M. (1998) Genome Res., 8,
203–210.
9 Tomii,K. and Kanehia,M. (1998) Genome Res., 8, 1048–1049.
10 Benson,D.A., Boguski,M.S., Lipman,D.J., Ostell,J. and Ouellette,B.F.
(1998) Nucleic Acids Res., 26, 1–7.
11 Ermolaeva,O., Rastogi,M., Pruitt,K.D., Schuler,G.D., Bittner,M.L.,
Chen,Y., Simon,R., Meltzer,P., Trent,J.M. and Boguski,M.S. (1998) Nature
Genet., 20, 19–23.
12 Bairoch,A. and Apweiler,R. (1998) Nucleic Acids Res., 26, 38–42
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 20, 2013
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
