Stringent doxycycline-dependent control of gene
activities using an episomal one-vector system
Georg W. Bornkamm*, Christian Berens1, Conny Kuklik-Roos, Jean-Marie Bechet2,
Gerhard Laux, Ju¨rgen Bachl, Martin Korndoerfer, Martin Schlee, Michael Ho¨lzel,
Anastassia Malamoussi, Rob D. Chapman, Falk Nimmerjahn3, Josef Mautner3,
Wolfgang Hillen1, Hermann Bujard4 and Jean Feuillard5
GSF-Institut fu¨r Klinische Molekularbiologie und Tumorgenetik, Marchioninistrasse 25, D-81377 Mu¨nchen,
Germany, 1Lehrstuhl fu¨r Mikrobiologie der Universita¨t Erlangen-Nu¨rnberg, Staudtstrasse 5, D-91058
Erlangen, Germany, 2Guest scientist, UMR 6551 Universite´ de Caen, F-14074 Caen, France, 3Klinische
Kooperationsgruppe, Pa¨diatrische Tumorimmunologie, Kinderklinik der Technischen Universita¨t Mu¨nchen,
Germany, 4Zentrum fu¨r Molekulare Biologie der Universita¨t Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, D-69120
Heidelberg, Germany and 5UMR CNRS 6101, Faculte´ de Me´decine de Limoges et Laboratoire d’He´matologie,
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Dupuytren, 2, Avenue Martin Luther King, F-87042 Limoges, France
Received July 21, 2005; Revised and Accepted August 19, 2005
ABSTRACT
Conditional expression systems are of pivotal import-
ance for the dissection of complex biological phe-
nomena. Here, we describe a novel EBV-derived
episomally replicating plasmid (pRTS-1) that carries
all theelements forconditionalexpressionofageneof
interest via Tet regulation. The vector is characterized
by (i) low background activity, (ii) high inducibility in
the presence of doxycycline (Dox) and (iii) graded
response to increasing concentrations of the inducer.
The chicken beta actin promoter and an element
of the murine immunoglobin heavy chain intron
enhancer drive constitutive expression of a bicis-
tronic expression cassette that encodes the highly
Dox-sensitive reverse tetracycline controlled trans-
activator rtTA2S-M2 and a Tet repressor-KRAB fusion
protein (tTSKRAB) (silencer) placed downstream of an
internal ribosomal entry site. The gene of interest is
expressed from the bidirectional promoter Ptetbi-1
that allows simultaneous expression of two genes,
of which one may be used as surrogate marker for
the expression of the gene of interest. Tight down
regulation is achieved through binding of the silencer
tTSKRAB to Ptetbi-1 in the absence of Dox. Addition of
Dox releases repression and via binding of rtTA2S-M2
activates Ptetbi-1.
INTRODUCTION
One of the most powerful approaches for the dissection of
complex biological processes is the ability to individually
manipulate the activity of a single gene or a few genes within
the context of a cell or a living organism. The tetracycline-
regulatable gene expression system (Tet system) has, for a
number of reasons, gained wide acceptance. By adapting
prokaryotic transcription control elements to the eukaryotic
transcriptional machinery, a highly selective regulatory circuit
was established (1), which greatly profited from the excep-
tional specificity of interaction between operator and repressor
of the Tn10-encoded tetracycline resistance operon (2). The
system is robust and works efficiently not only in a variety of
cultured cells of different origin, but also in whole organisms
including yeast, Dictyostelium, Drosophila, amphibia and
mammals such as rodents and non-human primates (3,4).
Two complementary systems have been developed in which
the addition of the tetracycline derivative doxycycline (Dox)
either switches transcription of a target gene off (tTA or ‘Tet
Off’ system) (1) or on (rtTA or ‘Tet On’ system) (5). An addi-
tional advantage of the system is that it also enables control of
the level of gene expression by titrating the dose of Dox.
Moreover, there is a wealth of information on the pharmaco-
logy and pharmacokinetics of tetracycline and its derivatives,
which is of particular value for in vivo applications.
The Tet system, as initially designed, consists of two com-
ponents: a tetracycline controlled transcriptional activator
(tTA or rtTA) and a tTA/rtTA responsive promoter Ptet (6)
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +49 89 7099510; Fax: +49 89 7099500; Email: bornkamm@gsf.de
Present address:
Falk Nimmerjahn, Department of Immunology and Autoimmune Diseases, Rockefeller University, NY, USA
 The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 16 e137
doi:10.1093/nar/gni137
directing the transcription of the gene of interest. Bidirectional
tTA/rtTA responsive promoters, Ptetbi-1 have been developed,
allowing the coordinate expression of two genes, of which one
may be used as a reporter for the expression of the gene of
interest (6,7). For reasons discussed earlier (1,6), the best
results are obtained when the genes encoding the two com-
ponents of the Tet system including the genes of interest, are
introduced into cell lines or transgenic animals separately from
each other in a two-step procedure, whereby in a first step,
cell lines or, for example, mouse lines are generated that
produce tTA or rtTA appropriately. These lines are generally
suitable for introducing a variety of genes of interest controlled
by Ptet or Ptetbi-1. In the case of cell lines, this second step
is accomplished by a second transfection and selection of
appropriate clones, whereas for transgenic animals double
transgenic individuals are obtained by breeding (4,8). This
procedure avoids co-integration of the two transcriptional
units and thus, crosstalk between the promoter driving the
tTA/rtTA genes and Ptet. An additional advantage of this pro-
cedure is that well-characterized transactivator-expressing cell
lines are available suitable for the transfer of a Ptet controlled
target gene. At the mouse level, a ‘zoo’ of 150 mouse lines
has been described, transgenic for either the tTA or rtTA genes
under the control of a cell type specific promoter, or for various
genes of interest controlled by Ptet, thus, allowing a multitude
of combinations for in vivo studies (4).
There are, however, numerous applications where a reliable
one-step transfer of Ptet controlled genes along with the tTA/
rtTA encoding transcription unit would be of great advantage
or even essential. They include the transfer of Tet-regulated
genes into cell lines or primary cells that are difficult to trans-
fect and/or subject to subsequent selection processes. More-
over, various approaches in gene therapy rely on the controlled
expression of therapeutic genes, which should be transmitted
ex vivo or in vivo in a simple one-step procedure. Last but not
least, it would often be convenient to quickly generate cells
that allow the control of a gene function for a given period of
time. Accordingly, various vectors have been described car-
rying the entire Tet-regulatory circuit of which some establish
themselves as episomes and, thus, avoid the influence of
chromosomal integration sites on Ptet as well as on the pro-
moter driving the tTA/rtTA gene (9–13). However, episomally
existing transcription units are not subject to the same chro-
matin suppression seen when integration in an appropriate
chromosomal locus has occurred. As a consequence, a signi-
ficant tTA/rtTA-independent activity of Ptet may be observed,
as also experienced in transient expression studies. Ptet can,
however, be shielded from such unspecific activation by
tetracycline-controlled transcriptional silencers (tTS) (14),
and tightly regulated adenoviral vectors making use of rtTA
in combination with tTSkid have been described (15,16).
Here, we report on the development of a broadly applicable
EBV-based vector that contains all the elements for control-
ling the activity of a gene of interest via Dox. We show that
the vector stably replicates in EBV-positive and -negative
cells and demonstrates tight regulation by controlling growth
inhibitory genes. The design of the vector facilitates the
exchange of individual elements, particularly of target genes
and, thus, makes the system useful for a variety of experi-
mental applications, both in human and, contrary to expecta-
tion (17), also in rodent cell systems.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cloning of pRT-1 and pRTS-1
Details of the construction and the DNA sequence of pRT-1
and pRTS-1 are available upon request.
Cell culture
Cells were cultivated in growth media consisting of
RPMI1640 supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS),
1% non-essential amino acids, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 2 mM
L-glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin and 0.1 mg/ml streptomycin
at 37C in 5% CO2. For growth in 96-well plates, 100 mM
a-thioglycerol, 3 mM sodium pyruvate and 20 nM
bathocuproine-disulfonate were additionally added (18,19).
TGR-1 rat fibroblasts were cultured at 8% CO2.
Transient transfection and quantification of eGFP,
NGF receptor and luciferase expression
DNA (10–20 mg) was transfected into 107 cells by electro-
poration in 400 ml Optimem (Invitrogen) at 230 V and 960 mF
using a Biorad electroporation apparatus leaving 40–60% of
the cells alive. Immediately after electroporation, cells were
resuspended in 1 ml FCS and 9 ml growth medium without
FCS was added. Cells were incubated in tissue culture flask at
37C and 5% CO2. After two days in culture, cells were coun-
ted, an aliquot treated with Dox, and eGFP and NGF receptor
expression quantified by flow cytometry using FACScan. NGF
receptor staining was performed using HB8737 mouse mono-
clonal antibody at a dilution of 1:50 as primary antibody and
phycoerythrin (PE)-labelled secondary goat anti-mouse IgG at
1:200 (Jackson labs). Luciferase activity was determined using
a Berthold luminometer as described previously (20).
Stable transfection and establishment of cell lines by
limited dilution
Electroporation was carried out as described above and the
cells were allowed to recover in 10 ml growth medium for two
days at 37C and 5% CO2. Cells were counted and plated into
96-well plates in 100 ml at a density of 500, 50 and 5 viable
cells per well. Cells were cultivated in growth medium sup-
plemented additionally with 100 mM a-thioglycerol, 3 mM
sodium pyruvate and 20 nM bathocuproine-disulfonate. After
5–6 days, 100 ml supplemented growth medium was added
containing 250 mg/ml or 300 mg/ml hygromycin B for BJAB or
Raji cells, respectively. Replacing 50 ml of the cell supernatant
with supplemented fresh selection medium weekly, the
hygromycin B concentration was slowly increased to a final
concentration of 250 mg/ml hygromycin B for BJAB and
300 mg/ml for Raji cells. Within the next 2–4 weeks, hygro-
mycin B resistant cells grew out. If cell lines grew out in <30%
of the wells, the outgrowing cells were regarded as single cell
clones. When an appropriate cell density was reached, cells
were expanded successively into 48 and 24 well plates, and
finally into 75 ml tissue culture flasks and maintained in cul-
ture under hygromycin B selection in the absence of Dox.
HLA class II restricted T cell recognition
BL30-B95.8 cells were co-transfected with 10 mg pRTS-M1
(encoding the matrix protein M1 gene of human influenza
virus) and 10 mg pCMV-NGFR. After 48 h of transfection,
e137 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 16 PAGE 2 OF 11
live cells were incubated with the a-NGF receptor mouse
monoclonal antibody HB8737 (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA)
for 15 min on ice. After removal of unbound antibody by
washing, cells were incubated for 10 min with a MicroBeads
coupled goat-anti-mouse antibody (Miltenyi Biotec), and
MACS-purified. After expansion of the cells, M1 protein
expression was induced by addition of 1 mg/ml Dox to the
culture medium. Two days later, the transfected cells were
co-cultured with the M1-specific CD4+ T cell clone E5 and
T cell stimulation was monitored by measuring GM-CSF
release into the medium (21).
Transfection of TGR-1 rat fibroblasts
In general, 6 · 105 TGR-1 cells were transfected with 6 mg
of pRTS-1 DNA using PolyFect (Quiagen) and expanded in
200 mg/ml hygromycin B for at least 2 weeks. Selection was
performed either in the presence or in the absence of Dox.
Cells expanded in the absence of Dox were treated with
1 mg/ml Dox for 24 h to activate conditional gene expression.
For proliferation assays, TGR-1 cells were transfected with
6 mg of either the vector expressing luciferase (pRTS-1), or,
instead of luciferase, the gene encoding the nucleolar protein
Bop1wt (pRTS-Bop1), or its N-terminal deletion mutant
Bop1D (pRTS-Bop1D). Plasmids encoding for Bop1 wt and
Bop1Dwere kindly provided by D. Pestov, and used for further
cloning into pRTS-1 constructs. Transfected cells were expan-
ded under 200 mg/ml hygromycin B selection for 2 weeks
in the absence of Dox, and eGFP expression subsequently
determined by flow cytometry 24 h after the addition of Dox.
Episomal replication of the plasmids was visualized by gel
electrophoresis in 1% agarose after lysis of the cells in the gel
(22). To evaluate the copy number, different number of Raji
cells were included as well as TGR-1 cells to which different
amounts of pRTS-1 DNA had been added.
RESULTS
Design of the episomal expression vector pRTS-1
All functional elements required for tetracycline regula-
tion were placed on one contiguous AscI–NotI restriction
fragment of 9.7 kb (Figure 1). This fragment comprises two
expression cassettes, one that responds to Dox, and a second
conferring Dox responsiveness. The latter is composed of the
chicken-beta-actin promoter (CAG) flanked by the mouse
immunoglobulin heavy chain intron enhancer (Em) and drives
expression of two genes encoding rtTA2S-M2 (23) and
tTSKRAB (24) separated by an internal ribosomal entry site
(IRES). The rtTA2S-M2 is an optimized version of the original
rtTA, exhibiting significantly reduced affinity to tetO in
absence of Dox and a highly increased sensitivity to Dox
(23). Conversely, tTSKRAB binds to tetO only in the absence
of Dox (or tetracycline) and dissociates when an effector is
added. The use of natural sequence variants of TetR ensures
that the reverse Tet-transactivator and the Tet-silencer can
only homo- and not heterodimerize (24,25). Simultaneous
expression of both Tet-controlled transcriptional regulators
from the same bicistronic expression cassette should confer
active repression of Ptet in the absence of Dox, whereas repres-
sion is relieved and activity of Ptet is induced by the addition
of Dox (14,16). The chicken-beta-actin promoter was selected
because it is active in many cell types including ES cells,
and also in transgenic mice. Furthermore, it appears to be
less sensitive to epigenetic silencing than many widely used
viral promoters (26,27). As the research of some of us is
focused on Epstein–Barr virus and B cell lymphomagenesis,
the Em intron enhancer was included for efficient expression of
Dox-controlled regulators in B cells.
The Dox-responsive expression cassette is composed of
a bidirectional promoter, driving expression of two genes in
a coordinated fashion, one of which encoding the firefly luci-
ferase, the other eGFP. The luciferase gene is flanked by SfiI
sites that generate non-cohesive ends that can be used as uni-
versal cloning sites for genes of interest. Generation of non-
cohesive sites by digestion with SfiI guarantees that neither
the vector nor the insert can self-ligate, thereby ensuring high
cloning efficiency (28). The luciferase gene is followed by the
b-globin intron and polyadenylation site. The eGFP gene is
flanked by unique SwaI and BglII sites and can be replaced
by other genes, for example, the truncated version of the
NGF receptor leaving the SV40 polyadenylation signal in
place (Figure 1).
The vector backbone comprises the ampicillin-resistance
gene, the bacterial colE1 origin of replication, an optimized
Figure 1. Schematic map of pRTS-1. The vector is described in detail in
Results. SA and SD denote splice donor and acceptor sites. The rabbit b-globin
intron and polyadenylation site is placed behind the luciferase gene (luc). The
bicistronic expression cassette driving expression of rtTAs-M2 and tTSKRAB,
separated by an internal ribosomal entry site (IRES), is placed behind the
chicken b-actin intron and transcribed from a promoter/enhancer consisting
of the mouse heavy chain intron enhancer (Em) and the chicken b-actin pro-
moter (CAGp). Ptetbi-1 denotes the bidirectional tetracycline-regulated promo-
ter, oriP the EBV episomal origin of replication carrying the family of repeats
(FR) and the dyad symmetry element (DS). EBNA1, the EBV gene EBNA1;
bla, b-lactamase; SVp, the SV40 early promoter; ori, the bacterial origin of
replication derived from pMB1; and hyg, the hygromycin phosphotransferase
gene.
PAGE 3 OF 11 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 16 e137
hygromycin B resistance gene driven by the SV40 early
enhancer-promoter, the EBV episomal origin of replication
(oriP) and the EBNA1 gene (17). The SV40 enhancer-
promoter is flanked by unique Bst1107I and SnaBI sites,
and the hygromycin B resistance gene by SnaBI and NotI
so that the promoter, the gene encoding the selectable marker
or both can be replaced. The EBNA1 gene is transcribed
from a cryptic promoter in pBR322, and is derived from
the original episomal EBV vector described by Yates et al.
(17). The modified hygromycin B resistance gene is derived
from pAT76 (29). In pAT76, the Kozak sequence has been
optimized and cryptic splice sites have been removed. The
vector has been designated pRTS-1 (reverse transactivator
silencer-1). A vector lacking IRES-tTSKRAB but otherwise
identical was generated for comparison and has been
designated pRT-1.
BJAB cells were transiently transfected by electroporation
with pRTS-1 or the corresponding vector lacking the Tet-
silencer tTSKRAB (pRT-1), treated with 1 mg/ml Dox or left
untreated. Luciferase activity was measured in cell lysates
after 48 h. As shown in Figure 2A, luciferase activity was
slightly higher in cells transfected with the control vector
lacking tTSKRAB and treated with Dox. There was, however,
a dramatic difference in the luciferase activity of cells that
had not been treated with Dox. The difference in luciferase
activity +/ Dox was 30-fold for pRT-1, and due to the
low background, 1000-fold for pRTS-1. Dox-dependent
co-expression of the two genes driven by Ptetbi-1 was verified
by FACS analysis of Raji cells transfected with a construct in
which the luciferase gene had been replaced by a bicistronic
expression cassette encoding activation-induced deaminase
(AID) and the truncated NGF receptor separated by an IRES
(Figure 3).
Low luciferase and eGFP background of human B
lymphoma cells transfected with pRTS-1
To study inducibility and background of expression, BJAB
and Raji cells were transfected with pRT-1 and pRTS-1:
72 h after transfection, cells were seeded in 96-well plates
at 5, 50, and 500 cells per well, and hygromycin B selection
was started after another three days. Cell lines growing out
at the lowest cell density were regarded as single cell clones,
and cultured in duplicates: 48 h after addition of Dox to one
or both, luciferase and eGFP expression were quantified
(Figure 2B and C). This experiment led to three important
observations. First, not all hygromycin B-resistant cell clones
express the gene of interest upon Dox treatment. Second, even
though we are dealing with episomally replicating vectors,
there is variation among different cell clones in terms of
inducibility by Dox and the basal level of expression in the
absence of Dox. Third, and most importantly, simultaneous
expression of tTSKRAB along with rtTA2S-M2 reduced the
background by 1–2 orders of magnitude without significantly
affecting inducibility by Dox: 9 out of 10 pRTS-1 transfected
clones exhibited a barely measurable background activity in
the absence of Dox (Figure 2C). In about one-fifth of pRTS-1
transfected clones, the low background was associated with
response of >80% of the cells to Dox. Whether the variation
in expression observed within one clone is due to rapidly
evolving heterogeneity in expression or due to outgrowth of
more than one clone within one well, cannot be discriminated
at present. Due to the low background and varying inducib-
ility, the factor of induction varied between 1000- and
140 000-fold in cells transfected with pRTS-1, whereas
it was typically in the range of 30- to 100-fold in cells trans-
fected with pRT-1. The vector replicated episomally and
the copy numbers in BJAB cells varied between 3 and 10
(data not shown). Three representative clones of each group
are depicted in Figure 2B and C.
To test whether induction of gene expression from the
pRTS-1 vector is reversible, eGFP was induced by addition
of Dox to one of the pRTS-1 transfected BJAB cell clones
followed by removal of Dox by three consecutive washes.
Due to its long half-life, eGFP levels decreased only slowly
over time: 19 days after removal of Dox, eGFP expression
had reached almost the basal background level of uninduced
cells. Re-addition of Dox revealed a very similar pattern of
expression as observed in the first round of induction (data not
shown). This shows that, as expected, the Dox-controlled
activation/repression system transferred by pRTS-1 works
in a reversible fashion.
pRTS-1 driven antigen-specific T cell stimulation
is strictly dependent on Dox
T cell receptor-dependent recognition of antigen by CD4+ and
CD8+ T cells is a very sensitive process that is known to
require only a few peptide molecules per cell (30). To assess
the tightness of the Dox-regulated vector, we cloned the gene
encoding the influenza matrix protein M1 into pRTS-1,
and transfected the construct into the Burkitt lymphoma
line BL30-B95.8 that expresses HLA-DR13, the restriction
element for the M1-specific T cell clone E5 (21). Upon
co-culture of untreated and Dox-treated BL30-B95.8 cells
with the M1-specific CD4+ T cell clone, antigen-specific T
cell stimulation was quantified by measuring GM-CSF release
into the medium. As shown in Figure 4, GM-CSF release was
strictly dependent on Dox treatment. We conclude that expres-
sion of influenza matrix protein M1 in BL30-B95.8 cells in the
absence of Dox is below the critical threshold for eliciting
GM-CSF release by the M1-specific CD4+ T cell clone.
Stable expression of an inhibitor of cell proliferation
in rat TGR-1 fibroblasts
To test whether the vector also works in rodent fibroblasts,
non-transformed rat TGR-1 cells were transfected with
pRTS-1, and eGFP expression was monitored before and
after selection with hygromycin B. If cells were selected
with hygromycin B in the presence of Dox, large foci of
green fluorescent cells grew out (Figure 5A). If selection
was performed by hygromycin B in the absence of inducer
and Dox added after 4 weeks, large foci of green cells were
equally visible (Figure 5B), whereas no green fluorescent cells
were apparent in the absence of Dox (Figure 5C). In TGR-1
cells, the majority of cells that were selected by hygromycin B
also responded to Dox. Southern blot analyses of cells lysed
in the agarose gel before gel electrophoresis (22) revealed
that the vector was episomally replicated in TGR-1 cells
(Figure 5G).
The highest challenge for a conditional vector system is the
establishment of cell clones that express—upon addition of
e137 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 16 PAGE 4 OF 11
the inducer—a toxic molecule or an inhibitor of cell prolif-
eration. Low basal expression of the inhibitor in the absence of
Dox may select for clones that do not express the inhibitor
at all. To address the question whether cell lines can be
established that express an inhibitor in a conditional fashion,
an N-terminal deletion mutant of the nucleolar protein Bop1
(Bop1D) was cloned into pRTS-1. This mutant has been
shown before to act as a dominant negative mutant of Bop1
and as an inhibitor of cell proliferation (31,32). TGR-1 cells
were transfected by electroporation and selected for hygro-
mycin B resistance. Dox was then added to the cultures, and
eGFP expression and cell proliferation were monitored in the
Figure 2. Reduction of background by the expression of tTSKRAB. (A) BJAB cells (107) were transfected with 10 mg pRT-1 and pRTS-1 DNA by electroporation.
Cells were left untreated or treated with 1 mg/ml Dox immediately after electroporation and luciferase activity measured in cell extracts after 48 h. The relative light
units of untreated cells are given above the columns. (B and C) Three BJAB cell lines were transfected with pRT-1 (B) or pRTS-1 (C), expanded in the absence of Dox,
and analysed2 months after transfection. Cells were treated with Dox or left untreated and were analysed for luciferase and eGFP expression 48 h after Dox addition.
The luciferase activities of uninduced cells and the factor of inducibility are presented in the left panels. The differences in the factor of inducibility of pRT-1- and
pRTS-1-transfected cells are due to the background activity in the absence of Dox. Note that the pattern of eGFP induction is not uniform in the different BJAB cell
lines, even within one cell line. This is most probably due to the fact that the cell lines arising in individual wells of 96-well plates are not of clonal origin.
PAGE 5 OF 11 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 16 e137
transfected cells. As shown in Figure 5F, switching on expres-
sion of Bop1D reduced proliferation strongly (and of Bop1
wild type weakly). Yet, regardless of whether luciferase,
Bop1-wt or Bop1D had been co-expressed with eGFP, there
was no difference, neither in the number of cells expressing
eGFP (Figure 5D) nor in the level of eGFP expression
(Figure 5E) upon addition of Dox. We conclude that repres-
sion of Bop1D expression in the off-state was sufficiently
efficient to establish stable cell lines conditional for this
growth inhibitor.
Gradual induction of gene expression by tetracycline
and Dox at the single cell level
Addition of increasing amounts of Dox or tetracycline had
revealed a dose-dependent increase in the amount of luciferase
activity in previous experiments (data not shown). A gradual
increase in luciferase activity with increasing Dox concentra-
tion is compatible with two interpretations. First, it might
indicate that each single cell responds to an increase in
Dox in a dose-dependent manner. Alternatively, it is also
compatible with the model that each individual cell is able
to discriminate between two states only, the off- and the on-
state, and that an increase in Dox concentration would increase
the likelihood that an individual cell is switching from the off-
to the on-state. To discriminate between both models, eGFP
expression was analysed with increasing Dox concentration.
If the first model is correct, we would expect to see a gradual
shift in the eGFP expression peak with increasing Dox
concentration from absent, to low, over medium, to high
expression. According to the second model, we would expect
that the peak of eGFP-negative cells decreases, while a peak
of highly eGFP-positive cells increases with increasing Dox
concentration. The experiment revealed that gradual gene
expression can indeed be achieved at a single cell level. Appar-
ently, repression can be efficiently relieved at 1–2 ng/ml Dox
(Figure 6A), presumably without affecting activation as has
been shown previously (14). This conclusion is supported by
Figure 3. Simultaneous equivalent gene expression from both sides of the bidirectional promoter visualized at the single cell level. (A) Staining control of
untransfected Raji cells. In (B) and (D), the luciferase gene was replaced by a bicistronic expression cassette encoding activation-induced deaminase and a truncated
NGF receptor separated by an internal ribosomal binding site (IRES). In (C), the eGFP gene was replaced by a truncated NGF receptor gene and the luciferase gene
was deleted by inserting a short stuffer inserted bridging the two SfiI sites. NGF receptor and eGFP expression was monitored by FACS staining in the absence (B) and
presence of 1 mg/ml Dox (C and D). The double-negative cells represent untransfected Raji cells.
Figure 4. BL30-B95.8 cells transfected with pRTS-1-M1 (M1 gene of influ-
enza virus) elicit an antigen-specific CD4+ T cell response only in the presence
and not in the absence of Dox. Transfected BL30-B95.8 cells were co-cultured
with the M1-specific CD4+T cell clone E5. T cell stimulation was monitored by
measuring GM-CSF release into the medium.
e137 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 16 PAGE 6 OF 11
the notion that the mean fluorescence intensity reached at this
low Dox concentration equals that obtained with vectors lack-
ing tTSKRAB in the absence of Dox (see also Figure 3B). At
concentrations of 5–100 ng/ml Dox, the promoter is activated
in a graded fashion resulting in a broad peak of eGFP-positive
cells moving from the left to the right with increasing Dox
concentration (Figure 6A). The reverse transactivator respon-
ded only poorly to tetracycline and was by about three orders
of magnitude less sensitive to tetracycline than to Dox [(23);
data not shown].
Figure 5. TGR-1 cells were transfected with 6 mg pRTS-1 DNA and expanded in 200 mg/ml hygromycin B for 4 weeks either in the presence (A) or in the absence of
Dox (B and C). Cells expanded in the absence of Dox were treated with 1 mg/ml Dox for 24 h (B), or left untreated (C). Cells were visualized by light microscopy
(upper panels of A, B and C) and fluorescence microscopy (lower panels). In (D–F), TGR-1 cells were transfected with 6 mg of either the vector expressing luciferase
(pRTS-1), or, instead of luciferase, the gene encoding the nucleolar protein Bop1 wt, or its N-terminal deletion mutant Bop1D. Transfected cells were expanded under
hygromycin B selection (200 mg/ml) for 2 weeks and eGFP expression determined by flow cytometry 24 h after the addition of Dox (D and E). (F) Equal numbers of
cells transfected with luciferase, Bop1, and Bop1Dwere plated, Dox added and cell numbers determined after 6 days. The data are presented as percentage of control
cells expressing luciferase. (G) Episomal replication of the plasmids was visualized by gel electrophoresis in 1% agarose after lysis of the cells in the gel (22). To
evaluate the copy number, different number of Raji cells were included as well as TGR-1 cells to which different amounts of pRTS-1 had been added. Lanes (a)–(e)
contain TGR-1 cells transfected with pRTS-1 (a), and vector expressing the nucleolar proteins or mutants WDR12 (b), WDR12 DNle (c), Bop1 (d) and Bop1D (e).
PAGE 7 OF 11 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 16 e137
Inducibility is not stable over time
To study both background of expression and inducibility over
time, in a long-term experiment, BJAB cells were transfected
with pRTS-1 and several clones cultured in the absence of Dox
for 5 and 9 months. Dox was added to aliquots of the cultures
and eGFP expression monitored after 2, 5 and 9 months.
Impaired inducibility was already evident after 5 months
(Figure 7). After 9 months, clone H11 had retained its indu-
cibility whereas clone B12 did not respond to Dox anymore
(data not shown). Four additional clones cultured over 9
months had also lost their responsiveness to Dox. Remarkably,
not only was inducibility lost or decreased over time, also the
background of eGFP expression appeared to be considerably
higher in cells that had lost their responsiveness to Dox
(Figure 7 and data not shown). The latter observation argues
for the fact that expression of the bicistronic rtTA2S-M2-
tTSKRAB transactivator-silencer cassette may not be stable
over time in culture.
DISCUSSION
We describe here the prototype of a Dox-inducible episomal
vector designated pRTS-1. This vector was designed to
accommodate all the elements required for Dox-regulated
gene expression on one episomally replicating plasmid includ-
ing the gene of interest. The hallmark of pRTS-1 is its low
background and its high inducibility in the absence and pres-
ence of Dox, respectively. Low background expression in the
off-state was demonstrated by using an antigen-specific T cell
stimulation assay and by establishing a cell line expressing a
strong inhibitor of cell proliferation. To study antigen pre-
sentation in the off- and the on-state, BL30-B95.8, a Burkitt
lymphoma line infected with EBV B95.8 in vitro, was trans-
fected with pRTS-1 encoding influenza matrix protein M1.
These cells elicited an antigen-specific response in an M1-
specific CD4+ T cell clone only if Dox was added, and not
in the absence of Dox. As growth inhibitory protein, a dom-
inant negative mutant of the nucleolar protein Bop1 that lacks
231 amino acids of the N-terminus and inhibits cell prolifera-
tion (31,32) was conditionally expressed from pRTS-1 in rat
TGR-1 cells. Stably transfected cell lines could be established
that exhibited pronounced cell cycle arrest upon addition of
Dox. The tight regulation of the gene of interest observed in
these experiments makes pRTS-1 a very useful experimental
tool. Importantly, the vector enables the expression of a gene
of interest in a graded fashion by titrating the Dox concentra-
tion. The vector carries the EBV plasmid origin of replication
as well as EBNA1, the viral protein binding to oriP and main-
taining episomal replication and segregation of the episome to
daughter cells synchronously with the cell cycle. A bidirec-
tional promoter is used to express the gene of interest. The
second gene driven by the bidirectional promoter may encode
a second protein to express a heterodimeric protein in an
inducible fashion, or may encode a surrogate marker gene,
like eGFP, to monitor expression of the gene of interest. The
truncated NGF receptor gene may be used alternatively to sort
those cells that respond to Dox. We have verified at the single
cell level that the two genes transcribed from the bidirectional
promoter are indeed expressed simultaneously (Figure 3). That
both genes are also transcribed and expressed at an equivalent
level has been carefully demonstrated by Hasan et al. in trans-
genic mice (33).
Despite these very useful properties, the vector also has its
limitations: pRTS-1 was initially designed for use in human B
lymphoma cell lines and EBV-immortalized cells. It soon
became apparent that not all cells selected by the dominant
marker indeed respond to Dox. To overcome this problem, we
routinely use eGFP or truncated NGFR to trace those cells that
respond to Dox and do express the gene of interest. But there is
not only variation in the inducibility of individual cells or cell
clones, there is also variation in their inducibility over time.
Upon in vitro cultivation of transfected BJAB cell clones for
Figure 6. Graded increase of eGFP expression of pRTS-1 transfected TGR-1
cells with increasing Dox concentration. TGR-1 cells transfected with pRTS-1
were plated in six-well plates and different concentrations of Dox added (A).
The numbers depicted in the histograms represent ng/ml Dox. Mean fluores-
cence of eGFP expression was plotted versus the Dox concentration in a double
logarithmic plot (B). Note that, although the peak of eGFP expressing cells is
very broad at intermediate Dox concentrations (25–100 ng/ml), induction does
not follow an ‘all or none’ pattern.
e137 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 16 PAGE 8 OF 11
9 months, inducibility decreased significantly. It appears that
the price to be paid for the efficiency savings using an epi-
somal one-plasmid system is its limited stability over time.
Additional work is required to define the reason(s) for this
limited stability. There may be great variability between dif-
ferent cell lines. EBV-positive and -negative Burkitt lymph-
oma lines with so-called group I phenotype appear to be
particularly difficult to work with in terms of transfection
efficiency, heterogeneity and stability as compared with, for
instance, TGR-1 rat fibroblasts (see Figure 5). The role of
epigenetic factors regulating or limiting stability has to be
defined. The fact that not only inducibility by Dox, but also
repression was lost, argues for the fact that expression of the
bicistronic rtTA2S-M2-tTSKRAB cassette has not been stable
over time. To be able to select for expression of the bicistronic
reverse transactivator-silencer cassette, we now are construct-
ing a tricistronic expression cassette that expresses the puro-
mycin or hygromycin B resistance gene from a second IRES.
Limited expression of transfected or transduced DNA over
time is, however, not only a problem of this vector system. In
cell culture, genes that are subject to negative transcripitonal
regulation are prone to silencing by epigenetic mechanisms
over time (34). It is thus advisable to study the biological
readout of the transfected gene of interest as soon
as sufficient numbers of cells are available for the analysis.
To speed up this process, we routinely co-transfect a non-
replicating plasmid that encodes the truncated NGFR, a splice
variant of CD34, or the extracellular domain of rat CD2 along
with pRTS-1 or its derivative expressing the gene of interest
and sort the transfected cells 48 h after electroporation using
magnetic beads. The sorted cells are then cultivated in bulk in
the presence of hygromycin B to expand the transfected cells.
Depending on the initial transfection efficiency, sufficient cell
numbers will be available after 2 to 4 weeks to study the
phenotype of induced versus uninduced cells. For transient
gene delivery, an adenovirus vector system expressing both,
the reverse Tet-transactivator and the Tet-silencer, has been
described (16).
The vector also replicates episomally in rat fibroblasts and is
tightly regulated. Surprisingly, there was much less variation
in the inducibility at the single cell level than in human B
lymphoma lines. The vast majority of cells resistant to
Figure 7. Inducibility of eGFP expression is impaired when pRTS-1-transfected BJAB cells are cultivated in the absence of Dox over 5 months. Panels A and C
represent two different pRTS-1-transfected BJAB cell lines analysed for eGFP expression in the absence and presence of Dox after 2 months in culture. Panels B and
D show the pattern of eGFP expression in the same BJAB-transfected cell lines after 5 months in culture.
PAGE 9 OF 11 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 16 e137
dominant marker selection also responded to Dox. This
allowed us to establish cell lines that express dominant
negative mutants of Bop1 inhibiting cell proliferation.
The vector has also been used successfully as an integrating
vector in DT40 cells after linearization. As expected, there was
marked clonal variation in the inducibility by Dox in various
clones (Ertongur and Jungnickel, Personal communication).
In summary, pRTS-1 is the prototype of an improved
Dox-regulated episomal ‘all-in-one’ vector characterized by
low background, high inducibility and graded response to
increasing Dox concentrations. It is particularly suited to
study the biological impact of unknown genes in an isogenic
system, for example, genes that have been identified by
differential expression on microarrays.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to Victor Steimle for providing the SfiI cassette
and D. Pestov for providing Bop1 and Bop1D. We thank the
students Franziska Bartsch, Michael Schurig and Stefan Spiller
for help with intermediate cloning steps and/or the generation
of transfected cell lines. The work was supported by DFG
(SFB455 and SFB 473) and the Wilhelm Sander-Stiftung
through grants 2002.124-1 and 2003.043-1. Funding to pay
the Open Access publication charges for this article was
provided by GSF-Forschungszentrum fu¨r Umwelt und
Gesundheit.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Gossen,M. and Bujard,H. (1992) Tight control of gene expression in
mammalian cells by tetracycline-responsive promoters.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 89, 5547–5551.
2. Hillen,W. and Berens,C. (1994) Mechanisms underlying expression of
Tn10 encoded tetracycline resistance. Annu. Rev. Microbiol., 48,
345–369.
3. Gossen,M., Bonin,A.L. and Bujard,H. (1993) Control of gene activity in
higher eukaryotic cells by prokaryotic regulatory elements.
Trends Biochem. Sci., 18, 471–475.
4. Berger,S. and Bujard,H. (2003) Novel mouse models in biomedical
research: the power of dissecting pathways by quantitative control of gene
activities. In Dathe,S. (ed.), Handbook of Experimental
Pharmacology. Springer Verlag, Heidelberg.
5. Gossen,M., Freundlieb,S., Bender,G., Muller,G., Hillen,W. and
Bujard,H. (1995) Transcriptional activation by tetracyclines in
mammalian cells. Science, 268, 1766–1769.
6. Baron,U. and Bujard,H. (2000) Tet repressor-based system for regulated
gene expression in eukaryotic cells: principles and advances.
Methods Enzymol., 327, 401–421.
7. Baron,U., Freundlieb,S., Gossen,M. and Bujard,H. (1995) Co-regulation
of two gene activities by tetracycline via a bidirectional promoter.
Nucleic Acids Res., 23, 3605–3606.
8. Kistner,A., Gossen,M., Zimmermann,F., Jerecic,J., Ullmer,C.,
Lubbert,H. and Bujard,H. (1996) Doxycycline-mediated quantitative and
tissue-specific control of gene expression in transgenic mice.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 93, 10933–10938.
9. Feuillard,J., Schuhmacher,M., Kohanna,S., Asso-Bonnet,M., Ledeur,F.,
Joubert-Caron,R., Bissieres,P., Polack,A., Bornkamm,G.W. and
Raphael,M. (2000) Inducible loss of NF-kappaB activity is associated
with apoptosis and Bcl-2 down-regulation in Epstein-Barr
virus-transformed B lymphocytes. Blood, 95, 2068–2075.
10. O’Brien,K., Otto,K. and Rao,R.N. (1997) Construction and
characterization of a one-plasmid system for the controlled expression of
genes in mammalian cells by tetracycline. Gene, 184, 115–120.
11. Schuhmacher,M., Staege,M.S., Pajic,A., Polack,A., Weidle,U.H.,
Bornkamm,G.W., Eick,D. and Kohlhuber,F. (1999) Control of cell
growth by c-Myc in the absence of cell division. Curr. Biol.,
9, 1255–1258.
12. Wu,K.J., Grandori,C., Amacker,M., Simon-Vermot,N., Polack,A.,
Lingner,J. and Dalla-Favera,R. (1999) Direct activation of TERT
transcription by c-MYC. Nature Genet., 21, 220–224.
13. Wu,K.J., Polack,A. and Dalla-Favera,R. (1999) Coordinated regulation of
iron-controlling genes, H-ferritin and IRP2, by c-MYC.
Science, 283, 676–679.
14. Freundlieb,S., Schirra-Muller,C. and Bujard,H. (1999) A tetracycline
controlled activation/repression system with increased potential for gene
transfer into mammalian cells. J. Gene Med., 1, 4–12.
15. Mizuguchi,H., Xu,Z.L., Sakurai,F., Mayumi,T. and Hayakawa,T. (2003)
Tight positive regulation of transgene expression by a single adenovirus
vector containing the rtTA and tTS expression cassettes in separate
genome regions. Hum. Gene Ther., 14, 1265–1277.
16. Salucci,V., Scarito,A., Aurisicchio,L., Lamartina,S., Nicolaus,G.,
Giampaoli,S., Gonzalez-Paz,O., Toniatti,C., Bujard,H., Hillen,W. et al.
(2002) Tight control of gene expression by a helper-dependent adenovirus
vector carrying the rtTA2(s)-M2 tetracycline transactivator and repressor
system. Gene Ther., 9, 1415–1421.
17. Yates,J.L., Warren,N. and Sugden,B. (1985) Stable replication of
plasmids derived from Epstein–Barr virus in various mammalian cells.
Nature, 313, 812–815.
18. Brielmeier,M., Bechet,J.M., Falk,M.H., Pawlita,M., Polack,A. and
Bornkamm,G.W. (1998) Improving stable transfection efficiency:
antioxidants dramatically improve the outgrowth of clones
under dominant marker selection. Nucleic Acids Res.,
26, 2082–2085.
19. Falk,M.H., Meier,T., Issels,R.D., Brielmeier,M., Scheffer,B. and
Bornkamm,G.W. (1998) Apoptosis in Burkitt lymphoma cells is
prevented by promotion of cysteine uptake. Int. J. Cancer,
75, 620–625.
20. Dudziak,D., Kieser,A., Dirmeier,U., Nimmerjahn,F., Berchtold,S.,
Steinkasserer,A., Marschall,G., Hammerschmidt,W., Laux,G. and
Bornkamm,G.W. (2003) Latent membrane protein 1 of Epstein-Barr virus
induces CD83 by the NF-kappaB signaling pathway. J. Virol., 77,
8290–8298.
21. Nimmerjahn,F., Kobelt,D., Steinkasserer,A., Menke,A., Hobom,G.,
Behrends,U., Bornkamm,G.W. and Mautner,J. (2003) Efficient
generation and expansion of antigen-specific CD4+ T cells by
recombinant influenza viruses. Eur. J. Immunol., 33, 3331–3341.
22. Gardella,T., Medveczky,P., Sairenji,T. and Mulder,C. (1984) Detection
of circular and linear herpesvirus DNA molecules in mammalian
cells by gel electrophoresis. J. Virol., 50, 248–254.
23. Urlinger,S., Baron,U., Thellmann,M., Hasan,M.T., Bujard,H. and
Hillen,W. (2000) Exploring the sequence space for tetracycline-
dependent transcriptional activators: novel mutations yield
expanded range and sensitivity. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 97,
7963–7968.
24. Forster,K., Helbl,V., Lederer,T., Urlinger,S., Wittenburg,N. and
Hillen,W. (1999) Tetracycline-inducible expression systems with
reduced basal activity in mammalian cells. Nucleic Acids Res,
27, 708–710.
25. Baron,U., Schnappinger,D., Helbl,V., Gossen,M., Hillen,W. and
Bujard,H. (1999) Generation of conditional mutants in higher eukaryotes
by switching between the expression of two genes. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA, 96, 1013–1018.
26. Chung,S., Andersson,T., Sonntag,K.C., Bjorklund,L., Isacson,O. and
Kim,K.S. (2002) Analysis of different promoter systems for efficient
transgene expression in mouse embryonic stem cell lines.
Stem Cells, 20, 139–145.
27. Sawicki,J.A., Morris,R.J., Monks,B., Sakai,K. and Miyazaki,J. (1998)
A composite CMV-IE enhancer/beta-actin promoter is ubiquitously
expressed in mouse cutaneous epithelium. Exp. Cell Res.,
244, 367–369.
28. Steimle,V., Otten,L.A., Zufferey,M. and Mach,B. (1993)
Complementation cloning of an MHC class II transactivator mutated in
hereditary MHC class II deficiency (or bare lymphocyte syndrome).
Cell, 75, 135–146.
29. Giordano,T.J. and McAllister,W.T. (1990) Optimization of the
hygromycin B resistance-conferring gene as a dominant selectable marker
in mammalian cells. Gene, 88, 285–288.
e137 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 16 PAGE 10 OF 11
30. Krogsgaard,M., Huppa,J.B., Purbhoo,M.A. and Davis,M.M.
(2003) Linking molecular and cellular events in T-cell
activation and synapse formation. Semin. Immunol., 15,
307–315.
31. Pestov,D.G., Strezoska,Z. and Lau,L.F. (2001) Evidence of p53-
dependent cross-talk between ribosome biogenesis and the cell cycle:
effects of nucleolar protein Bop1 on G(1)/S transition. Mol. Cell. Biol., 21,
4246–4255.
32. Strezoska,Z., Pestov,D.G. and Lau,L.F. (2000) Bop1 is a mouse
WD40 repeat nucleolar protein involved in 28S and 5. 8S RRNA
processing and 60S ribosome biogenesis. Mol. Cell. Biol., 20,
5516–5528.
33. Hasan,M.T., Schonig,K., Berger,S., Graewe,W. and Bujard,H. (2001)
Long-term, noninvasive imaging of regulated gene expression in living
mice. Genesis, 29, 116–122.
34. Ayyanathan,K., Lechner,M.S., Bell,P., Maul,G.G., Schultz,D.C.,
Yamada,Y., Tanaka,K., Torigoe,K. and Rauscher,F.J.,III (2003)
Regulated recruitment of HP1 to a euchromatic gene induces mitotically
heritable, epigenetic gene silencing: a mammalian cell culture model
of gene variegation. Genes Dev., 17, 1855–1869.
PAGE 11 OF 11 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 16 e137
