The Vertebrate Genome Annotation (Vega)
database
J. L. Ashurst*, C.-K. Chen, J. G. R. Gilbert, K. Jekosch, S. Keenan, P. Meidl, S. M. Searle,
J. Stalker, R. Storey, S. Trevanion, L. Wilming and T. Hubbard
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire CB10 1SA, UK
Received August 23, 2004; Revised and Accepted October 28, 2004
ABSTRACT
The Vertebrate Genome Annotation (Vega) database
(http://vega.sanger.ac.uk) has been designed to be a
community resource for browsing manual annota-
tion of finished sequences from a variety of verteb-
rate genomes. Its core database is based on an
Ensembl-style schema, extended to incorporate cura-
tion-specific metadata. In collaboration with the
genome sequencing centres, Vega attempts to
present consistent high-quality annotation of the
published human chromosome sequences. In addi-
tion, it is also possible to view various finished
regions from other vertebrates, including mouse
andzebrafish.Vegadisplaysonlymanuallyannotated
gene structures built using transcriptional evidence,
which canbe examined in the browser. Attempts have
been made to standardize the annotation procedure
across each vertebrate genome, which should aid
comparative analysis of orthologues across the
different finished regions.
INTRODUCTION
In 1999 the DNA sequence of chromosome 22, the first human
chromosome to be fully sequenced, was published (1). It pro-
vided a snapshot of the complexity of genes within a chro-
mosomal landscape and set the standard for manual annotation,
which the rest of the community was to follow. Yet as sequen-
cing methods improved and researchers wanted to analyse
unfinished, as well as finished, sequence data, new automated
annotation methods were established and genome browsers
such as Ensembl (2) and the UCSC Genome Browser (3)
provided automatic genome annotation for the draft human
genome assembly finished in 2001 (4). After the announce-
ment of the finishing of the human genome in 2003, attention
turned to producing a gold standard manually curated view of
the human gene set.
The Vertebrate Genome Annotation (Vega) database is spe-
cifically dedicated to the browsing and maintenance of manu-
ally annotated data. Initially designed to view the manual
annotation produced by the Havana group at the Sanger Insti-
tute (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/HGP/havana/), the project has
expanded to include the manual annotation from the major
centres (including RIKEN, the Joint Genome Institute, Geno-
scope andWashingtonUniversityGenome SequencingCenter)
involved in the sequencing and annotation of the human gen-
ome. Currently, it contains the annotation for 10 human chro-
mosomes (6, 7, 9, 10, 13, 14, 20, 22, X and Y), but as the public
consortium aims to complete the publication of its analysis by
the end of 2004, it is planned that Vega will contain the com-
pletemanual annotation of the human genome by the beginning
of 2005. Manual annotation is currently more accurate at iden-
tifying splice variants, pseudogenes, polyadenylation [poly(A)]
features, non-coding genes and complex gene arrangements
and clusters than automated methods. At the time of writing,
the Vega human database contains over 15 000 gene loci and
approximately 29 500 transcripts. In addition, Vega contains
manual annotation of other vertebrate species and it is possible
to view small chromosomal regions, e.g. mouseDel36H (5) and
non-contiguous finished clone annotation of zebrafish. Figure 1
represents an overview of the processes and software involved
in producing the data shown in Vega.
GENE CLASSIFICATION AND STANDARDIZATION
OF ANNOTATION
Since different research groups are performing high-quality
manual annotation of different chromosomes, it has been
essential to standardize a set of definitions to describe the
annotation of different gene features. A common factor is
that all annotated gene structures must be supported by tran-
scriptional evidence, either from cDNA, expressed sequence
tag (EST) or protein sequences. The following are the gene
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +44 1223 494910; Fax: +44 1223 494919; Email: jla1@sanger.ac.uk
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use permissions, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org.
ª 2005, the authors
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 33, Database issue ª Oxford University Press 2005; all rights reserved
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D459–D465
doi:10.1093/nar/gki135
indices used in human chromosome 20 annotation (6) and
adopted by the Vega database as standard:
(i) Known genes: identical to human cDNA or protein
sequences identified by LocusLink ID in the LocusLink
database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/).
(ii) Novel genes: have an open reading frame (ORF) and are
identical or homologous to known cDNAs (vertebrates)
and/or proteins (all species).
(iii) Novel transcripts: similar to novel genes but no ORF can
be unambiguously assigned.
(iv) Putative genes: homologous to spliced ESTs (vertebrates)
but devoid of significant ORF/CDS.
(v) Pseudogenes: sequences homologous to proteins (over
>50% of the subject length) with a disrupted CDS and
for which an active gene can generally be found at another
locus.
These definitions have also been used in the recent annotation
of chromosome 14 together with an additional classification
‘predicted genes’. Genoscope used this new classification to
describe a gene based on ab initio predictions for which at least
Figure 1. The VEGA annotation pipeline. The pipeline shown here is for human. The automated analysis for other species has slight differences. The searches are
run on our computer farm and stored in an EnsemblMySQL database using the Ensembl analysis pipeline system (20). Nearly all searches and prediction algorithms
are run on repeat masked sequence, the exception being CpG island prediction [see cpgreport in the EMBOSS (21) application suite]. RepeatMasker (http://
ftp.genome.washington.edu/RM/RepeatMasker.html) is used to mask interspersed repeats, followed by TRF (22) to mask tandem repeats. Nucleotide sequence
databases are searched with wuBLASTN (http://blast.wustl.edu), and significant hits are re-aligned to the unmasked genomic sequence using est2genome (23). The
Uniprot protein database (http://www.uniprot.org) is searched with wuBLASTX, and the accession numbers of significant hits are looked up in the Pfam database
(24). The hidden Markov models for Pfam protein domains are aligned against the genomic sequence using Genewise (25) to provide annotation of protein
domains (Halfwise in the figure).We also run a number of ab initioprediction algorithms: genscan (26) and fgenesh (27) for genes, tRNAscan (28) to find tRNAgenes
andEponineTSS (29),which predicts transcription start sites. The annotators use theOtterlace interface to create and edit genes,which are stored in theOtter database
(13).Where predicted transcript structures fromEnsembl are available these can be viewed fromwithin the Otterlace interface andmay be used as starting templates
for gene curation. Annotation in the Otter database is submitted to the EMBL/GenBank/DDBJ nucleotide database. The database for the VEGA website is
periodically created by a publishing process that involves the copying and reformatting of data from the Otter genes and automated pipeline databases.
D460 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
one exon is covered by biological or similarity data (unspliced
ESTs, mouse or Tetraodon genomes or expression data from
Rosetta) (7). These predicted genes as well as putative genes
provide targets for experimental validation (8). Immunoglo-
bulin segments and pseudogenes found on chromosomes 22
(1) and 14 (7) have also been given unique tags. These clas-
sifications have been extended across all the species in Vega
with the only exception being that the specific model organism
databases, e.g. the Mouse Genome Database (MGD) (http://
www.informatics.jax.org/) (9) and the Zebrafish Information
Network (ZFIN) nomenclature database (http://zfin.org/
zf_info/nomen.html) (10), are used as the point of reference
for known genes in place of LocusLink (11).
Using correct gene nomenclature is an important method for
maintaining consistency in an annotation database, especially
when comparing haplotypes or syntenic regions. The annota-
tion staff involved in the Vega project, therefore, interact
closely with the nomenclature committees from the Human
Genome Organisation (HUGO, HGNC) (12), ZFIN and MGD.
If an approved symbol is not available for a gene locus, an
interim internal identifier is used, which is usually in the for-
mat clonename.number, e.g. RP11-694B14.5.
The locus and its associated transcripts and exons
are also attributed stable, versioned database IDs
(e.g. OTTHUMG00000017411, OTTHUMT00000046000),
generated and tracked within the Otter database (see Figure
2). Whenever a gene locus is edited the version number will
increase and the date of the change will be saved, allowing the
user to find out when the annotation was last updated. Otter is
an extended Ensembl database with an associated client/server
system that is able to support interactive updating of annota-
tion (13). The annotation stored in the Otter backend for the
Vega database is either curated directly using Otterlace (a Perl/
TK curation interface wrapped around Acedb) or via Otter
XML uploads, such as from external groups. Multiple versions
of any genome assembly can be stored in the system, with tools
to migrate annotation to the latest assembly. Although the
finished sequence is highly accurate (better than 1 base
error in 10 000) over megabase regions, assemblies are fre-
quently revised as chromosomal regions are finished, particu-
larly in regions of genome duplication and frequently in
conjunction with feedback from manual annotation. For refer-
ence sequences we can also expect assemblies to be revised as
re-sequencing reveals a more common haplotype.
In an attempt to define a common standard for manual
annotation across the human genome, collaborators involved
in submitting annotation data to Vega have held a series of
human annotation workshops (HAWK) (http://www.sanger.
ac.uk/HGP/havana/hawk.shtml; see http://www.sanger.ac.uk/
HGP/havana/docs/guidelines.pdf). Currently, there are many
different transcript structures available in different browsers
for various loci. With the aim of producing a single gold
standard gene set, NCBI, UCSC, Ensembl and the Sanger
Institute have started a collaboration to analyse the human
gene sets produced by RefSeq, Ensembl and Vega and to
define a non-redundant set of protein coding transcripts
(HCDSs) that all collaborators can agree on.
ADDITIONAL FEATURES IN Vega
Unlike most of the browsers currently available containing
automated gene builds, the manually annotated data shown
in Vega does not have a particular emphasis on displaying only
Figure 2. Curated Locus Report giving information about the PAX2 locus on chromosome 10.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D461
coding transcripts. Of transcripts annotated within Vega,
50% have no ORF associated with them. There are many
possible properties of these transcripts, such as their being
non-coding RNAs, transcripts involved in nonsense mediated
mRNA decay (possibly regulating coding genes) (14) or par-
tial transcripts where the ORF has not yet been experimentally
determined. Each transcript constructed has spliced evidence
associated with it, which can be viewed in Vega, so the user
can assess the validity of each transcript. In addition to coding
genes, 30% of gene structures are pseudogenes. These have
been subdivided into unprocessed and processed categories in
the recently finished chromosomes, so the user can identify
whether the pseudogene has arisen from a duplication event or
retrotransposition.
Polyadenylation sites and signals, identified manually by
examining 30 EST and cDNA data, are visible within the
ContigView webpage of Vega (see Figure 3). The features
are not associated with a particular transcript as it is difficult
using 30 EST data to associate a poly(A) feature with a
particular alternative variant when they share the same
30-untranslated region. Single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) can also be viewed in ContigView and are
Figure 3. ContigView webpage from human chromosome 6 Vega displaying poly(A) signals/sites and SNPs associated with SLC29A1 and HSPCB loci.
D462 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
mapped from the Glovar database (http://www.glovar.org/
Homo_sapiens/) onto the clones within Vega. Glovar contains
all the human dbSNP data in addition to SNPs derived from
comparing public human reads from the trace repository
(http://trace.ensembl.org/) with the current genome build.
The functional classification of the SNPs (coding, untranslated
region, Intronic, Other) is derived frommapping onto the Vega
annotation. Currently SNPs are available only for the human
chromosomes but they will eventually be available for all
genomic sequences within Vega.
In addition to displaying the latest working assembly for
each chromosome from individual public human sequencing
consortia, Vega contains the annotated haplotype sequence
available for the major histocompatability complex (MHC)
region on chromosome 6 (15) (see Figure 4). The two common
HLA haplotypes, PG and CX, are strongly associated with
auto-immune diseases including type 1 diabetes and multiple
sclerosis. The two haplotypes differ in their complement com-
ponent C4 genes and MHC class II HLA-DRB genes, and this
comparison can be easily made within ContigView. In a future
Vega release we are planning to use the Ensembl Compara
genome comparison framework to allow us to support Multi-
ContigView pages so that haplotypes can be examined
in parallel and to facilitate browsing the four more human
MHC haplotype regions that will be available at the end
of the year.
The mouse annotation browser within Vega, besides dis-
playing finished regions from the reference mouse strain
(C57BL/6), also displays three regions from the non-obese
diabetic (Nod) strain (16) (see Figure 4). Since several insulin
dependent diabetes (IDD) susceptibility loci have been
mapped onto mouse chromosomes 1 and 3, comparison of
the genomic sequence and genes between the two strains
could be used to highlight functionally important SNPs
(17). The zebrafish genome sequence will be finished and
manually annotated solely by the Sanger Institute. Vega will
be the main site for browsing the annotated data and at present
there are 1164 loci, mostly from individual BAC and PAC
clones. The genome is currently displayed in chromosomes/
linkages groups 1–25 (see Figure 4). In addition, there are two
Figure 4. Different chromosomes and regions annotated from the three different vertebrates currently available in Vega.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D463
‘artificial’ chromosomes, U containing all the clones that could
not be mapped onto the chromosomes yet, and AB containing
clones from the AB strain. Clones that have not yet been
annotated are displayed with all their features derived from
automated computational analysis (repeat masking, ab initio
gene predictions, BLAST searches, etc.) but are shaded in grey
to avoid confusion with the annotated ones.
ACCESSING AND QUERYING DATA
The Vega browser, which is based on the Ensembl web code
and infrastructure, provides a number of standard entry points
such as sequence similarity (BLAST and SSAHA search) and
keyword search. Data can be downloaded using ExportView,
which can dump data in a variety of formats including FASTA,
Gene Feature Format (GFF) and as flat files. Annotation can
also be accessed directly via distributed annotation server
(DAS) data sources. At present, we do not directly provide
data mining via BioMart (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomart/)
since Vega is designed to be updated weekly, which currently
makes rebuilding BioMart impractical. It is possible to use
EnsMart (18), available at Ensembl (http://www.ensembl.org/
Multi/martview), to query a recent version of the gene struc-
tures from the Vega human database (which are displayed on
the Ensembl website in ContigView). However, the Vega
annotation shown in Ensembl would have been mapped
from the latest chromosome assembly, upon which the anno-
tation was curated and which is displayed in Vega, onto the
current international genome assembly, which inevitably lags
behind. If the assembly in Ensembl differs from that in Vega,
only the annotation that can be cleanly transferred is present.
For the informatician, a more comprehensive search of the
Vega data can be performed using the Ensembl API (http://
www.ensembl.org/Docs).
FEEDBACK AND SUBMITTING DATA
Vega is a community annotation database and feedback from
researchers is essential to produce a gold standard annotation
of the genomes available. Therefore, a webform is provided on
the website (http://vega.sanger.ac.uk/helpdesk/index.html) to
enable the user to contact the Vega team directly and improve
the annotation if additional evidence is available. Since the
browser is not restricted to annotation of whole genomes, we
encourage users to contact vega@sanger.ac.uk to submit man-
ual annotation of vertebrate finished regions they have
sequenced, provided it has been peer reviewed and/or meets
the HAWK standard for annotation.
FUTURE PLANS
We aim to have a fully manually annotated human genome
available by the beginning of 2005. With community support,
we hope to maintain the annotation and update on a weekly
basis. We will also display the latest manual annotation of
the regions as part of the ENCODE project (http://
www.genome.gov/10005107) (19). In addition, annotated
sequences from the mouse and zebrafish genomes, finished
at the Sanger Institute or by the public sequencing centres,
will be released on a chromosome basis in Vega. In collabora-
tion with the MHC consortium we are also planning to release
additional human MHC haplotypes, as well as MHC regions
from dog, cat, pig and rat. Using the comparative analysis
pipeline designed by the Ensembl team we are looking into
producing comparative views for these data to enable the user
to browse easily among different species.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank the Havana, Chromosome 22, Genoscope and
WashU genome annotation groups for providing the annotation
data that have been currently incorporated into Vega. We also
thank the MHC haplotype consortium for providing sequence
and analysis of the MHC haplotypes. We thank the Ensembl
Project for the software that is the basis of the Vega website and
the Otter client/server system and the Glovar project for pro-
viding support for SNPs on Vega.
REFERENCES
1. Dunham,I., Shimizu,N., Roe,B.A., Chissoe,S., Hunt,A.R., Collins,J.E.,
Bruskiewich,R., Beare,D.M., Clamp,M., Smink,L.J. et al. (1999) The
DNA sequence of human chromosome 22. Nature, 402, 489–495.
2. Birney,E., Andrews,T.D., Bevan,P., Caccamo,M., Chen,Y., Clarke,L.,
Coates,G., Cuff,J., Curwen,V., Cutts,T. et al. (2004) An overview of
Ensembl. Genome Res., 14, 925–928.
3. Kent,W.J., Sugnet,C.W., Furey,T.S., Roskin,K.M., Pringle,T.H.,
Zahler,A.M. and Haussler,D. (2002) The human genome browser at
UCSC. Genome Res., 12, 996–1006.
4. Lander,E.S., Linton,L.M., Birren,B., Nusbaum,C., Zody,M.C.,
Baldwin,J., Devon,K., Dewar,K., Doyle,M., FitzHugh,W. et al. (2001)
Initial sequencing and analysis of the human genome. Nature, 409,
860–921.
5. Mallon,A.-M., Wilming,L., Weekes,J., Gilbert,J.G.R., Ashurst,J.,
Peyrefitte,S., Matthews,L., Cadman,M., McKeone,R., Sellick,C.A.
et al. (2004) Organization and evolution of a gene-rich region of the
mousegenome:A12.7-Mb regiondeleted in theDel(13)Svea36Hmouse.
Genome Res., 14, 1888–1901.
6. Deloukas,P., Matthews,L.H., Ashurst,J., Burton,J., Gilbert,J.G.,
Jones,M.,Stavrides,G.,Almeida,J.P.,Babbage,A.K.,Bagguley,C.L.etal.
(2001) The DNA sequence and comparative analysis of human
chromosome 20. Nature, 414, 865–871.
7. Heilig,R., Eckenberg,R., Petit,J.L., Fonknechten,N., Da Silva,C.,
Cattolico,L., Levy,M., Barbe,V., De Berardinis,V., Ureta-Vidal,A. et al.
(2003) The DNA sequence and analysis of human chromosome 14.
Nature, 421, 601–607
8. Ashurst,J.L. and Collins,J.E. (2003) Gene annotation: prediction and
testing. Annu. Rev. Genomics Hum. Genet., 4, 69–88.
9. Blake,J.A., Richardson,J.E., Bult,C.J., Kadin,J.A. and Eppig,J.T. (2003)
MGD: the Mouse Genome Database. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 193–195.
10. Sprague,J., Clements,D., Conlin,T., Edwards,P., Frazer,K., Schaper,K.,
Segerdell,E., Song,P., Sprunger,B. and Westerfield,M. (2003) The
Zebrafish Information Network (ZFIN): the zebrafish model organism
database. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 241–243.
11. Wheeler,D.L., Church,D.M., Edgar,R., Federhen,S., Helmberg,W.,
Madden,T.L., Pontius,J.U., Schuler,G.D., Schriml,L.M., Sequeira,E.
et al. (2004)Database resources of theNationalCenter for Biotechnology
Information: update. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D35–D40.
12. Wain,H.M., Lush,M.J., Ducluzeau,F., Khodiyar,V.K. and Povey,S.
(2004) Genew: the Human Gene Nomenclature Database, 2004 updates.
Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D255–D257.
13. Searle,S.M.,Gilbert,J., Iyer,V. andClamp,M. (2004)Theotter annotation
system. Genome Res., 14, 963–970.
14. Winter,J., Lehmann,T., Krauss,S., Trockenbacher,A., Kijas,Z.,
Foerster,J., Suckow,V., Yaspo,M.L., Kulozik,A., Kalscheuer,V. et al.
(2004) Regulation of the MID1 protein function is fine-tuned by a
complex pattern of alternative splicing. Hum. Genet., 114, 541–552.
D464 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
15. Stewart,C.A., Horton,R., Allcock,R.J., Ashurst,J.L., Atrazhev,A.M.,
Coggill,P., Dunham,I., Forbes,S., Halls,K., Howson,J.M. et al. (2004)
Complete MHC haplotype sequencing for common disease gene
mapping. Genome Res., 14, 1176–1187.
16. Hill,N.J., Lyons,P.A., Armitage,N., Todd,J.A., Wicker,L.S. and
Peterson,L.B. (2000) NOD Idd5 locus controls insulitis and diabetes
and overlaps the orthologous CTLA4/IDDM12 and NRAMP1 loci in
humans. Diabetes, 49, 1744–1747.
17. Wicker,L.S., Chamberlain,G., Hunter,K., Rainbow,D., Howlett,S.,
Tiffen,P., Clark,J., Gonzalez-Munoz,A., Cumiskey,A.M., Rosa,R.L.
et al. (2004) Fine mapping, gene content, comparative sequencing, and
expression analyses support Ctla4 and Nramp1 as candidates for Idd5.1
and Idd5.2 in the nonobese diabetic mouse. J. Immunol., 173, 164–173.
18. Kasprzyk,A., Keefe,D., Smedley,D., London,D., Spooner,W.,
Melsopp,C.,Hammond,M., Rocca-Serra,P., Cox,T. andBirney,E. (2004)
EnsMart: a generic system for fast and flexible access to biological
data. Genome Res., 14, 160–169.
19. The ENCODE Project Consortium (2004) The ENCODE
(ENCyclopedia Of DNA Elements) Project. Science, 306, 636–640.
20. Potter,S.C., Clarke,L., Curwen,V., Keenan,S.,Mongin,E., Searle,S.M.J.,
Stabenau,A., Storey,R. and Clamp,M. (2004) The Ensembl Analysis
Pipeline. Genome Res., 14, 934–941.
21. Rice,P., Longden,I. and Bleasby,A. (2000) EMBOSS: the European
Molecular Biology Open Software Suite. Trends Genet., 16, 276–277.
22. Benson,G. (1999) Tandem repeats finder: a program to analyze DNA
sequences. Nucleic Acids Res., 27, 573–580.
23. Mott,R. (1997) EST_GENOME: a program to align spliced DNA
sequences to unspliced genomic DNA. Comput. Appl., 13, 477–478.
24. Bateman,A., Coin,L., Durbin,R., Finn,R.D., Hollich,V., Griffiths-
Jones,S., Khanna,A., Marshall,M., Moxon,S., Sonnhammer,E.L.L. et al.
(2004) The Pfam Protein Families Database. Nucleic Acids Res., 32,
D138–D141.
25. Birney,E., Clamp,M. and Durbin,R. (2004) GeneWise and Genomewise.
Genome Res., 14, 988–995.
26. Burge,C. and Karlin,S. (1997) Prediction of complete gene structures in
human genomic DNA. J. Mol. Biol., 268, 78–94.
27. Salamov,A.A. and Solovyev,V.V. (2000) Ab initio gene finding in
Drosophila genomic DNA. Genome Res., 10, 516–522.
28. Lowe,T.M. and Eddy,S.R. (1997) tRNAscan-SE: a program for
improved detection of transfer RNA genes in genomic sequence.Nucleic
Acids Res., 25, 955–964.
29. Down,T.A. and Hubbard,T.J.P. (2002) Computational detection and
location of transcription start sites in mammalian genomic DNA.
Genome Res., 12, 458–461.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D465
