PRIDE: a public repository of protein and peptide
identifications for the proteomics community
Philip Jones1,*, Richard G. Coˆte´1, Lennart Martens2, Antony F. Quinn1, Chris F. Taylor1,
William Derache1, Henning Hermjakob1 and Rolf Apweiler1
1EMBL Outstation, European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI), Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridge, CB10 1SD, UK and 2Department of Medical Protein Research, Flanders Interuniversity
Institute for Biotechnology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University, Rommelaere Institute,
Building D, A. Baertsoenkaai 3, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium
Received August 15, 2005; Revised and Accepted October 27, 2005
ABSTRACT
PRIDE, the ‘PRoteomics IDEntifications database’
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride) is a database of protein
and peptide identifications that have been described
in the scientific literature. These identifications will
typically be from specific species, tissues and sub-
cellular locations, perhaps under specific disease
conditions. Any post-translational modifications
that have been identified on individual peptides can
be described. These identificationsmay be annotated
with supporting mass spectra. At the time of writing,
PRIDE includes the full set of identifications as sub-
mitted by individual laboratories participating in the
HUPO Plasma Proteome Project and a profile of the
human platelet proteome submitted by the University
ofGhent inBelgium.By late2005PRIDE isexpected to
contain the identifications and spectra generated by
the HUPO Brain Proteome Project. Proteomics labor-
atories are encouraged to submit their identifications
and spectra to PRIDE to support their manuscript
submissions to proteomics journals. Data can be
submitted in PRIDE XML format if identifications are
included or mzData format if the submitter is depos-
iting mass spectra without identifications. PRIDE is a
web application, so submission, searching and data
retrieval can all be performed using an internet brow-
ser. PRIDE can be searched by experiment accession
number, protein accession number, literature refer-
ence and sample parameters including species,
tissue, sub-cellular location and disease state. Data
can be retrieved as machine-readable PRIDE or
mzData XML (the latter for mass spectra without
identifications), or as human-readable HTML.
INTRODUCTION
The vast quantity of data associated with a single proteomics
experiment can become problematic at the point of publishing
the results. Laboratories tend to publish their work in an appro-
priate journal with perhaps a PDF document listing the pro-
teins described. If space allows, the individual peptide
sequences may be included but there is little possibility of
including details of the mass spectra in this format. This
clearly creates difficulties while attempting to reproduce the
work of a laboratory to confirm their results.
Fortunately, the community has recognized and is tackling
this problem through the formation of groups concerned with
the development of standards for the capture and sharing of
proteomics data. One such group is the HUPO Proteomics
Standards Initiative (PSI) (1) who are in the process of devel-
oping standards tackling several aspects of proteomics, includ-
ing ontologies of proteomics related terms, XML schemata
and minimal reporting guidelines.
The Proteomics Identifications database (PRIDE), previ-
ously described by Martens et al. (2) is a PSI compliant public
repository for proteomics identifications to which any proteo-
mics laboratory is welcome to submit data. It is envisaged, but
not mandated, that any such submission would normally be in
the context of the corresponding submission of a manuscript to
a journal describing the identifications submitted to PRIDE.
As such, PRIDE aims to become the proteomics equivalent of
the ArrayExpress database (3) used to capture microarray
experiment data in support of journal publications.
PRIDE is not alone in this endeavor. Several other publicly
available databases exist for the purpose of capturing and
disseminating proteomics data from mass spectrometry.
Such databases include the Global Proteome Machine Data-
base (gpmDB) (4), The Institute for Systems Biology’s
PeptideAtlas (5) and the University of Texas’ Open Proteo-
mics Database (opd) (6). Currently in progress is the devel-
opment of a collaborative agreement to exchange data between
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +44 1223 492610; Fax: +44 1223 494468; Email: pjones@ebi.ac.uk
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D659–D663
doi:10.1093/nar/gkj138
these and other emerging proteomics data repositories,
including PRIDE.
DATABASE DESCRIPTION
What is the scope of PRIDE?
PRIDE can store
(i) The title and description of the experiment, together with
contact details of the submitter.
(ii) Literature references.
(iii) Protein identifications by accession number suppor-
ted by a corresponding list of one or more peptide
identifications.
(iv) For each peptide identified, the sequence and coordin-
ates of the peptide within the protein that it provides
evidence for. Optionally, a reference to any submitted
mass spectra that form the evidence for the peptide
identification.
(v) Any post-translational modifications (natural or artefac-
tual) coordinated in relation to the specific peptide that
they have been found upon.
(vi) A description of the sample under analysis, including but
not limited to the species of origin, tissue, sub-cellular
location (if appropriate), disease state and any other
relevant annotation.
(vii) A description of the instrumentation used to perform the
analysis, including mass spectrometer source, analysers
and detector, instrument settings and software settings
used in data processing to generate peak lists.
(viii) Processed peak lists supporting the identifications in
PRIDE in the versatile PSI mzData format.
PRIDE version 2.0, the release of PRIDE available at the
time of writing, makes use of HUPO PSI deliverables such as
the mzData XML schema (7) for capturing the settings and
output from mass spectrometry work flow, including items
vi–viii listed earlier. At present, the PRIDE XML schema
encompasses the mzData schema with additional elements
to allow protein and peptide identifications and post-
translational modifications to be captured. It is envisaged
that the analysisXML XML schema will be incorporated
into PRIDE following its first release as a finalized schema,
expected by early 2006, replacing large parts of the custom
schema currently present in PRIDE.
Datasets currently available in PRIDE
A significant dataset that is publicly available from PRIDE at
the time of writing is the set of protein and peptide identifica-
tions from the individual laboratories involved in the HUPO
Plasma Proteome Project (8). This project was in part respons-
ible for the requirements statement that initiated the PRIDE
project.
Another publicly available dataset in PRIDE is a profile of
the human platelet proteome (9) submitted by the Department
of Medical Protein Research, Ghent University. This depart-
ment is also scheduled to contribute a substantial dataset iden-
tifying proteolytic cleavage by caspases in apoptotic Jurkat
T-cells (10) as well as a large set of spectra used to evaluate
spectrum quality filtering software (11).
A dataset of protein and peptide identifications describing
the organelle proteome of the secretory pathway is currently
held as private data in PRIDE but is expected to be publicly
available following publication of the related manuscript. At
present this dataset can only be viewed by prior permission of
the submitters.
It is expected that by the end of 2005 PRIDE will also
contain the protein and peptide identifications and related
mass spectra from the HUPO Brain Proteome Project (12)
as a publicly available dataset.
Submission and retrieval of data
Data can be both submitted to and retrieved from PRIDE
through a web interface, using either the PRIDE XML schema,
which embeds mzData as a sub-element to allow inclusion of
details of the spectra, or using the mzData XML schema, in
which case all identifications will be omitted.
Data can also be viewed as a human-readable HTML table
illustrated in Figure 1.
Figure 2 illustrates the search page. Queries can include
experiment identifier, protein accession or identifier, literature
references and sample parameters, including species, tissue,
sub-cellular location and disease. The search results include all
the experiments that match the query, together with options of
how the data should be presented.
Data security in PRIDE: PRIDE as a tool for
journal review
Data submitted to PRIDE is marked as public or private. Pri-
vate data can be shared through a collaborative mechanism
that allows individuals to apply to join a collaboration, their
application then being confirmed or rejected by the creator of
the collaboration. As well as allowing collaborating laborat-
ories to share their data, this mechanism can also be used to
allow manuscript reviewers to access the corresponding
PRIDE entry in a confidential manner on a neutral site.
Use of controlled vocabularies and ontologies in PRIDE
By extending the mechanism designed for the mzData XML
schema, PRIDE makes extensive use of external controlled
vocabularies and ontologies (hereafter ‘CVs’) to annotate ent-
ries. The use of CVs ensures that queries for particular terms
will capture all of the relevant data without omission due to
differences in terminology. As a spin-off of the PRIDE devel-
opment program, a SOAP web service to allow external CVs
to be queried in an intelligent manner has been developed at
the EBI, initially for use by PRIDE (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/
ontology-lookup/). This service allows queries to take advant-
age of the hierarchical nature of ontologies. For example, if a
user requests all protein identifications found in pancreas, the
relevant Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) term will be
looked up in the ontology web service and PRIDE will be
queried for entries relating to the MeSH term ‘Pancreas’ as
well as all child terms, currently in this case including ‘Islets of
Langerhans’, ‘Pancreas, Exocrine’ and ‘Pancreatic Ducts’.
This mechanism assists the user by retrieving all the relevant
data without the need to have a detailed knowledge of the
terms involved.
CVs and ontologies suggested for use in PRIDE include
MeSH (13) for animal anatomy and disease states; Gene
D660 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
Ontology (GO) (14) for sub-cellular location; NEWT (15) for
taxonomy, which is a superset of the NCBI taxonomy (16); the
mass spectrometry ontology being developed by the HUPO
PSI; RESID for naturally occurring post-translational
modifications (17) and UNIMOD for protein modifications
encountered in mass spectrometry experiments (18).
A PRIDE CV has been created for cases where existing CVs
do not include a term required to annotate data in PRIDE.
The use of CVs and ontologies will allow the annotation of
certain specific experimental results such as peptide retention
times for LC-MS experiments or protein quantitation informa-
tion for quantitive or differential proteomics experiments.
Figure 1. An example of PRIDE data in tabulated HTML format.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D661
Where the required CV terms do not exist already, PRIDE can
accommodate these data elements through the use of user
parameters.
PRIDE is an open-source software development project
Care has been taken throughout the development of PRIDE to
ensure that all system components are open-source and freely
available. PRIDE is written in Java and made available under
the open-source Apache license. All the source code are freely
available from the CVS repository (http://sourceforge.net/cvs/
?group_id=122040). PRIDE uses the open-source Object-
Relational Bridge (OJB) (http://db.apache.org/ojb/) API for
database connectivity. As a consequence, PRIDE can easily be
adapted to run on any SQL-based relational database manage-
ment system. Configuration files exist for both Oracle (http://
www.oracle.com) and MySQL (http://www.mysql.com/).
DISCUSSION
Here we consider possible applications of PRIDE from the
perspective of the typical proteomics researcher. PRIDE offers
the user several useful query opportunities including:
 Retrieving all proteomics experiments in which a particular
protein of interest has been observed.
 Downloading proteome datasets of interest in a standard
format for further local analysis.
 Retrieving the complete list of protein identifications (and the
specific peptides found) for a given publication.
 Using the links provided via PRIDE to further explore the
proteins identified.
 Comparison of one’s own results with previous findings to
quickly determine overlap as well as potentially novel
findings.
 Planning of one’s experiments: finding experimental proto-
cols that have already been applied successfully to analyse
your sample or even protein of interest.
 Re-analysing previously published results using your own
techniques.
 Obtaining test sets for training or trying out novel algorithms
(e.g. algorithms for protein or peptide identification).
 Retrieving typical base line proteomes for specific tissues and
species.
 Allowing journal appointed reviewers to analyse thedetails of
the identifications and potentially the supporting spectra as
part of their review in a standardized manner.
FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS
The developers of PRIDE recognize that the system has room
to evolve in several important aspects.
It is important for the future of PRIDE to keep apace with
developments in the HUPO PSI. One important development
of this initiative is the analysisXML XML schema, designed
to hold details of protein and peptide identifications and
Figure 2. The PRIDE Advanced Search form.
D662 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
post-translational modifications, together with cross refer-
ences to the relevant mzData entries describing spectra. It
is intended that analysisXML will be fully supported by
PRIDE for import and export, without modification or data
loss, as soon as possible after the first stable release of the new
analysisXML XML schema.
Submitters of identifications to PRIDE will naturally make
use of their favored protein sequence database against which to
search their spectra. Consequently, PRIDE will quickly fill
with protein accessions and IDs from disparate protein
sequence databases. An important short-term goal of the
PRIDE project is to map all identifications to the UniProt
database (19), including cross references to as many other
protein databases as possible. This work will borrow heavily
from the IntAct project (20), both in terms of code base and
procedures for automatic and human curation.
A long-term goal of the PRIDE project is to provide an
automated program of regular re-analysis of mass spectra
deposited in PRIDE using the most up-to-date protein
sequence databases and available open-source search
algorithms such as X!Tandem (http://www.thegpm.org/
TANDEM/) (21). The submitter’s original identifications
would continue to be available as described in the correspond-
ing manuscript.
The EBI has developed a Distributed Annotation Server
(DAS) (22) service for PRIDE (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/das-
srv/pride/das/) using the BioJava Dazzle servlet (http://
www.biojava.org/dazzle/). This service is publicly available
and can be used to enable DAS clients such as Dasty (23),
designed for visualizing protein sequence and annotation, to
display identifying peptides for the protein specified in the
DAS request.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
PRIDE is supported through BBSRC iSPIDER and HUPO
Plasma Proteome Project funding as well as a EU Marie
Curie fellowship. L.M. is a research assistant of the Fund for
Scientific Research, Flanders (Belgium) (F.W.O. Vlaanderen).
L.M. would like to thank Prof Dr Kris Gevaert and Prof Dr Joe¨l
Vandekerckhove for their support. Funding to pay the Open
Access publication charges for this article was provided by
BBSRC iSPIDER and HUPO.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Orchard,S., Hermjakob,H. and Apweiler,R. (2003) The proteomics
standards initiative. Proteomics, 3, 1374–1376.
2. Martens,L., Hermjakob,H., Jones,P., Adamski,M., Taylor,C., States,D.,
Gevaert,K., Vandekerckhove,J. and Apweiler,R. (2005) PRIDE: the
proteomics identifications database. Proteomics, 5, 3537–3545.
3. Parkinson,H., Sarkans,U., Shojatalab,M., Abeygunawardena,N.,
Contrino,S., Coulson,R., Farne,A., Lara,G.G., Holloway,E.,
Kapushesky,M. et al. (2005) ArrayExpress—a public repository for
microarray gene expression data at the EBI. Nucleic Acids Res., 33,
D553–D555.
4. Craig,R., Cortens,J.P. and Beavis,R.C. (2004) Open source system for
analyzing, validating, and storing protein identification data. J. Proteome
Res., 3, 1234–1242.
5. Deutsch,E.W., Eng,J.K., Zhang,H., King,N.L., Nesvizhskii,A.I., Lin,B.,
Lee,H., Yi,E.C., Ossola,R. and Aebersold,R. (2005) Human Plasma
PeptideAtlas. Proteomics, 5, 3497–3500.
6. Prince,J.T., Carlson,M.W., Wang,R., Lu,P. and Marcotte,E.M. (2004)
The need for a public proteomics repository. Nat. Biotechnol., 22,
471–472.
7. Orchard,S., Hermjakob,H., Taylor,C.F., Potthast,F., Jones,P., Zhu,W.,
Julian,R.K.Jr and Apweiler,R. (2005) Second proteomics
standards initiative spring workshop. Expert Rev. Proteomics, 2,
287–289.
8. Omenn,G.S. (2004) The Human Proteome Organization Plasma
Proteome Project pilot phase: reference specimens, technology platform
comparisons, and standardized data submissions and analyses.
Proteomics, 4, 1235–1240.
9. Martens,L., Van Damme,P., Van Damme,J., Staes,A., Timmerman,E.,
Ghesquiere,B., Thomas,G.R., Vandekerckhove,J. and Gevaert,K. (2005)
The human platelet proteome mapped by peptide-centric proteomics: a
functional protein profile. Proteomics, 5, 3193–3204.
10. Van Damme,P., Martens,L., Van Damme,J., Hugelier,K., Staes,A.,
Vandekerckhove,J. and Gevaert,K. (2005) Caspase-specific and
nonspecific in vivo protein processing during Fas-induced apoptosis.
Nat. Methods, 2, 771–777.
11. Flikka,K.,Martens,L., Vandekerckhove,J., Gevaert,K. and Eidhammer,I.
(2005) Improving the reliability and throughput of mass spectrometry
based proteomics by spectrum quality filtering. Proteomics, in press.
12. Stephan,C., Reidegeld,K., Meyer,H.E. and Hamacher,M. (2005) HUPO
BrainProteomeProject Pilot Studies: bioinformatics atwork.Proteomics,
5, 2716–2717.
13. Lipscomb,C.E. (2000) Medical Subject Headings (MeSH). Bull. Med.
Libr. Assoc., 88, 265–266.
14. Harris,M.A., Clark,J., Ireland,A., Lomax,J., Ashburner,M., Foulger,R.,
Eilbeck,K., Lewis,S., Marshall,B., Mungall,C. et al. (2004) The Gene
Ontology (GO) database and informatics resource.NucleicAcidsRes.,32,
D258–D261.
15. Phan,I.Q., Pilbout,S.F., Fleischmann,W. and Bairoch,A. (2003)
NEWT, a new taxonomy portal. Nucleic Acids Res., 31,
3822–3823.
16. Wheeler,D.L., Barrett,T., Benson,D.A., Bryant,S.H., Canese,K.,
Church,D.M., DiCuccio,M., Edgar,R., Federhen,S., Helmberg,W. et al.
(2005) Database resources of the National Center for Biotechnology
Information. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D39–D45.
17. Garavelli,J.S. (2004) The RESID Database of protein modifications as a
resource and annotation tool. Proteomics, 4, 1527–1533.
18. Creasy,D.M. and Cottrell,J.S. (2004) Unimod: protein modifications for
mass spectrometry. Proteomics, 4, 1534–1536.
19. Apweiler,R., Bairoch,A., Wu,C.H., Barker,W.C., Boeckmann,B.,
Ferro,S., Gasteiger,E., Huang,H., Lopez,R., Magrane,M. et al. (2004)
UniProt: the Universal Protein knowledgebase. Nucleic Acids Res., 32,
D115–D119.
20. Hermjakob,H., Montecchi-Palazzi,L., Lewington,C., Mudali,S.,
Kerrien,S., Orchard,S., Vingron,M., Roechert,B., Roepstorff,P.,
Valencia,A. et al. (2004) IntAct: an open source molecular interaction
database. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D452–D455.
21. Craig,R. and Beavis,R.C. (2004) TANDEM: matching proteins with
tandem mass spectra. Bioinformatics, 20, 1466–1467.
22. Dowell,R.D., Jokerst,R.M., Day,A., Eddy,S.R. and Stein,L. (2001) The
distributed annotation system. BMC Bioinformatics, 2, 7.
23. Jones,P., Vinod,N., Down,T., Hackmann,A., Kahari,A., Kretschmann,E.,
Quinn,A., Wieser,D., Hermjakob,H. and Apweiler,R. (2005) Dasty and
UniProt DAS: a perfect pair for protein feature visualization.
Bioinformatics, 21, 3198–3199.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D663
