Gramene: a bird’s eye view of cereal genomes
Pankaj Jaiswal, Junjian Ni, Immanuel Yap, Doreen Ware1,3, William Spooner1,
Ken Youens-Clark1, Liya Ren1, Chengzhi Liang1, Wei Zhao1, Kiran Ratnapu1,
Benjamin Faga1, Payan Canaran1, Molly Fogleman, Claire Hebbard, Shuly Avraham1,
Steven Schmidt1, Terry M. Casstevens2, Edward S. Buckler2,3, Lincoln Stein1
and Susan McCouch*
Department of Plant Breeding, 240 Emerson Hall, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA, 1Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory, 1BungtownRoad,ColdSpringHarbor,NY11724,USA, 2Institute forGenomicDiversity,Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY 14853, USA and 3USDA-ARS NAA Plant, Soil & Nutrition Laboratory Research Unit, Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
Received September 14, 2005; Revised and Accepted October 31, 2005
ABSTRACT
Rice, maize, sorghum, wheat, barley and the other
major crop grasses from the family Poaceae
(Gramineae) are mankind’s most important source
of calories and contribute tens of billions of dollars
annually to the world economy (FAO 1999, http://
www.fao.org; USDA 1997, http://www.usda.gov).
Continued improvement of Poaceae crops is neces-
sary in order to continue to feed an ever-growing
worldpopulation.However,of themajorcropgrasses,
only rice (Oryza sativa), with a compact genome
of 400 Mbp, has been sequenced and annotated.
The Gramene database (http://www.gramene.org)
takes advantage of the known genetic colinearity
(synteny) between rice and the major crop plant
genomes to provide maize, sorghum, millet, wheat,
oat and barley researchers with the benefits of an
annotated genome years before their own species
are sequenced. Gramene is a one stop portal for
finding curated literature, genetic and genomic data-
sets related to maps, markers, genes, genomes and
quantitative trait loci. The addition of several new
tools to Gramene has greatly facilitated the potential
for comparative analysis among the grasses and
contributes to our understanding of the anatomy,
development, environmental responses and the fac-
tors influencing agronomic performance of cereal
crops. Since the last publication on Gramene data-
base by D. H. Ware, P. Jaiswal, J. Ni, I. V. Yap, X. Pan,
K. Y. Clark, L. Teytelman, S. C. Schmidt, W. Zhao,
K.Changet al. [(2002),PlantPhysiol., 130, 1606–1613],
the database has undergone extensive changes that
are described in this publication.
INTRODUCTION
Gramene is a comparative genome mapping database for
grasses, using the rice genome as an anchor (http://www.
gramene.org). Both automatic and manual data curation are
performed to combine and inter-relate information on the
structure and organization of genomes and genes, functions
of proteins, various maps (genetic, physical and sequence
maps), mapped markers, quantitative trait loci (QTL) and lit-
erature citations (Figure 1A). As an information resource, the
purpose of Gramene is to provide added value to the data that
are initially contributed by a variety of species-specific data-
bases (1–3) and generic data repositories such as Entrez (4).
This facilitates the researchers’ ability to leverage the rice
genomic sequence and genetic information and to compare
and understand the characteristics of genes, genome organ-
ization, pathways and phenotypes in the cereals. Since the
last publication on Gramene (5), the database has undergone
numerous enhancements by the addition of new datasets, tools
and search interfaces as described in the following sections.
The datasets and modules described here are based on release
no.18 (September 2005) of the Gramene database.
MAP SEARCH
Gramene’s central comparative mapping tool is CMap, which
can be accessed from the Gramene website in a variety of ways
(http://www.gramene.org/cmap/index.html). This tool repres-
ents a map as a linear array of interconnected features, which
could correspond to a single linkage group in the case of a
genetic map, to a single contig for a physical map, or to a
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 607 255 0420; Fax: +1 607 255 6683; Email: SRM4@cornell.edu
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D717–D723
doi:10.1093/nar/gkj154
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 25, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
MapsMarkersGenomes
Genes 
Ontology
Function / Expression / Trait
LiteratureProteins
QTL 
Figure 1. (A) A flowdiagramshowing all themodules and datasets (genomes,maps,markers,QTL, genes, proteins, ontologies and literature) present in theGramene
database. Eachmodule connects or links to the information fromone tomanyothermodules as depicted by the arrows.The double headed connections suggest that the
modules link in both directions. (B) Themodified image displayed by the comparativemap tool CMap. TheCMap tool allows a user to add any number ofmaps to the
left and/or right of the reference map. In this case, the reference map is the sequence map of rice chromosome-3 from the mapset called ‘Gramene TIGR
pseudomolecule assembly of IRGSP sequence 2005’. In the first display, the wheat deletion map of chromosome-4D from the mapset ‘Wheat, Physical, EST
2003 (wEST 2003)’ and themaize geneticmap of Chromosome-1 from themapsetMMP IBM2Neighbors 2004were added to the right and left of the referencemap,
respectively. The blue colored lines connecting the maps suggest that there is colinearity (conserved synteny) among rice chromosome-3, wheat 4D and maize 1 as
demonstrated by themarker order on thesemaps. Subsequently, a fourthmapwas added to the display, namely a QTLmap ofmaize chromosome-1 from themap set
‘IowaMo17/M99RIRFLPQTL1996’. This provided away to investigate if themaizeQTL,GRYLD (for the trait Grain yield, i.e. second from top) containsmarkers
that lead to a colinear region of rice. A comparative map from themaize QTLmap to the sequencemap of rice enables a user to readily identify putative homologs in
the conserved region that may be investigated to determine whether they contribute to the same traits in the two species. The markers highlighted in red on the maize
and ricemaps are sharedmarker loci on the differentmaps.Red coloredmarkers in theCMapdisplay indicate that there is a correspondence between thosemarker loci
and markers present in other maps in the display. The displayed label (symbol) for a QTL represents a trait acronym e.g. GRYLD is for the trait Grain yield.
D718 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 25, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
contig or scaffold in the case of an annotated sequence.
Related maps are grouped into map sets, such as the set of
linkage groups produced by a genetic mapping study, or the set
of chromosomes annotated during a sequencing project. To set
up a comparison between different map sets from either the
same or different species or even from different map types, the
researcher first selects a reference map set, and then selects a
reference map (chromosome, linkage group or contig) from
within the set. This reference map serves as the basis for any
comparison that one chooses to make.
Once the reference map image has been rendered, the user is
given the option to select one or two comparative maps. These
comparative maps may be added to both the left and the right
of the previously selected reference map (Figure 1B). The user
may keep adding additional maps, as long as valid compar-
isons are available. Any item that is positioned on a map is
called a feature (e.g. a marker, clone, gene, QTL, etc.) and may
be either a point or an interval. The researcher can click on a
feature to obtain additional information about the feature
including internal links within Gramene or to external
resources. In a comparative map view, the lines that connect
features on one map to those on another map denote corres-
pondences. These correspondences are assigned either auto-
matically (based on a sequence alignment or a feature name) or
manually by a curator following curational guidelines.
Currently the CMap module hosts a total of 159 maps char-
acterized into 6 different types, namely sequence, physical,
deletion, genetic, Maize bin and QTL maps. These maps
belong to 22 different species representing major cereal
crops and include 1 833 720 features of 36 different types.
Since the last publication (5), the CMap section has undergone
major updates by including a greater number of species, map
sets and feature types, in addition to new search, display and
download options. CMap was developed by Gramene in col-
laboration with GMOD (http://www.gmod.org) under open
source licensing.
MARKER SEARCH
Another recently-enhanced feature is Gramene’s marker
module (http://www.gramene.org/markers/index.html). This
module allows user to search the marker collection by typing
any number of marker names in the ‘Marker Name’ search
box, each separated by commas or spaces. To further refine the
search query, the researcher may specify a marker type (e.g.
‘RFLP’) and/or a species (e.g. ‘rice’) e.g. a search for
rice RFLP markers beginning with RZ gives 287 entries
(http://www.gramene.org/db/markers/marker_view?marker_
name¼*RZ*&marker_type_id¼3&species_id¼1&action¼
marker_search). New users can familiarize themselves with
the marker datasets by visiting the web page at http://www.
gramene.org/db/markers/marker_view, where they will find
summaries of all the information available in Gramene
about a given marker, including marker name, synonyms,
type, species and germplasm from which it was derived,
maps on which the marker can be found, genome positions
on the rice genome sequence and the maize physical map,
cross references to the source of the marker, literature citations
and if available, images illustrating the length polymorphisms
(e.g. rice SSR marker RM220 http://www.gramene.org/db/
markers/marker_view?marker_name¼rm220).
Currently the marker module contains a total of 1 308 654
genetic and physical markers of 11 types from 17 different
species. As a result of ongoing curation activity, 67% of the
features found in the map module are also present in the
marker database. Additional curated markers will be added
in future releases.
QUANTITATIVE TRAIT LOCI
A QTL is a statistical construct that identifies a particular
region of the genome as putatively containing one or more
genes associated with a trait. A QTL is represented as an
interval in a genetic linkage group within which the pro-
bability of association is plotted for each marker used in
the mapping experiment. The QTL module (http://www.
gramene.org/qtl/index.html) is a new addition to the Gramene
database. It facilitates the comparative study of QTL across
species by providing researchers with tools to investigate
colinear regions found to carry genes and QTL contributing
to similar traits in different plant species. Gramene does not
currently curate raw QTL segregation data, but emphasizes the
presentation of basic QTL information such as the trait name,
symbol, mapped position on the genetic, cited reference, and
comments in free text (e.g. grain length QTL, CQAL1 http://
www.gramene.org/db/qtl/qtl_display?qtl_accession_id¼CQAL1).
The trait descriptions are mapped to a controlled vocabulary
called the trait ontology (TO), which allows researchers to
relate a trait in one species with a similar trait in another.
Currently the QTL module includes a total of 8410 QTLs
identified for 274 agronomic traits from nine major cereal
crops including rice, maize, oat, barley, wheat (hexaploid
and tetraploid), pearl millet (Pennisetum glaucum), foxtail
millet (Setaria italica) and wild rice (Zizania palustris). For
convenience of searching, the 274 traits are grouped into eight
major trait families related to abiotic and biotic stress, fertility,
anatomy, development, vigor, quality and yield. This dataset
includes >7000 rice QTLs which have been curated by
Gramene staff (J. Ni et al., unpublished data) from published
literature that dates back to the very first rice QTL study in
1994 (6). QTLs for other species were either curated in-house
or contributed by our collaborators at MaizeGDB (2), Grain-
Genes (3), and elsewhere. Future enhancements will include
advanced level of annotation providing information on stat-
istical scores, contributing allele, germplasm, population,
assay environments, and treatment and associations to various
controlled vocabularies (ontologies) described in the ontology
section.
RICE, MAIZE AND ARABIDOPSIS GENOMES
The Genome browser section of Gramene (http://www.
gramene.org/genome_browser) is a graphical display of
annotations on plant genomes, and includes tracks describing
genes, transcripts, peptides, SNPs, repeats, ESTs, markers,
insertion elements, and other features of interest. Currently
we host annotated genome assemblies of rice-japonica (7)
and Arabidopsis (8), as well as a representation of the physical
bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) map of maize (9).
These genomes are displayed using the latest version of the
genome browser developed by the Ensembl project (10).
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D719
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 25, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
AB
D720 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 25, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
The rice genome (http://www.gramene.org/Oryza_sativa/)
serves as the entry point for sequence-based comparative
genomic analyses. We do this by identifying regions of
sequence similarity between rice and other cereal species
using a variety of sequence-based tags including the sequences
of ESTs, proteins, full length cDNAs, flanking sequence tags
(FSTs), microarray probes, BACs and BAC ends, SNPs and
repeat elements. Our mapping protocols use conservative
standards in order to minimize the rate of false correspond-
ences, as described at http://www.gramene.org/documentation/
Alignment_docs/to_Japonica/index.html. In addition, we have
used protein sequence-based orthology information to identify
gene family relationships among Arabidopsis, rice and maize
(Figure 2B) using the Ensembl compara pipeline (http://
www.gramene.org/Oryza_sativa/helpview?se¼1&kw¼
geneview#OrthologuePrediction). The current rice genome
assembly imported from the Osa1 rice genome annotation
database (7) is a new addition that replaced the earlier-reported
BAC clone-wise browser displaying annotation (5).
The maize genome browser (http://www.gramene.org/
Zea_mays/) is based on an FPC physical map developed by
the Arizona Genomics Institute (AGI; http://www.genome.
arizona.edu/fpc/maize/) (9). In addition to the features mapped
by AGI, we have added to this map many sequenced features
from various grass species including rice and maize (http://
www.gramene.org/documentation/Alignment_docs/to_Maize/
index.html). The addition of the Ensembl synteny
viewer (http://www.gramene.org/Oryza_sativa/syntenyview?
otherspecies¼Zea_mays) displaying the patterns of long-
range synteny among the rice and maize genomes provides
a useful comparative tool for users to find colinear regions of
the rice and maize genomes as they search for genes, their
functional orthologs and shared genetic markers. We construc-
ted syntenic blocks between rice and maize by constructing a
sorted pairwise list of locations of mapped overgo markers
on the maize FPC map and identifying their corresponding
locations on the rice genome (D. H. Ware et al., unpublished
data).
Arabidopsis is the premiere model organism for plants, and
its genomic sequence and well-characterized genes (8) are
of great help in the annotation and characterization of genes
found in the cereal genomes. Therefore the Arabidopsis
genome assembly was added to the genome search modules
in Gramene. This helps users familiar with the function or
phenotype of a known Arabidopsis gene to traverse between
genomes and find the expressed, known and/or predicted gene
sequence(s) mapped on the rice and maize genomes. Similarly
the computed orthologies also allow to traverse from cereal
genomes to that of Arabidopsis. The data for the Arabidopsis
genome browser (http://www.gramene.org/Arabidopsis_
thaliana/) were kindly provided by the Nottingham
Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC: http://nasc.life.nott.ac.uk/)
who initially imported it from The Institute for Genome
Research (TIGR) (8).
Future enhancements to this module’s search capabilities
will include information on the assembled rice-indica shotgun
sequence (11,12) and its comparisons with the rice-japonica
genome, mapping of Swiss-Prot–Trembl database protein
entries to the gene models from rice and maize and mapping
of ESTs and gene expression profiles to the gene models in rice
and maize.
GRAMENEMART AND BLAST SEARCH
GrameneMart (http://www.gramene.org/Multi/martview)
simplifies the task of creating and maintaining query inter-
faces. It is backed by a relational database and is particularly
well-suited for providing data mining-like searches of com-
plex descriptive (e.g. biological) data. After choosing a data-
set, e.g. TIGR rice genes, one can filter the data to view only
those rice genes with Arabidopsis homologs, or one can add
a second filter to search for only those peptides with known
molecular function(s). After this, a user can immediately
export results from the output page or click on the count
button to calculate the number of entries expected in the
final output. MartView can generate a number of different
types of output, including sequence and tabulated list data
in various formats, including HTML, tab delimited text and
Microsoft Excel. The GrameneMart is a new addition to the
Gramene database and is served from the Genome module
(http://www.gramene.org/genome_browser/index.html). Ori-
ginally developed as a part of BioMart, it is a generic data
management system developed jointly by the European Bioin-
formatics Institute (EBI) and Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
(CSHL).
The BLAST search (http://www.gramene.org/Multi/
blastview) provides access to BLAST sequence similarity
search algorithms via a web interface. It allows for simultan-
eous searches with multiple query sequences against sequence
datasets from multiple target species. The sequence datasets
include genomes, ESTs, markers, genes, cDNAs, FSTs, BACs
and BAC ends and proteins. The updated version allows users
to set their own alignment parameters, select specific combina-
tions of species and sequence datasets and to upload sequence
files and display options. This is in addition to saving or book-
marking the web link of their search results, with a link that
remains active for one week.
GENE SEARCH
The gene search module (http://www.gramene.org/rice_
mutant/index.html) is a curated resource that provides publicly
available information on genetically identified genes in
Figure 2. (A) Rice genome browser. A detail view of a section of rice chromosome-3 where the BAC clone AC119747 is mapped as part of the genome assembly.
This genomic clone is the first feature in the view and is described as aDNAcontig in blue and labeledwith aGenBank accession number. The annotations provided in
relation to this BAC represent datasets generated by Gramene using its internal gene prediction pipeline (e.g. Rice_GeneModel-FGENESH) as well as annotations
obtained from external databases or individual researchers (as labeled in each track). The views can be customized by the researcher by going to the dropdownmenus
on the browser views (e.g. Features, ESTs, GSSs, etc.) to display or hide specific tracks, or one can select features in a track by clicking the plus sign next to the track
name. A researcher may traverse to a physical map in the comparative map tool by selecting an option from the ‘Jump to’ menu. Genes displayed in grey in the
Rice_GeneModel_TIGR track suggest that putative orthologs have been identified in maize and/or Arabidopsis. (B) The detailed view of a gene report page for the
gene Loc_Os03g03350 provides a general description of the gene and its functional annotation, as well as specific information about the gene, its introns and exons,
the transcript(s), peptide(s), putative orthologs, and also offers a download option.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D721
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 25, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
rice (Oryza sp.). It includes descriptions of genes and alleles,
associated with morphological, developmental and agronom-
ically important phenotypes, variants of physiological charac-
ters, biochemical functions and isozymes. Users can search
for the genes by their name, symbol or accession number. For
example a search for ‘flowering’ yields as many as 64 genes
with the word ‘flowering’ appearing in either the gene name
or the description. A ‘browse by alphabetical order of gene
symbol’ option is also available (http://www.gramene.org/db/
mutant/display_mutant_list). The database now contains 1488
characterized genes, an increase of 100 genes over earlier
reports (5) and many are fully annotated with phenotypic
descriptions, map positions, sequence definitions, identifica-
tion of gene products, allele(s), germplasm(s) in which the
allele was characterized and citations, along with associations
to trait (TO), plant structure (PO) and plant growth stages
(GRO). e.g. rice Photoperiod-sensitivity-1 (hd1) gene http://
www.gramene.org/db/mutant/search_mutant?id¼GR:0060860.
In the future our curational activity will focus on the addi-
tion of 18 000 genes identified in the recently sequenced
rice genome that have full length cDNA evidence (7,13).
Previously, this module was called ‘Mutants’ but it has
been renamed as ‘Genes’ to better describe the datasets stored
within.
PROTEIN SEARCH
The protein module (http://www.gramene.org/protein/index.
html) provides curated information about Swiss-Prot–Trembl
protein entries from the grasses (Poaceae or Gramineae).
Protein entries are annotated using the Gene Ontology (GO)
(14,15) for biochemical characterization and the Plant
Ontology (PO) for gene expression and phenotype associ-
ations. Information stored in this module is derived from
published reports or generated by in silico experiments and
includes mappings to Interpro (16), EC number, transmem-
brane [using TMHMM (17)], SignalP (18) and Predotar (19)
analyses. Each association is supported with evidence in the
form of a reference along with a corresponding evidence code
(experiment type http://www.gramene.org/plant_ontology/
evidence_codes.html). Information on the genes associated
with the proteins is provided via a phenotype link (e.g.
the protein from rice Photoperiod-sensitivity-1 gene iso-
lated from Ginbozu germplasm http://www.gramene.org/db/
protein/protein_search?acc¼Q9FE92). Since the rice genome
sequence assembly and annotation processes have only begun
to stabilize recently, we also provide a BLASTP query link so
that users can determine the best match to a peptide(s) that is
deduced from the a predicted/known rice gene(s) identified
on the rice genome assembly (information that is provided in
the genome browser section).
Currently we provide information on 67 000 cereal pro-
teins but only rice proteins (55 000) are subjected to internal
manual curation. The addition of proteins from other grasses
enhances the comparative aspect of Gramene and is a new
feature of this module. Future plans include providing links to
the peptides and genes found on the genome assembly,
information on homologs and orthologs for intra and inter-
specific comparison and working with our collaborators on
species-specific protein curation.
ONTOLOGY SEARCH
With the increasing demands of large-scale genomic experi-
ments that generate large datasets related to gene expression
and phenotype analyses, the requirement for use of controlled
vocabularies (ontologies) has become more apparent (14,20).
The ontologies are organized in structures called directed
acyclic graphs, which differ from hierarchies in that a child,
or more specialized, term can have many parents, or less
specialized, terms. For example (http://www.gramene.org/
db/ontology/search_term?id¼TO:0000207), the trait term
plant height has two parents, suggesting that it is a sub-type
of shoot anatomy and morphology trait and is also a sub-type
of the height-related trait. This helps the user to find the
associated genes and QTL either via the anatomy or the
height-related trait path of the ontology tree and still get
the same query result.
To emphasize the use of such vocabularies in Gramene’s
annotation protocols (21) and to allow users to find genes,
proteins, QTL, map sets and traits (http://www.gramene.
org/plant_ontology/index.html), we have either adopted the
ontologies developed by ongoing projects such as the GO
(14,15), or the PO (22) or developed our own ontologies
such as the TO (23), Environment (EO) and Taxonomy
(GR_tax) ontologies, with help from collaborators (P. Jaiswal
et al., unpublished data).
The TO (23) has 8794 unique gene and QTL associations.
The GO (14,15) has1 94 000 associations to40 000 Swiss-
Prot–Trembl proteins from the grasses and 21 000 rice genes
from the Ensembl database. The PO (22) and GRO (21), have
associations to 420 unique rice genes. The most recent addi-
tion was the GR_tax that provides a way of identifying
information from all the datasets related to a given species
in Gramene. For example, rice or Oryza has associations to
106 map sets in CMap, 1488 genes and 55 306 SP–Trembl
proteins. In the future we will extend our annotation of genes
and QTL to include annotations using the EO and PO (22).
OUTREACH AND EDUCATION
Gramene is a collaborative project between CSHL, Cornell
University and the cereal community. Our outreach activities
extend to all local, state, national and global communities and
are interactive. Outreach occurs in many different forms
including collaborations with contributors of datasets and
tools or running workshops to educate users about Gramene’s
resources and how to use them in research. For the former we
collaborate actively and acknowledge by either linking back to
the source from the appropriate dataset in Gramene and/or by
listing our collaborators contact information on our Collabor-
ators page at http://www.gramene.org/collaborators/. For the
day-to-day users of our database, we provide pre-designed
queries, glossaries and frequently asked questions sections
and offer online tutorials to guide outlining a step-by-step
process showing users how to retrieve information from the
database (http://www.gramene.org/workshop_tutorial.html).
General information is provided via the species pages about
various cereal crops, including their genetic or evolutionary
histories, production profiles, biology and commercial uses
(http://www.gramene.org/species/index.html). In order to
maintain a high standard of curation and help us provide
D722 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 25, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
new types of datasets, we request users to send us feedback
by sending e-mail at gramene@gramene.org.
DATABASE AVAILABILITY AND CONTACT
INFORMATION
Gramene is a curated, free for use, web-accessible data
resource for comparative genome analysis in the grasses.
The technological core of Gramene is the MySQL database
management system, an open source relational database sys-
tem that is stable and well supported. We have developed
a relational schema to represent the various biological entities
of Gramene, and a middleware layer to dynamically trans-
late this information into web pages. The database and the
curated datasets are freely available for local use and instal-
lation (http://www.gramene.org/documentation/gramene_
installation.html).
FUTURE ENHANCEMENTS
The Gramene database is committed to build a community-
based information resource serving as a repository for
structured datasets. Various planned future enhancements
are described within each search module; however two new
modules that are yet to be implemented include the Genomic
Diversity and Phenotype Data Model (GDPDM) and RiceCyc
pathway tool. GDPDM (https://sourceforge.net/projects/
gdpdm/) will serve as the basis of a module that captures
both molecular and phenotypic diversity data. The main
focus of this schema is to hold quantitative phenotypic data
and molecular genotypic data. This data may be the product of
QTL mapping experiments, association studies, breeding
efforts or germplasm evaluation activities. GDPDM will be
used to provide the basic infrastructure for searches on refer-
ence germplasms/stocks and the genetic variation that they
embody. The RiceCyc pathway tool is being developed
based upon the BioCyc pathway tool (24) and will provide
information on the network of genes encoded by the rice
genome and their role in various pathways found in a virtual
rice plant cell.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is supported by the USDA Initiative for Future
Agriculture and Food Systems (IFAFS) (grant no. 00-52100-
9622) and USDA-Agricultural Research Service specific
cooperative agreement (grant no. 58-1907-0-041). During
2004–2007 this work is also supported by the National
Science Foundation (NSF) award no. 0321685 and USDA-
ARS. We are thankful to numerous collaborators and contri-
butors for help in curation and for sharing their datasets and
tools. Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for
this article was provided by NSF 0321685.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Shen,L., Gong,J., Caldo,R.A., Nettleton,D., Cook,D., Wise,R.P. and
Dickerson,J.A. (2005) BarleyBase—an expression profiling database for
plant genomics. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D614–D618.
2. Lawrence,C.J., Seigfried,T.E. and Brendel,V. (2005) The maize genetics
and genomics database. The community resource for access to diverse
maize data. Plant Physiol., 138, 55–58.
3. Matthews,D.E., Carollo,V.L., Lazo,G.R. and Anderson,O.D. (2003)
GrainGenes, the genome database for small-grain crops. Nucleic Acids
Res., 31, 183–186.
4. Geer,R.C. and Sayers,E.W. (2003) Entrez: making use of its power.
Brief Bioinform., 4, 179–184.
5. Ware,D.H., Jaiswal,P.,Ni,J.,Yap,I.V., Pan,X.,Clark,K.Y.,Teytelman,L.,
Schmidt,S.C., Zhao,W., Chang,K. et al. (2002) Gramene, a tool for grass
genomics. Plant Physiol., 130, 1606–1613.
6. Wang,G.L., Mackill,D.J., Bonman,J.M., McCouch,S.R.,
Champoux,M.C. and Nelson,R.J. (1994) RFLP mapping of genes
conferring complete and partial resistance to blast in a durably resistance
rice cultivar. Genetics, 136, 1421–1434.
7. Yuan,Q., Ouyang,S., Wang,A., Zhu,W., Maiti,R., Lin,H., Hamilton,J.,
Haas,B., Sultana,R., Cheung,F. et al. (2005) The institute for genomic
research Osa1 rice genome annotation database. Plant Physiol.,
138, 18–26.
8. Haas,B.J., Wortman,J.R., Ronning,C.M., Hannick,L.I., Smith,R.K.Jr,
Maiti,R., Chan,A.P., Yu,C., Farzad,M., Wu,D. et al. (2005) Complete
reannotation of the Arabidopsis genome: methods, tools, protocols
and the final release. BMC Biol., 3, 7.
9. Gardiner,J., Schroeder,S., Polacco,M.L., Sanchez-Villeda,H., Fang,Z.,
Morgante,M., Landewe,T., Fengler,K., Useche,F., Hanafey,M. et al.
(2004) Anchoring 9371maize expressed sequence tagged unigenes to the
bacterial artificial chromosome contig map by two-dimensional overgo
hybridization. Plant Physiol., 134, 1317–1326.
10. Hubbard,T., Andrews,D., Caccamo,M., Cameron,G., Chen,Y.,
Clamp,M., Clarke,L., Coates,G., Cox,T., Cunningham,F. et al. (2005)
Ensembl 2005. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D447–D453.
11. Yu,J., Hu,S., Wang,J., Wong,G.K., Li,S., Liu,B., Deng,Y., Dai,L.,
Zhou,Y., Zhang,X. et al. (2002) A draft sequence of the rice genome
(Oryza sativa L. ssp. indica). Science, 296, 79–92.
12. Yu,J., Wang,J., Lin,W., Li,S., Li,H., Zhou,J., Ni,P., Dong,W., Hu,S.,
Zeng,C. et al. (2005) The Genomes of Oryza sativa: a history of
duplications. PLoS Biol., 3, e38.
13. International Rice Genome Sequencing Project (2005), The map-based
sequence of the rice genome. Nature, 436, 793–800.
14. Clark,J.I., Brooksbank,C. and Lomax,J. (2005) It’s all GO for plant
scientists. Plant Physiol., 138, 1268–1279.
15. Harris,M.A., Clark,J., Ireland,A., Lomax,J., Ashburner,M., Foulger,R.,
Eilbeck,K., Lewis,S., Marshall,B., Mungall,C. et al. (2004) The Gene
Ontology (GO) database and informatics resource. Nucleic Acids Res.,
32, D258–D261.
16. Mulder,N.J., Apweiler,R., Attwood,T.K., Bairoch,A., Bateman,A.,
Binns,D., Bradley,P., Bork,P., Bucher,P., Cerutti,L. et al. (2005)
InterPro, progress and status in 2005.NucleicAcidsRes., 33, D201–D205.
17. Krogh,A., Larsson,B., von Heijne,G. and Sonnhammer,E.L. (2001)
Predicting transmembraneprotein topologywith a hiddenMarkovmodel:
application to complete genomes. J. Mol. Biol., 305, 567–580.
18. Bendtsen,J.D., Nielsen,H., von Heijne,G. and Brunak,S. (2004)
Improved prediction of signal peptides: SignalP 3.0. J. Mol. Biol.,
340, 783–795.
19. Small,I., Peeters,N., Legeai,F. and Lurin,C. (2004) Predotar: A tool for
rapidly screening proteomes for N-terminal targeting sequences.
Proteomics, 4, 1581–1590.
20. Berardini,T.Z., Mundodi,S., Reiser,L., Huala,E., Garcia-Hernandez,M.,
Zhang,P., Mueller,L.A., Yoon,J., Doyle,A., Lander,G. et al. (2004)
Functional annotation of the Arabidopsis genome using controlled
vocabularies. Plant Physiol., 135, 745–755.
21. Yamazaki,Y. and Jaiswal,P. (2005) Biological ontologies in rice
databases. An introduction to the activities in Gramene and Oryzabase.
Plant Cell Physiol., 46, 63–68.
22. The Plant Ontology Consortium. (2002) The Plant OntologyTM
Consortium and Plant Ontologies. Comp. Funct. Genomics, 3, 137–142.
23. Jaiswal,P., Ware,D., Ni,J., Chang,K., Zhao,W., Schmidt,S., Pan,X.,
Clark,K., Teytelman,L., Cartinhour,S. et al. (2002) Gramene:
development and integration of trait and gene ontologies for rice.
Comp. Funct. Genomics, 3, 132–136.
24. Krummenacker,M., Paley,S., Mueller,L., Yan,T. and Karp,P.D. (2005)
Querying and computing with BioCyc databases. Bioinformatics,
21, 3454–3455.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D723
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 25, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
