ARB: a software environment for sequence data
Wolfgang Ludwig*, Oliver Strunk, Ralf Westram, Lothar Richter, Harald Meier1,
Yadhukumar, Arno Buchner, Tina Lai, Susanne Steppi, Gangolf Jobb1, Wolfram FoÈ rster1,
Igor Brettske, Stefan Gerber, Anton W. Ginhart1, Oliver Gross, Silke Grumann1,
Stefan Hermann1, Ralf Jost1, Andreas KoÈnig1, Thomas Liss1, Ralph LuÈûmann1,
Michael May1, BjoÈ rn Nonhoff1, Boris Reichel1, Robert Strehlow1, Alexandros Stamatakis1,
Norbert Stuckmann1, Alexander Vilbig1, Michael Lenke1, Thomas Ludwig2, Arndt Bode1
and Karl-Heinz Schleifer
Lehrstuhl fuÈr Mikrobiologie, Technische UniversitaÈ t MuÈnchen, D-853530 Freising, Germany 1Lehrstuhl fuÈr
Rechnertechnik und Rechnerorganisation, Parallelrechnerarchitektur, Technische UniversitaÈ t MuÈnchen,
D-85748 Garching, Germany 2Institut fuÈr Informatik, Ruprecht-Karls-UniversitaÈ t Heidelberg, D-69120 Heidelberg,
Germany
Received January 13, 2004; Revised and Accepted January 28, 2004
ABSTRACT
The ARB (from Latin arbor, tree) project was
initiated almost 10 years ago. The ARB program
package comprises a variety of directly interacting
software tools for sequence database maintenance
and analysis which are controlled by a common
graphical user interface. Although it was initially
designed for ribosomal RNA data, it can be used for
any nucleic and amino acid sequence data as well.
A central database contains processed (aligned)
primary structure data. Any additional descriptive
data can be stored in database ®elds assigned to
the individual sequences or linked via local or
worldwide networks. A phylogenetic tree visualized
in the main window can be used for data access and
visualization. The package comprises additional
tools for data import and export, sequence align-
ment, primary and secondary structure editing, pro-
®le and ®lter calculation, phylogenetic analyses,
speci®c hybridization probe design and evaluation
and other components for data analysis. Currently,
the package is used by numerous working groups
worldwide.
INTRODUCTION
The ARB (from Latin arbor, tree) project was established as
an interdisciplinary bioinformatics initiative of the Lehrstuhl
fuÈr Mikrobiologie and the Lehrstuhl fuÈr Rechnertechnik
und Rechnerorganisation, Parallelrechnerarchitektur of the
Technical University of Munich almost 10 years ago. In that
time, comparative sequence analysis of the small subunit
rRNAs or the respective genes had already been established as
the most commonly applied approach for phylogeny inference
as well as microbial taxonomy and identi®cation. Further-
more, improved and automated sequencing techniques pro-
moted a rapid increase in the number of small subunit rRNA
primary structure data available from data sources such as
GenBank (1) or EBI (European Bioinformatics Institute) (2).
However, these databases provide only raw data and addi-
tional descriptive information which cannot interactively be
extended by the user. Although the Ribosomal Database
Project (RDP) (3) and the Antwerpen projects (4,5) offered
datasets of aligned sequences, data handling and analysis
remained dif®cult for scientists applying rRNA-based
methods. A variety of individual software tools for sequence
editing, alignment and phylogenetic analysis were available
from the different database projects (1±4) and other sources
(6) (http://www.gcg.com). However, a comprehensive
package of interacting tools was missing. Furthermore, the
number of different input and output formats which had to be
used re¯ected the variety of individual software programs
which uncomfortably had to be applied sequentially to achieve
a comprehensive analysis of molecular data. Unfortunately, a
promising initiative, the Genetic Data Environment (GDE)
project (http://bimas.dcrt.nih.gov/gde_sw.html), focusing on
the development of a common graphical interface for data
handling and analysis was not continued. Consequently,
microbiologists and computer scientists at the Technical
University of Munich decided to develop their own software
package capable of properly managing the upcoming data
¯ood.
The two major tasks according to the ARB concept,
formulated in the early days of the project and maintained to
the present, are (i) the maintenance of a structured integrative
secondary database combining processed primary structures
and any type of additional data assigned to the individual
sequence entries and (ii) a comprehensive selection of
software tools directly interacting with one another as well
as the central database which are controlled via a common
graphical interface. Software and rRNA databases are publicly
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +8161 71 5451; Fax: +8161 71 5475; Email: ludwig@mikro.biologie.tu-muenchen.de
Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, No. 4 1363±1371
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkh293
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 32 No. 4 ã Oxford University Press 2004; all rights reserved
Published online February 25, 2004
accessible (http://www.arb-home.de) and have been in use
worldwide for several years.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Sequence data
The raw data used to establish databases and perform data
analysis were taken from our own sequencing projects,
provided by other research groups or periodically retrieved
from public data sources such as the EBI (1), Genbank (2), the
RDP (3) and the Antwerpen databases for small (4) and large
(5) subunit RNAs. Complete releases were downloaded from
the latter two locations. The search and retrieval tools of the
former two institutions were used to select and download the
primary structure and additional information on rRNA or other
genes. Furthermore, sequence data determined at the
Lehrstuhl fuÈr Mikrobiologie of the Technical University of
Munich or by other groups were imported and processed.
Operating systems and programming languages
The ARB software was developed for UNIX systems and their
derivatives. Currently, the development is performed using
SuSE LINUX (http://www.suse.com) running on PCs.
The greater part of the source code was written in C++ and
C; some parts were written in Perl and other script languages.
The graphical environment is based upon the Open Motif
library.
Integrated external software tools
Functionalities from the GDE project (http://bimas.dcrt.nih.
gov/gde_sw.html) concerning sequence editing were adopted
and implemented in the ARB package. Some programs of the
PHYLIP package for phylogeny inference (6) were incorpor-
ated as components directly interacting with the central
database. Additionally, fastDNAml (7) and protml of the
Molphy package (8), components of the Puzzle package (9)
and AxML, a new accelerated fastDNAml derivative (10),
were included for maximum-likelihood-based phylogenetic
analyses of nucleic and amino acid sequence data.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A selection of tools and functionalities of the ARB packages
will be brie¯y described in the following sections. The
network in Figure 1 schematically visualizes these tools and
their interactions with one another and the central database.
Most tools developed for ARB directly interact with a copy of
the database in the main storage, whereas the integrated
second-party tools are provided with data from ARB and their
results are written back to the database. Thus any changes or
rearrangements are immediately known to the peripheral
software components.
The central database
The sequences representing organisms, genes or gene products
are stored in individual database ®elds as the central
components and a unique identi®er (short_name) is automatic-
ally generated and assigned to each of them. Databases created
using ARB are hierarchically structured. Following the ARB
concept of an integrative database, any type of additional data
can be assigned to the individual sequence data entry and
stored within default or user-de®ned database ®elds. These
data can either be kept as intrinsic components of the database
or linked to it via local networks or the Internet. In the latter
case the path to the respective ®le or the URL of an external
database, optionally including commands and search strings,
have to be stored within the respective ARB database ®elds.
The designations and hierarchy of the database ®elds can be
customized by the user. The default structuring is according to
the phylogeny of the organisms derived from the respective
sequence data. However, it can also be changed according to
other criteria de®ned by database ®eld entries. This hierarchy
is used by special algorithms for highly effective data
compression. Different protection levels (0±6) can be assigned
to the individual database ®elds. Database as well as security
management is facilitated by this tool.
Data access and visualization
A powerful search tool allows simple (strings and combination
of strings) and complex (default or user-de®ned algorithms)
searches in one or more of the database ®elds. The information
in all or a user-de®ned selection of database ®elds can be
visualized on the screen in respective windows (Fig. 2). The
layout of the visualization windows, i.e. selection, size and
positioning of database ®eld entries, can be customized by the
user. Simple algorithms are included.
An alternative method of data access and visualization is
provided by the ARB main window. Phylogenetic trees
generated by intrinsic ARB tree reconstruction tools or
imported from external sources are stored in the database
and can be visualized in different formats within the ARB
main window (Fig. 3). Any (combination of) database ®eld
entries can be visualized at the terminal nodes of the tree
currently shown. Selection and order of data entries, the
results of data analysis or extractions to be visualized are
de®ned by the node display settings (NDS) tool. Irrespective
of the visualization mode used, the ARB search and
Figure 1. The interacting components and tools of the ARB software
package and database.
1364 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, No. 4
replacement tool (SRT) and ARB command interpreter (ACI)
can be used for extraction of combinations of (sub)strings as
well as for analysis of database ®eld entries, respectively.
Sequence editors
The sequence data can be visualized and modi®ed with a
powerful editor (Fig. 4). The original data as well as virtually
transformed data (e.g. purine±pyrimidine or simpli®ed amino
acid presentation) are displayed in user-de®ned color codes.
Keyboard customization is possible for data entry and
modi®cation. Two different editing modes can be selected.
The `Align' mode allows only insertion/removal of alignment
gaps and movement of sequence characters. In addition to
these functions, character changes can be performed in the
`Edit' mode. The rights to overcome protection of the
individual sequence entries can be given for the two modes
independently. This helps to prevent unwanted character
changes when manually modifying the sequence data or
alignment.
Sets of search strings can be de®ned and optionally stored.
Their occurrence can be visualized within the displayed
sequences by user-de®ned background colors. Virtual com-
pression (removal of alignment gaps common to all or a
certain fraction of the displayed sequences) is possible. This
makes data handling more convenient in the case of large
insertions occurring in only part of the selected sequences.
Groups of sequences can be interactively de®ned or are
automatically shown if de®ned in the phylogenetic trees.
Consensus sequences are determined for each de®ned group of
sequences according to default or user-de®ned criteria and
optionally visualized along with or instead of the individual
sequences. This consensus can be edited and changes made
concern any sequence in the group. A special feature of the
editor is the simultaneous secondary structure check if rRNA
(gene) data are visualized. Symbols indicating the presence or
absence as well as the character of base pairing are shown
below the individual characters and immediately refreshed
during sequence editing. A (three-domain) consensus
secondary structure mask established according to commonly
accepted secondary structure models (11) functions as a guide
for this tool. Thereby the users are strongly supported with
regard to the evaluation of sequences, alignment and probe
targets.
The ARB secondary structure editor (Fig. 5) ®ts any
sequence into the common consensus model. The particular
sequence to be visualized is selected by cursor positioning in
the primary structure editor. The layout of the structure, i.e.
color coding of base-paired, non-paired and loop positions as
well as probe target sites, can be customized according to the
user's preferences. Any of the search strings activated in the
primary structure editor can be indicated in the secondary
structure model. This helps the experts to evaluate probe
targets. The evaluation of target position with respect to
higher-order rRNA structure is of importance especially
when probes are used for in situ cell hybridizations (12±14).
The structure can be exported to x®g, a simple open-
source graphics program (http://ww.x®g.org), for further
modi®cation and/or transformation into various formats.
Figure 2. Example of a data visualization window. Bibliographic data stored in respective database ®elds are shown. The selection of database ®elds,
extraction of data and the layout of the visualization window can be customized by the user.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, No. 4 1365
Pro®les, masks and ®lters
Conservation or base composition pro®les, higher-order
structure masks and ®lters including or excluding particular
alignment positions are important tools for sequence data
analyses, especially for phylogenetic inference (15). The ARB
package provides tools for determining such pro®les based
upon the full database or user-de®ned subsets. The underlying
methods range from simple character counting to maximum
parsimony-based column statistics. These pro®les, masks and
®lters are stored in the central database as so-called sequence
associated information (SAI) and can be visualized and
modi®ed by the primary structure editor. The ®lter selection
tool allows not only choice of sets of particular ®lters but also
Figure 3. The ARB main window showing part of an ARB parsimony-generated dendrogram. The rectangles represent `online compressed' monophyletic
groups which can be `unfolded' by mouse click. Database ®eld entries such as taxonomic name, public database accession number and strain designation as
reported in EMBL (1), RDP (3) and the European rRNA databases (DEW) (4,5) are visualized at the terminal nodes of the `unfolded' Desulfohalobiaceae.
1366 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, No. 4
performance of ®ne tuning with respect to the inclusion or
exclusion of alignment positions in the case of multiple
character ®lters.
Phylogenetic treeing
As mentioned in Materials and Methods, software implement-
ations of several alternative treeing methods are incorporated
in the package. They operate as intrinsic tools with all the
respective ARB components and database elements such as
alignment and ®lters. The central treeing tool of the package,
ARB-parsimony, is a special development for the handling of
several thousand sequences (more than 30 000 in the current
small subunit rRNA ARB database). New sequences are
successively added to an existing tree according to the
parsimony criterion. An intrinsic software component super-
imposes branch length on the parsimony-generated tree
topology. These branch lengths re¯ect the signi®cance of the
individual `tetra-furcations' by expressing the difference of
the most parsimonious and the two least parsimonious
solutions when performing nearest-neighbor interchange
(NNI) of adjacent branches or subtrees. These relative
distances are standardized according to a distance matrix
deduced from primary structure comparison. Thus branch
lengths in ARB-parsimony generated trees in the ®rst instance
visualize the signi®cance of topologies, and in the second
instance re¯ect a degree of estimated sequence divergence. A
prominent feature of ARB-parsimony is the possibility of
adding sequences to an existing tree without allowing any
changes in the initial tree. This enables the user to reconstruct
and optimize an initial tree based upon the best (full
sequences) and most comprehensive (wide variation of
phylogenetic levels) sequence data and also to include partial
sequences without perturbing the initial tree topology. The
second peculiarity of the treeing software concerns the tree
optimization performing cycles of NNI and Kernigham±Lin
(KL) (16) tree modi®cations. This optimization can not only
be applied to the complete tree but also con®ned to user-
selected subtrees. Thus tree optimization is possible applying
the appropriate ®lters for the respective phylogenetic levels
and groups. In this context, it is of interest that, while
performing stepwise optimizations, the intermediates are
stored until the user de®nes the version to be permanently
stored in the database. Furthermore, different trees generated
applying various parameters can be permanently kept in the
database and optionally used for data visualization in the ARB
main window.
The positional tree server
The ARB positional tree (PT) server, once established, allows
rapid ®nding of sequence identity or peculiarity. Thus it is the
central tool for fast search of closest relatives for automated
sequence alignment or to de®ne diagnostic sequence stretches
for primer and probe design. Establishing a positional tree
server of any oligonucleotide sequence up to 20mers occurring
in the underlying database and assignment of the individual
oligonucleotides to the sequences or organisms containing
Figure 4. The ARB primary structure editor. As an example for highlighting a search string a probe target site is shown by background color. Perfect and
mismatched pairing is color coded as well.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, No. 4 1367
them is the basis for these procedures. PT-server-based
analyses do not rely upon aligned sequences. The PT server
is not provided with the ARB program package or ARB
database. It has to be established for the respective database
locally. The PT server can be used by multiple users on the
local machine or via network. The computing time for
generating the respective ®les depends strongly on the size
and structure of the individual database as well as the
performance of the machine used. The advantages of these
logarithmic algorithms over linear ones such as Blast (17) or
Fasta (18) are effectiveness and rapidity.
Sequence alignment
As mentioned in Materials and Methods, for de novo
generation of a nucleic or amino acid sequence alignment
ClustalW (19) as implemented in the ARB package can be
used. However, in most cases new sequence entries have to be
integrated in an already existing database of aligned
sequences. For this purpose the ARB fast aligner was
developed and included. This aligner uses a (set of) selected
aligned reference sequences as template(s) for rapid integra-
tion of a (set of) unaligned sequence(s). Individual entries, i.e.
Figure 5. Secondary structure editor. The sequence selected in the primary structure editor (Fig. 4) is automatically ®tted into a consensus secondary structure
model.
1368 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, No. 4
sequences or consensus de®ned by the user or automatically
determined by PT-server-based search for most similar
reference sequences, are used as the template.
In the case of protein coding nucleic acid sequences the
alignment is usually optimized on the amino acid level. The
underlying nucleic acid alignment can then be adapted to the
amino acid alignment by a back-translation-based tool taking
into consideration all known codon usages.
Probe design and evaluation
Currently, taxon- or gene-speci®c probe design certainly plays
a central role in many molecular biological research and
analysis projects, for example the identi®cation and detection
of organisms in complex environmental samples or expression
studies within the scope of genome projects. Algorithms of
the ARB programs `Probe Design' and `Probe Match' are
searching the PT server to identify short (10±100 monomers)
diagnostic sequence stretches which are evaluated against the
background of all full and partial sequences in the respective
database the PT server has been built from. In principle, no
alignment of the sequence data is needed for speci®c probe
design. However, in the case of taxon-speci®c probes align-
ment and phylogenetic analyses are necessary to allow
de®ning groups of phylogenetically (taxonomically) related
organisms as the targets of speci®c probes. The design of
taxon-speci®c oligonucleotide probes with ARB is performed
in three steps. First, the user selects the organism or a group of
organisms for which he or she wants to design a diagnostic
probe. Secondly, the software `Probe Design' searches the PT
server for potential target sites. The results are shown in a
ranked list of proposed targets, probes and additional
information. The ranking is according to several composi-
tional and thermodynamic criteria (12,20). Thirdly, the
proposed oligonucleotide probes are evaluated against the
whole database by using the program `Probe Match'. Local
alignments are determined between the probe target
sequence(s) and the most similar reference sequences
(optionally from no to ®ve mismatches) in the respective
database (Fig. 6). Furthermore, these sequence strings can
automatically be visualized in the primary and secondary
structure editors. The latter information is of particular
importance when designing probes for in situ cell hybridiz-
ation. A tool for visualization of accessibility maps (13,14)
in the primary and secondary structure editors is under
development.
A special advance is the ARB multiprobe software
component. It determines sets of up to ®ve probes optimally
identifying the target group (21). These probe sets can be used
for multiple ¯uorescence in situ hybridization experiments.
Data import and export
The sequence as well as additional data can be imported and
exported in commonly used ¯at ®le formats. The parsing from
and to tagged ¯at ®les can be customized by advanced users.
There is also a tool for automated completion of database
submission forms for those users determining sequences on
their own.
Availability and documentation
Although so far not of®cially published, previous versions of
the software package and databases have been available for
several years and the software has been used worldwide. The
ARB package provides a comprehensive set of tools to support
the user's work. However, depending upon the user's interests,
some knowledge of the basics of sequence alignment,
phylogenetic analyses or probe hybridization is needed.
Some familiarity with UNIX operating systems is advanta-
geous. During installation, environment variables, paths,
Figure 6. Results of probe design and evaluation. Part of the primary structure alignment containing the probe target site is shown for the target organism
Desulfohalobium retbaense and the non-target organisms containing the most similar sequence stretches.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, No. 4 1369
permissions and aliases have to be de®ned. Instructions for
installation can be downloaded from http://www.arb-home.de/
download/ARB/documentation/ARB_install.pdf. Self-install-
ing versions of the recent program releases are currently
available for Linux systems only. The binaries, source code
and some documentation are available at the download area of
the ARB web site http://www.arb-home.de/download/. An
HTTP Browser is required as ftp connection is not accepted.
Furthermore, there is an email forum of the worldwide ARB
users community. Subscription is needed for those interested
in joining (subscribe@arb-home.de). Although a comprehen-
sive formal handbook is not yet available, manuals, instruc-
tions and problem solutions are available from the ARB
homepage and by contacting the ARB staff and user
community via the email forum. ARB sequence databases
are currently available for small subunit rRNA, and those for
other conserved genes will be provided soon. Checking for
new releases and updates should be done at http:www.
arb-home.de/downloads/databases/.
Systems, hardware and processing time requirements
The ARB group provides tested versions for SuSE LINUX and
Sun Solaris systems. According to information provided by
users, the LINUX version also runs on Redhat and Mandrake
LINUX systems. For running ARB on Mac OSX see http://
www.microbiol.unimelb.edu.au/micro/staff/mds/ARB_OSX/
ARB_to_MacOSX.html. With respect to hardware require-
ments, mainframe memory is more important than processor
performance. The users among the wet laboratory partners of
the ARB group are performing their analyses on dual Pentium
III PCs with 1 Gb memory and 1 Gb swap space. The
background storage requirements depend mainly upon the
number and size of the user ARB databases and PT servers.
The sizes of the installed program package, the current small
subunit rRNA database and the respective PT server ®les are
about 25 Mb, 80 Mb and 350 Mb, respectively. Twenty-one-
inch monitors at 1600 3 1200 are recommended. However,
ARB is also routinely used on laptops or older PCs and
workstations with less memory and monitors with lower
resolution.
Table 1 gives some information on processing times for
some of the major functions in ARB: generation of the PT
server, automated sequence alignment and phylogenetic
treeing. Run-time measurements were performed on a dual-
processor (Intelâ XeonÔ, 2.6 GHz) PC equipped with a 2 Gb
RAM running SuSE Linux 8.2. The ARB databases ssu_
jan03.arb (25 743 almost complete small subunit rRNA
sequences, 40 000 alignment positions) and ssu_10k.arb,
ssu_1k.arb, ssu_100.arb (subsets comprising 10 000, 1000 and
100 sequences) used for these PT server building studies are
available at http://www.arb-home.de. For adding 10, 100 and
1000 sequences to the database alignment or tree, ssu_
jan03.arb was used as basis. The ARB aligner was used in
combination with a PT-server-directed search for most similar
reference sequences. For phylogenetic treeing the respective
sequences/organisms were added to a tree comprising all
entries of the database applying the ARB parsimony tool.
Future developments
The ongoing developments are focusing on two major tasks.
First, a web tool providing all potential probe target sites
which can be derived from the current database version and
should phylogenetically (taxonomically) make sense. Users
can not only search for hierarchical and multiple probes
submitting names, strain designations or accession numbers of
organisms as search strings, but can also send their own probe
sequences for in silico evaluation. Second, the package is
adopted for handling and analysing databases of completed
and annotated genomes. All ARB functionalities can be
applied and genome maps can be used for visualization and
data access. In accordance with the ARB concept of
integrative databases experimental parameters and data can
be stored and assigned to the individual genomes or genes.
Many users ask for a Windows-compatible ARB version.
Although comprehensive software redesign would be desir-
able, the current capacity and funding of the ARB group does
not allow doing this in reasonable time with a source code
developed by many individual scientists and programmers.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors highly acknowledge F. O. GloÈckner and R. Amann
(Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen,
Germany) for redistributing the ARB database and software
and answering user queries, as well as hosting and organizing
ARB workshops. The authors thank Laura Schulz (Ludwig
Maximilian University, Munich, Germany) for critical reading
of the manuscript. ARB software development and database
maintenance was partly supported by the European Union
within the HRAMI project, by the German Research
Foundation and by the German Ministry of Research and
Education BIOLOG project.
REFERENCES
1. Stoesser,G., Baker,W., van den Broek,A., Camon,E., Garcia-Pastor,M.,
Kanz,C., Kulikova,T., Leinonen,R., Lin,Q., Lombard,V. et al. (2002) The
EMBL nucleotide sequence database. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 21±26.
2. Benson,D.A., Karsch-Mizrachi,I., Lipman,D.J., Ostell,J., Rapp,B.A. and
Wheeler,D.L. (2002) GenBank. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 17±20.
3. Maidak,B.L., Cole,J.R., Lilburn,T.G., Parker,C.T.,Jr, Saxman,P.R.,
Farris,R.J., Garrity,G.M., Olsen,G.J., Schmidt,T.M. and Tiedje,J.M.
(2001) The RDP-II (Ribosomal Database Project) Nucleic Acids Res., 29,
173±174.
4. Wuyts,J., Van de Peer,Y., Winkelmans,T. and De Wachter,R. (2002) The
European database on small subunit ribosomal RNA. Nucleic Acids Res.,
30, 183±185.
5. Wuyts,J., De Rijk,P., Van de Peer,Y., Winkelmans,T. and De Wachter,R.
(2001) The European Large Subunit Ribosomal RNA Database. Nucleic
Acids Res., 29, 175±177.
6. Felsenstein,J., (1989) PHYLIPÐPhylogeny Inference Package (version
3.2). Cladistics, 5, 164±166.
Table 1. Run time studies for PT server generation, automated alignment
and parsimony-based treeing
No. of sequences 10 100 1000 10 000 25 743
PT server ± 5 s 22 s 3 min 7 min 30s
Add to alignment 4 s 38 s 6 min
Add to tree 1 min 9 min 15 s 2 h
Datasets varying with respect to the number of sequence entries were used
for PT server generation. The most comprehensive of these datasets
comprising 25 743 entries and 40 000 alignment positions was used as a
template for inserting the speci®ed numbers of sequences into the database
alignment or tree. For treeing, 2141 alignment columns were included.
1370 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, No. 4
7. Olsen,G.J., Matsuda,H., Hagstrom,R. and Overbeek,R. (1994)
FastDNAml: a tool for construction of phylogenetic trees of DNA
sequences using maximum likelihood. Comput. Appl. Biosci., 10, 41±48.
8. Adachi,J. and Hasegawa,M. (1996) Molphy Version 2.3, Programs for
Molecular Phylogenetics Based on Maximum Likelihood. Technical
Report, The Institute of Statistical Mathematics, Tokyo.
9. Strimmer,K. and von Haeseler,A. (1996) Quartett Puzzling: a quartett
maximum likelihood method for reconstructing tree topologies.
Mol. Biol. Evol., 13, 964±969.
10. Stamatakis,A.P., Ludwig,T., Meier,H. and Wolf,M.J. Accelerating
parallel maximum likelihood-based phylogenetic tree calculations using
subtree equality vectors. Proc. Supercomputing Conference (SC2002),
Baltimore, MD, Nov. 2002, IEEE Computer Society.
11. Cannone,J.J, Subramanian,S., Schnare,M.N., Collett,J.R., D'Souza,L.M.,
Du,Y., Feng,B., Lin,N., Madabusi,L.V., MuÈller,K.M. et al. (2002). The
comparative RNA Web (CRW) site: an online database of comparative
sequence and structure information for ribosomal, intron and other
RNAs. BioMed Central Bioinform., 3, 2.
12. Amann,R., Ludwig,W. and Schleifer,K.H. (1995) Phylogentic
identi®cation and in situ detection of individual microbial cells without
cultivation. Microbiol. Rev., 59, 143±169.
13. Fuchs,B.M., Wallner,G., Beisker,W., Schwippl,L., Ludwig,W. and
Amann,R. (1998) Flow cytrometric analysis of the in situ accessibility of
Escherichia coli 16S rRNA for ¯uorescently labeled oligonucleotide
probes. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 64, 4973±4982.
14. Fuchs,B.M., Syutsubo,K., Ludwig,W. and Amann,R. (2001) In situ
accessibility of the Escherichia coli 23S rRNA for ¯uorescently labeled
oligonucleotide probes. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 67, 961±968.
15. Ludwig,W. and Klenk,H.P. (2001) Overview: a phylogenetic backbone
and taxonomic framework for prokaryotic systematics. In Garrity,G. (ed.)
Bergey's Manual of Systematic Bacteriology (2nd edn). Springer, New
York, pp. 49±65.
16. Kernigham,B.W. and Lin,S. (1970) An ef®cient heuristic procedure for
partitioning graphs. Bell Syst. Tech. J., 49, 291±307.
17. Altschul,S.F., Madden,T.L., Schaffer,A.A., Znang,J., Znang,Z.,
Miller,W. and Lipman,D.J. (1997) Gapped BLAST and PSI-Blast: a new
generation of protein-speci®c gap penalties and weight matrix choice.
Nucleic Acids Res., 25, 3389±3402.
18. Pearson,W.R. and Lipman,D.C. (1988) Improved tools for biological
sequence comparison. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 85, 2444±2448.
19. Thompson,J.D., Higgins,D.G. and Gibson,D.J. (1994) CLUSTAL W:
improving the sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment.
Comput. Appl. Biosci., 8, 189±191.
20. Amann,R. and Ludwig,W. (2000) Ribosomal RNA-targeted nucleic acid
probes for studies in microbial ecology. FEMS Microbiol. Rev., 24,
555±565.
21. Ludwig,W., Amann,R., Martinez-Romero,E., SchoÈnhuber,W., Bauer,S.,
Neef,A. and Schleifer,K.H. (1998) rRNA based identi®cation systems for
Rhizobia and other bacteria. Plant Soil, 204, 1±9.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, No. 4 1371
