Ribonucleases J1 and J2: two novel
endoribonucleases in B.subtilis with functional
homology to E.coli RNase E
Sergine Even, Olivier Pellegrini, Lena Zig, Valerie Labas1, Joelle Vinh1,
Dominique Bre´chemmier-Baey and Harald Putzer*
CNRS UPR9073, IBPC, 13 rue P. et M. Curie, 75005 Paris, France and 1CNRS UMR7637, ESPCI,
10 rue Vauquelin 75005 Paris, France
Received February 25, 2005; Revised and Accepted March 24, 2005
ABSTRACT
Many prokaryotic organisms lack an equivalent of
RNase E, which plays a key role in mRNA degradation
in Escherichia coli. In this paper, we report the puri-
fication and identification by mass spectrometry in
Bacillus subtilis of two paralogous endoribonuc-
leases, here named RNases J1 and J2, which share
functional homologies with RNase E but no sequence
similarity. Both enzymes are able to cleave the
B.subtilis thrS leader at a site that can also be cleaved
by E.coli RNase E. We have previously shown that
cleavage at this site increases the stability of the
downstream messenger. Moreover, RNases J1/J2
are sensitive to the 50 phosphorylation state of
the substrate in a site-specific manner. Orthologues
of RNases J1/J2, which belong to the metallo-
b-lactamase family, are evolutionarily conserved in
many prokaryotic organisms, representing a new
family of endoribonucleases. RNases J1/J2 appear to
be implicated in regulatory processing/maturation of
specific mRNAs, such as the T-box family members
thrS and thrZ, but may also contribute to global
mRNA degradation.
INTRODUCTION
In the past decade, interest in messenger RNA maturation/
degradation in bacteria has increased considerably, since it
has been shown to be an important element in the control of
gene expression. RNA turnover is not only a powerful tool
to permit rapid adaptation to nutritional or environmental
changes, but it also enables the cell to efficiently control the
stoichiometry of proteins encoded within a single operon (1–5).
RNA degradation has mostly been studied in Escherichia coli,
and has led to the identification and characterization of many
endo- and exoribonucleases involved in transcript turnover.
According to current knowledge, mRNA degradation in E.coli
generally initiates with an endonucleolytic cleavage (6–8).
This first step is rate-limiting and is mediated mainly by
RNase E. This enzyme, which is essential for cell viability,
cleaves predominately in AU-rich single-stranded regions
(9–11). The activity depends upon the nature of the 50 end of
the target mRNA. Monophosphorylated templates are cleaved
more efficiently than triphosphorylated mRNAs while circu-
larized substrates are essentially resistant (12–14). The RNA
fragments generated by endonucleolytic cleavages are then
attacked by 30–50-exonucleases, mainly polynucleotide phos-
phorylase and RNase II, but also RNase R (15).
While the process of RNA degradation is now well docu-
mented in E.coli, the major players involved in mRNA pro-
cessing, degradation and stabilization in Bacillus subtilis and
other Gram-positive bacteria remain elusive. RNase III and a
sugar-nonspecific endoribonuclease have been identified in
B.subtilis (16–18), but this organism has no homologues of
the two essential E.coli endoribonucleases, RNase E (rne) and
oligoribonuclease (orn). However, an activity similar to the
former probably exists in this organism (19). In addition, an
increasing amount of data suggests the existence of an enzyme
in B.subtilis which is sensitive to the nature or the structure of
the mRNA 50 end as is the case for RNase E (20–24). Clearly,
our understanding of mRNA processing/degradation in
B.subtilis requires the identification of the major ribonucleases
involved.
During previous studies on the expression of the B.subtilis
thrS gene, encoding threonyl-tRNA synthetase, we identified
an endonucleolytic cleavage near a conserved sequence called
the T-box just upstream of a transcription terminator present in
the long untranslated leader mRNA (Figure 1, cleavage 2). thrS
is a member of the T-box family of genes in Gram-positive
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +33 1 58 41 51 27; Fax: +33 1 58 41 50 20; Email: putzer@ibpc.fr
ª The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 7 2141–2152
doi:10.1093/nar/gki505
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 3, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
bacteria whose expression is regulated by a tRNA-dependent
antitermination mechanism in response to starvation for the
cognate amino acid [for a review, see (25)]. Cleavage next to
the T-box (Figure 1, cleavage 2) increases the stability of the
downstream mRNA probably due to the presence of a stable
secondary structure at its 50 end, i.e. the terminator involved in
regulation (24). Cleavage can occur at the same position in
E.coli where it is RNase E dependent (19). We have identified
a second processing site within the specifier domain of the
thrS leader mRNA (Figure 1, cleavage 1) that can be cleaved
in vitro by an activity contained in a ribosomal high salt wash
(HSW). Here, we describe the purification and identification
of two novel endoribonucleases that are responsible for both
the cleavages observed in the thrS leader. They are also implic-
ated in the processing of the thrZ leader encoding a second
threonyl-tRNA synthetase in B.subtilis. We provide evidence
that these two enzymes are paralogues and functionally homo-
logous to E.coli RNase E with respect to cleavage specificity
and 50 end dependence.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Bacterial strains and growth conditions
The prototrophic Bacillus subtilis 168 strain 1A2 (BGSC) was
used for the purification of RNases J1/J2 and the construction
of mutants. In strain SSB340, the rnjB (ymfA) gene was par-
tially deleted by double-crossover recombination with plasmid
pHMJ3. For strain SSB344, the rnjA (ykqC) gene in strain
SSB340 was put under the control of the Pspac promoter by
Campbell-type integration of plasmid pHMJ4. Strain SSB30 is
derived from the prototrophic strain and carries a deletion of the
thrS gene constructed by double-crossover recombination with
plasmid pHMS15 (26). Strain SSB345 corresponds to strain
SSB344 where, in addition, the thrS gene has been deleted by
transformation with chromosomal DNA of strain SSB30.
E.coli JM 109 served as the host for plasmid constructions.
Overexpression of intein fusion proteins was carried out in
strain BL21(DE3) (27) carrying plasmid pRARE (Novagen)
which overexpresses rare tRNAs.
Figure 1. thrS mRNA leader: regulation by antitermination and cleavage sites. Under threonine starvation conditions, uncharged tRNAThr interacts with the thrS
leader mRNA as illustrated, thereby increasing read-through of the terminator by stabilizing the antiterminator structure. Two RNA cleavage sites are indicated by
arrows. Cleavage 1 in the AG-box (see text) was used to trace the novel endoribonuclease activity during purification. Cleavage 2, occurring next to the T-box has
previously been shown to stabilize thrS read-through transcripts in vivo by leaving a stable secondary structure close to the 50 end of the mRNA (24). E.coli RNase E is
able to cleave site 2 in vivo and in vitro (19).
2142 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 7
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 3, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
E.coli was grown at 37C in LB medium. B.subtilis was
grown at 37C in LB or SMS minimal medium (28)
supplemented with 0.2% casaminoacids. When required, anti-
biotics were added at the following concentration: ampicillin
(200 mg/ml), tetracyclin (10 mg/ml), neomycin (7 mg/ml),
erythromycin (erythromycin and lincomycin at 0.5 and
12.5 mg/ml, respectively).
Plasmid constructions
pHMJ1. The coding sequence of the rnjA gene containing an
additional C-terminal glycine codon was cloned in phase with
the intein domain in plasmid pKYB1 (New England Biolabs)
between the sites NdeI and SapI.
pHMJ2. Similar to pHMJ1, but containing the rnjB gene with
an additional C-terminal glycine codon.
pHMJ3. A 742 bp BmgBI–EcoRI fragment within the rnjB
gene in plasmid pHMJ2 was replaced with the tetracycline
cassette (cleaved with SmaI–EcoRI) of plasmid pDG1515 (29).
pHMJ4. A 407 bp fragment of the rnjA gene starting at
position 56 with respect to the initiation codon was PCR
amplified and ligated as a HindIII–SphI fragment into the
respective sites of the integrative plasmid pDG648 (provided
by P. Stragier) downstream of the Pspac promoter. Campbell-
type integration of pHMJ4 on the B.subtilis chromosome
renders rnjA expression IPTG dependent.
pHMS17. This plasmid contains the promoter, the entire leader
sequence and part of the thrS structural gene (30).
In vitro transcription
In vitro transcription with E.coli (Sigma) or purified B.subtilis
RNA polymerase (31) was carried out as described in (32)
using plasmid pHMS17 linearized by ClaI as template.
In vitro transcription with T7 RNA polymerase was per-
formed as described by the manufacturer (Promega) using
PCR fragments as templates. For thrS mRNA synthesis, the
PCR template was prepared using oligonucleotides HP128
(AGAATTCTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGATT AAG-
AAAGACAC) and HP27 (CCTTGACTGCTCCATCAGGA-
AATG). It contains the T7 promoter, the entire leader sequence
and the first 46 nt of the coding sequence. The thrZ template
was synthesized with oligonucleotides HP813 (AGAATTCT-
AATACGACTCACTATAGGGA ATTGAATACATGCGAT)
and HP814 (GTCCGGAAGCTGAATGTG). It contains the
T7 promoter, part of the leader sequence [downstream of the
second leader terminator, position 582 in (26)] and the first
33 nt of the coding sequence. Transcripts were purified by
gel filtration on Sephadex G-50 columns. Alternatively, the
mRNA substrate was purified from unwanted products by
isolation on a 5% polyacrylamide gel.
50 monophosphorylated 32P-labelled mRNA substrates were
synthesized with T7 RNA polymerase as described in (33).
RNase J1/J2 processing assays
The assay mixture (50 ml) contained 20 mM HEPES–KOH
(pH 8.0), 8 mM MgCl2, 100 mM NaCl, 0.48 U/ml RNasin
(Promega), 32P-labelled mRNA substrate prepared with
either E.coli or T7 RNA polymerase and a protein fraction.
The addition of MgCl2 was necessary to observe cleavage.
The reaction was incubated at 30C for 20 min, stopped by
the addition of 5 ml of 3 M Na-acetate pH 5, phenolized and
precipitated. The pellet was dissolved in 1· gel loading buffer
and run on a denaturing 5% polyacrylamide gel.
Alternatively, assays with purified RNase J1 or J2 proteins
were performed in 10 ml of the same reaction mixture. The
reaction was stopped by the addition of 5 ml of 3· gel loading
buffer and directly loaded on a 5% polyacrylamide gel. The
reaction products were visualized on a Phosphorimager and
where necessary quantified.
Purification and identification of B.subtilis
RNases J1 and J2
Endoribonucleolytic activities were isolated from B.subtilis
ribosomes. All steps were performed at 4C, and pH of all
buffers was adjusted at room temperature. Following growth
at 37C in LB medium supplemented with 0.5% glucose and
20 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7), bacteria were har-
vested at the end of exponential growth by centrifugation,
washed in buffer A (10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 15 mM mag-
nesium acetate, 60 mM NH4Cl and 8 mM b-mercaptoethanol),
resuspended in buffer A supplemented with DNase I
(10 mg/ml) and disrupted by two passages through a French
Press (15 000 psi). After clearing the lysate (27 000 g, 30 min),
ribosomes were concentrated by ultracentrifugation (190 000 g,
1 h 15 min), resuspended in buffer A by gentle agitation,
purified by ultracentrifugation through a sucrose cushion
(37.7% in buffer A, 165 000 g, 17 h) and washed for 2 h
under constant stirring with buffer A containing 1 M NH4Cl.
After removal of ribosomes by ultracentrifugation (190 000 g,
1 h 15 min), this high salt ribosomal wash was precipitated
with 80% ammonium sulfate and dialysed against buffer B
(40 mM Bis-Tris, pH 6.5, 4 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT and
10% v/v glycerol) containing 50 mM NaCl. The preparation
was loaded on a hydroxyapatite column (BioRad). Loosely
bound proteins were eliminated by washing the column
with 3 M and 50 mM NaCl in buffer B, before applying
a 0–1 M K-phosphate, pH 6.8 gradient in buffer containing
4 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT and 10% v/v glycerol. Fractions
containing the endoribonuclease activity were identified by
in vitro assays as described above, pooled, dialysed against
buffer B containing 50 mM NaCl and fractionated on a
Heparin column (Pharmacia) by a 0–2 M NaCl gradient
in buffer B. Active fractions were pooled and loaded on a
Superdex 200 column (Pharmacia) equilibrated in buffer B
containing 150 mM NaCl. Proteins responsible for the endo-
ribonucleolytic activity eluted faster than a 158 kDa marker
protein.
Fractions containing the highest activity were analysed
on 15% SDS–PAGE and visualized with the SilverQuest
Silver staining kit (Invitrogen). For mass spectrometric ana-
lysis, the candidate proteins were excised from a Coomassie
R-350 stained gel.
Overexpression of RNases J1 and J2 in E.coli
Native RNase J1/J2 proteins containing an additional glycine
residue at the C-terminal end were isolated using the IMPACT
system (New England Biolabs) and following the instructions
of the manufacturer. The rnjA (ykqC) and rnjB (ymfA) open
reading frames were cloned in phase into the intein fusion
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 7 2143
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 3, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
vector pKYB1 to give plasmids pHMJ1 and pHMJ2,
respectively. Overproduction of fusion proteins was carried
out in E.coli strain BL21(DE3) containing plasmid pRARE
(Novagen).
Mapping of the AG-box processing site
The processing site in the AG-box was mapped by reverse
transcription on unlabelled thrS leader transcript synthesized
in vitro with E.coli RNA polymerase and processed by HSW
as described above. Reverse transcription was performed
as described previously (34) using oligonucleotide HP238
(50-AGTTCCCGTCAGCCATTAC-30), complementary to
positions 151–169 of the thrS leader.
Mapping of the processing site upstream of
the leader terminator
In order to determine whether the processed fragments contain
the 50 or 30 ends of the original substrates, the transcripts were
32P-labelled on their 50 or 30 ends. For 50 end-labelling, the
nonradioactive mRNA substrates were successively incubated
with shrimp alkaline phosphatase (Amersham) and T4
polynucleotide kinase (Biolabs), as described by the manu-
facturers, using 10 mCi of g-32P ATP (Amersham). The 30 end-
labelling reaction was performed overnight at 16C as
described in (35) using 50 mCi of 32P pCp (Amersham).
The end-labelled transcripts were phenolized, precipitated
with ethanol, washed, dried, resuspended in water and sub-
sequently used in 10 ml post-transcriptional processing assays
as described above. Sequencing ladders starting at the 50 or 30
ends of the mRNA substrates were used for the identification
of the cleavage sites.
Measurement of bulk mRNA decay
Total mRNA decay was measured as described previously
(36). Briefly, an early-exponential-phase culture was pulse-
labelled with [3H]uridine for 2 min; transcription was stopped
by the addition of actinomycin D, unlabelled uridine and
nalidixic acid. At time intervals from 0 to 10 min, duplicate
1-ml samples were removed and TCA precipitated. Precipit-
ated nucleic acid was collected on Whatman GF/C glass filters.
The stable RNA component of radiolabelling was factored out
by substracting precipitable counts that remained 60 min after
the inhibition of transcription from the counts obtained at all
time points.
Database search for RNase J orthologues
At the time of writing 264 prokaryotic genomes (of which
the large majority was fully sequenced and annotated) were
available on the NCBI Microbial Genomes BLAST database
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sutils/genom_table.cgi) for a
protein-based blastp search. Orthologues for RNase J are
proposed on the basis of strong overall sequence similarity
extending essentially to the entire length of each protein. All
alignments were done with B.subtilis RNase J1 as well as
RNase J2. The results obtained were the same. In addition
to overall similarity, we also checked each individual ortho-
logue for the presence of three motifs (motifs A-C, see text)
which allow for an assignment of the individual proteins to
the b-CASP family of metallo-b-lactamases (37). Potential
orthologues of RNase J were only considered as such when
the following residues were present: Asp/Glu in motif A,
His in motif B and His or a polar amino acid in motif C.
Such a configuration has been predicted for members of the
b-CASP family involved in RNA metabolism (37).
RESULTS
Identification of an endonucleolytic cleavage in
the thrS mRNA leader in vitro
Cleavage within the so-called specifier domain of thrS
(Figure 1) was first observed during in vitro transcription
assays aimed at identifying protein factors promoting
tRNA-dependent antitermination. In vitro transcription was
carried out as described in (32) using purified B.subtilis
RNA polymerase and linearized plasmid pHMS17 containing
the promoter, the entire leader sequence and part of the thrS
structural gene as template (38). In the presence of a protein
fraction isolated from ribosomes (High Salt ribosome Wash),
a new signal was generated in addition to the transcript ter-
minated at the leader terminator and the full-length transcript.
This signal was also observed in a post-transcriptional assay
when incubating a purified thrS transcript with HSW or a
highly purified fraction containing the processing activity
(Figure 2A), indicating this signal was generated by cleavage
rather than by transcription arrest. This mRNA was 60 nt
shorter than the terminated transcript. The processing site was
mapped by reverse transcription of the processed thrS tran-
script using an oligonucleotide complementary to positions
151–169 of the thrS leader. Cleavage was found to occur at
three positions in a single-stranded sequence of the specifier
domain. This sequence, known as the AG-box (Figures 1 and
2B), is well conserved in the T-box family of genes and is
essential for tRNA-dependent antitermination for reasons
not yet known [(39), our unpublished results]. The upstream
cleavage product was not detected, probably due to its small
size and consequently to its low signal intensity. Moreover,
it is likely that this small unprotected RNA is degraded very
quickly by exoribonucleolytic activities present in the HSW.
Likewise, the signal of the read-through transcript is greatly
reduced relative to the 280 nt terminated or 220 nt processed
transcript, presumably because it is not protected by secondary
structure at the 30 end.
Two novel endoribonucleases, YkqC and YmfA,
are responsible for cleavage of the thrS
leader mRNA in vitro
Further purification of the HSW fraction (by FPLC) was
undertaken to isolate the protein(s) responsible for the cleav-
age observed in vitro in the AG-box of the thrS leader. The
HSW was successively fractionated on hydroxyapatite,
heparin and Superdex 200 columns. Throughout the purifica-
tion, the endoribonucleolytic activity was followed by post-
transcriptional cleavage assays as described in Materials and
Methods (Figure 2A). The last step, i.e. gel filtration, was
found to be crucial for the purification since the active com-
ponents eluted in fractions corresponding to a high molecular
weight component (>158 kDa). In the most active Superdex
200 fraction, we detected only two bands visible on a silver-
stained SDS polyacrylamide gel, which was surprising when
2144 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 7
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 3, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Figure 2. Purification of the nuclease responsible for the cleavage in thrS mRNA leader in vitro. (A) The thrS leader was transcribed in vitro using plasmid pHMS17
linearized by ClaI as template and E.coli RNA polymerase (see Materials and Methods). The thrS transcripts, one prematurely terminated at the leader terminator and
a read-through transcript, were incubated in 50 ml post-transcriptional assays without the addition of proteins, with 15 mg of a B.subtilis ribosomal high salt wash
(HSW) or with the most active enriched protein fraction eluting from a Superdex 200 (S 200) column. Scissors indicate the processed transcript. (B) Mapping of the
processing site shown in (A) in the thrS specifier domain. Primer extension was performed with 32P-labelled oligonucleotide HP238 on thrS mRNA synthesized
in vitro in the presence of B.subtilis HSW. Arrows indicate the processing sites within the thrS specifier domain, referred to as cleavage 1 (Figure 1). A sequencing
ladder was run in parallel using the same primer. (C) Purification of the endoribonucleolytic activity responsible for cleavage in the thrS specifier domain. The most
active fractions from the heparin (Hep) and S 200 columns were separated on a 15% SDS–polyacrylamide gel and silver stained. Molecular weight marker proteins
(M) were run in the first lane. (D) Cleavage of the thrS leader transcript by purified YkqC and YmfA proteins. thrS mRNA was prepared as described in (A) and
incubated in 50 ml post-transcriptional assays without proteins, with 15 mg of a B.subtilis HSW or with 200 ng of the purified proteins, YmfA, YkqC and a mixture
of YmfA and YkqC. The processed transcripts are indicated by scissors and a number (1: cleavage in the AG-box; 2: cleavage near the T-box, see Figures 1 and 3).
(E) Cleavage of a thrS leader transcript generated with T7 RNA polymerase from a PCR fragment (see Materials and Methods) by purified YkqC and YmfA proteins.
The fully synthesized thrS mRNA was incubated in 10 ml post-transcriptional assays without any proteins or with 200 ng of the purified proteins, YmfA and YkqC.
The processed transcripts are indicated by scissors.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 7 2145
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 3, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
one considers the protein pattern observed after the heparin
column (Figure 2C). The molecular weight of the two candid-
ate proteins was estimated to be 60 kDa, suggesting that the
native protein had to be at least a trimer.
The two bands on the SDS polyacrylamide gel were directly
analysed by mass spectrometry, which allowed the identifica-
tion of the two proteins as YkqC (upper band) and YmfA
(lower band) both of unknown function (Figure 2C). The two
polypeptides contain 555 and 515 amino acids according to
the Subtilist webserver (http://genolist.pasteur.fr/SubtiList/).
However, a comparison of the proposed YmfA coding
sequence with orthologues in other bacteria (see below) and
analysis of the putative translation start sites, suggested that
the annotation for YmfA was not correct. The true coding
sequence appears to start with a TTG codon 120 bp upstream
compared to the original annotation, which corresponds to 40
additional amino acids at the N-terminal end. In fact, these
additional amino acids can be perfectly aligned with ortho-
logues from related bacteria. This original TTG initiation
codon was converted to AUG for overexpression of the protein
(see below). Thus, both proteins have the same length and a
molecular weight of 61 kDa, which is in good agreement with
the observed molecular weights on SDS–PAGE (Figure 2C).
In addition, the two proteins are also paralogues sharing
49% identical residues. While YmfA is dispensable, YkqC is
considered to be an essential protein (40). From a structural
point of view, both proteins belong to the same subgroup of
the metallo-b-lactamases, namely the b-CASP family (37),
which is thought to be involved in DNA and RNA metabolism
(see Figure 6 and Discussion).
The YkqC and YmfA proteins were overexpressed in
E.coli as intein fusion proteins and purified in a single step
after induced self-cleavage of the intein (see Materials and
Methods). The purified proteins were then tested in post-
transcriptional assays for cleavage of the AG-box in the
thrS leader. As shown in Figure 2D (cleavage 1), both proteins
were able to cleave in the AG-box, but the signal was very
weak compared to that observed with the HSW. Unexpectedly,
a second cleavage product appeared (Figure 2D, cleavage 2),
which had not been observed with the HSW or even the most
purified protein fraction from B.subtilis (Figure 2A). This
fragment of 245 nt was the main cleavage product. The same
cleavage pattern was observed when enzymes were used
independently or together indicating that YkqC and YmfA
possess the same or similar enzymatic activity. Normally
the templates for cleavage reactions were prepared using
E.coli RNA polymerase, but we also used transcripts synthes-
ized by T7 RNA polymerase (see Materials and Methods).
The cleavage patterns observed with E.coli and T7 RNA
polymerase transcripts were quite similar, with the main cleav-
age product at 245 nt. However, cleavage in the AG-box
(cleavage 1), which was very weak on transcripts synthesized
by E.coli RNA polymerase, was not even detectable with T7
RNA polymerase transcripts.
The second cleavage occurs near the T-box, at the
same site previously shown to be an RNase
E-dependent cleavage in E.coli
In order to identify the site of the second cleavage (Figure 2D
and E, cleavage 2), the full-length and terminated thrS
transcripts synthesized by T7 RNA polymerase were isolated
on a polyacrylamide gel and used separately or together in
cleavage assays with YkqC and YmfA. Cleavage was observed
with both transcripts, generating the same major cleavage
product (marked with a scissors symbol in Figure 3A). This
fragment thus corresponds to the 50 part of the thrS leader
upstream of the cleavage site which is common to the full-
length and terminated transcript. This result was confirmed
by processing assays on thrS leader substrates labelled either
at their 50 or 30 ends. The major cleavage product was only
observed with the 50 end-labelled transcript (data not shown).
A sequencing ladder starting at the 50 end of the transcript was
run in parallel, which allowed us to map the processing site
upstream of the thrS terminator (around position 243 of
the thrS leader), in a region corresponding to the loop of
the antiterminator (Figure 3A and B). In the case of the
full-length transcript, the second fragment originating from
this cleavage has a predicted length of 105 bp corresponding
to sequences between the cleavage site and the 30 end of the
transcript. This fragment is present in assays with continuously
(Figure 3A, lanes 2, 3, 8 and 9) and 30 end-labelled (data not
shown) transcripts. This result clearly demonstrated that both,
YkqC and YmfA, are endoribonucleases. We have previously
shown that cleavage at exactly the same position upstream
of the thrS leader terminator occurs in vivo especially under
conditions that increase tRNA-mediated antitermination.
Processing at this site causes an increase in stability of the
downstream mRNA due to the presence of a stable secondary
structure (the terminator) close to the 50 end of the transcript
thereby amplifying the effect of antitermination on gene
expression (24). When transferred on a plasmid, processing
of the B.subtilis thrS leader can occur at the same site in E.coli,
where it is dependent on the endoribonuclease E, both in vivo
and in vitro (19). This suggested that YkqC and YmfA could
be functional homologues of E.coli RNase E. We decided
to rename the two proteins RNase J1 (YkqC) and RNase J2
(YmfA).
RNases J1 and J2 are sensitive to the
50 phosphorylation state of the mRNA
Considerable data on mRNA decay, mostly from E.coli, but
also from B.subtilis strongly suggest the importance of the
50 end in the control of mRNA stability (8,12–14,41,42). We
therefore analysed the ability of RNases J1 and J2 to ‘sense’
the 50 end of the mRNA, by determining the influence of the
mRNA 50 end phosphorylation state on the cleavage rate.
Uniformly labelled triphosphorylated and monophos-
phorylated thrS leader transcripts were used as substrates.
As shown in Figure 4, the rate of cleavage at site 2 (near
the T-box) by RNase J1 (YkqC) was similar with 50 mono-
or triphosphorylated transcripts with a <2-fold increase
for the monophosphorylated substrate. Interestingly, we also
observed cleavage 1 (in the AG-box), but only for the mono-
phosphorylated transcript (Figure 4A). The two observed
cleavages thus have quite different requirements concerning
the 50 phosphorylation state of the transcript. Cleavage in
the AG-box clearly depends on a 50 monophosphorylated
RNA whereas cleavage near the T-box is barely affected by
the nature of the 50 end. The results were very similar when
replacing RNase J1 by RNase J2 (Figure 4B).
2146 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 7
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 3, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Figure 3. YmfA and YkqC cleave near the T-box. (A) In vitro transcription was performed as described in Materials and Methods with a PCR fragment corresponding
to the thrS leader mRNA as template and T7 RNA polymerase. The terminated and full-length transcripts were purified on a 5% polyacrylamide gel and subsequently
used together (lanes 1–3) or separately (lanes 4–6 for the terminated transcript and lanes 7–9 for the full-length transcript) in 10 ml post-transcriptional assays.
Incubations were performed as described in Materials and Methods without any proteins or with 200 ng of the purified proteins, YmfA and YkqC. The processed
transcript is indicated by scissors. A sequencing ladder was run in parallel using primer HP43, which starts at the transcriptional start site of thrS. (B) T-box processing
site in the terminator and antiterminator conformations. T-box is indicated in bold.
Figure 4. Sensibility of the YkqC (A) and YmfA (B) processing activity to the 50 end phosphorylation state of the substrate. Equal amounts of 32P uniformly labelled
tri- (lanes 1–7) and monophosphorylated (lanes 8–14) thrS leader transcripts were used as substrates in 50ml post-transcriptional processing assays with 1mg of YkqC
or YmfA. Samples (5 ml) were taken at 0 min (lanes 1 and 8), 1 min (lanes 2 and 9), 2.5 min (lanes 3 and 10), 5 min (lanes 4 and 11), 10 min (lanes 5 and 12), 15 min
(lanes 6 and 13) and 20 min (lanes 7 and 14) after addition of purified YkqC (A) or YmfA (B), directly diluted with 2.5 ml of 3· gel loading buffer to stop the reaction
and run on a 5% polyacrylamide gel. The processed transcript is indicated by scissors and a number (1: cleavage in the AG-box; scissor 2: cleavage near the T-box).
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 7 2147
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 3, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Cleavage in the AG-box with the Superdex 200 fraction
containing a mixture of RNases J1 and J2 was initially
observed on a 50 triphosphorylated transcript (see Figure 2A).
However, the initial cleavage rate was 14-fold higher on a
50 monophosphorylated transcript indicating that the 50 end
dependence of RNases J1/J2 is similar when the proteins are
isolated from B.subtilis or E.coli (data not shown).
RNases J1 and J2 cleave upstream of the terminator
in the thrZ leader mRNA in vitro
In addition to thrS, the leader regions of several of the
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase genes of B.subtilis regulated by
tRNA-dependent antitermination are cleaved in vivo between
the T-box and the leader terminator (24). We therefore tested
the ability of RNases J1 and J2 to cleave a thrZ leader tran-
script in vitro. The thrZ gene encodes a second threonyl-tRNA
synthetase gene, which is normally silent. Its expression is
induced in a dose-compensatory manner when expression
of the housekeeping thrS gene is reduced or the strain is sub-
ject to threonine starvation conditions (26). The thrZ leader is
over 800 bp long and contains three terminators (Figure 5A).
Cleavage in vivo is observed upstream of the terminator
proximal to the structural gene (24). We therefore synthesized
a PCR fragment including a T7 promoter covering the thrZ
leader downstream of the second terminator and the beginning
of coding sequence (Figure 5A). As in the case of thrS, two
transcripts were obtained, a full-length read-through transcript
and a shorter one, prematurely terminated at the leader ter-
minator. Both RNases J1 and J2 were able to cleave the thrZ
transcript in vitro (Figure 5B). The processed fragment shown
in Figure 5B was also observed with 50 end-labelled transcripts
confirming that it corresponds to the fragment upstream of the
cleavage site (data not shown). A sequencing ladder starting at
the 50 end of the transcript was run in parallel, which allowed
us to map the processing site near the T-box (Figure 5B), at
the same position as previously observed in vivo (24).
RNases J1 and/or J2 are required for thrZ
leader mRNA cleavage in vivo
Having shown that RNases J1 and J2 can cleave in vitro the
50 noncoding regions of thrS and thrZ upstream of the leader
terminator, we wanted to verify that these enzymes are also
responsible for cleavage in vivo. For that purpose, we con-
structed single and double mutant strains (as described in
Figure 5. Processing of the thrZ mRNA leader in vitro and in vivo. (A) Genetic organization map of the thrZ leader. Grey squares indicate the three T-box sequences.
The PCR fragment used for in vitro transcription (see B) and the transcripts generated are also shown. (B) In vitro transcription was performed as described in
Materials and Methods with T7 RNA polymerase and a PCR fragment corresponding to the thrZ leader downstream of the second transcription terminator and the
beginning of the coding sequence as template (see A). The two transcripts generated, i.e. the full-length read-through transcript and a shorter one, prematurely
terminated at the leader terminator, were incubated in 10 ml post-transcriptional assays without any proteins or with 200 ng of the purified proteins, YmfA and YkqC.
The processed transcripts are indicated by a scissors symbol. A sequencing ladder was run in parallel using primer HP 821, which starts at the transcriptional start site
of thrZ mRNA leader synthesized in vitro. Arrows indicate the processing site. T-box is indicated in bold. (C) Processing of the thrZ mRNA leader in vivo. Primer
extension was performed with 32P-labelled oligonucleotide HP814 (50-GTCCGGAAGCTGAATGTG-30) on total RNA from B.subtilis SSB30 (lane 1) and SSB345
(lane 2) as described in Materials and Methods. A sequencing ladder was run in parallel using the same primer. The transcriptional start site of thrZ (+1), the
processing site near the T-box (scissor) and the non-specific stop at the terminator structure (T) are indicated.
2148 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 7
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 3, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Materials and Methods). In the single mutant, the ymfA gene
(RNase J2) was partially deleted by a double cross-over event
(strain SSB340). For the double mutant, in addition, we put the
expression of the chromosomal ykqC gene (RNase J1) under
the control of the IPTG-inducible Pspac promoter (strain
SSB344). A double knock-out strain was not feasible due to
the essential nature of the ykqC gene. Strain SSB344 grew well
in the presence of IPTG in rich and minimal media. In the
absence of IPTG, strain SSB344 still grew in LB medium,
indicating a certain leakiness of the Pspac promoter. However,
in the absence of IPTG, reasonable growth in minimal medium
could only be achieved through the addition of casamino acids.
This behaviour compromised an in vivo analysis of the role of
RNases J1 and J2 in the cleavage of the thrS leader. Cleavage
upstream of the thrS terminator in vivo is only efficiently
detected during threonine starvation, conditions too harsh
for the double mutant strain grown in the absence of IPTG.
We therefore turned our efforts to the thrZ gene, which
is well expressed and whose leader is efficiently cleaved
upstream of the third leader terminator in a strain lacking a
functional thrS gene (24,26). We thus compared the cleavage
of thrZ transcripts in a ykqC, ymfA double mutant strain car-
rying a thrS deletion (strain SSB345), grown in the absence of
IPTG, and a thrS deletion strain, wild-type for the RNase J
genes (strain SSB30). Primer extension experiments using an
oligonucleotide complementary to positions 16–33 of the thrZ
coding sequence indicated that the thrZ mRNA is efficiently
cleaved upstream of the proximal transcription terminator in
strain SSB30; practically no signal corresponding to an exten-
sion beyond the cleavage site is detectable. In contrast, in
strain SSB345 the strongest signal corresponded to position
+1, almost 800 nt upstream of the cleavage site (Figure 5C).
Thus, reducing the expression of RNase J1 in the total absence
of RNase J2 increased the proportion of unprocessed thrZ
leader (thereby enabling the reverse transcriptase to proceed
all the way through to the 50 end of the thrZ transcript). These
data strongly suggest that RNase J1 and/or RNase J2 are
responsible in vivo for the cleavage of the thrZ leader mRNA.
Bulk mRNA stability is slightly increased in
an RNase J1/J2 double mutant strain
We next investigated whether the presence or absence of the
RNase J proteins has an impact on global mRNA stability, as is
the case for RNase E in E.coli. The decay rate of bulk mRNA
was measured by pulse-labelling RNA with 3H-uridine as
described in Materials and Methods. Global mRNA half-life
was 2.6 – 0.1 min in a wild-type strain, 2.6 – 0.3 min in
SSB340 (DymfA) and 3.6 – 0.1 min in SSB344 (DymfA,
Pspac-ykqC) when grown in the absence of IPTG. We con-
clude that the absence of RNase J2 alone has no effect on
mRNA stability. However, reducing, in addition, expression of
RNase J1 slightly increases global mRNA half-life. This effect
is weak but RNase J1 may influence rates of mRNA decay.
DISCUSSION
RNases J1 and J2: functional homologues of
E.coli RNase E
In this paper, we describe the purification, identification and
characterization of two novel endoribonucleases in B.subtilis,
RNases J1 and J2. In order to be consistent with the current
nomenclature, we renamed their genes rnjA (ykqC) and rnjB
(ymfA). The two Bacillus enzymes are, in several aspects,
functionally homologous to E.coli RNase E.
The most striking similarity is the fact that RNase J1/J2 and
RNase E cleave the thrS leader at the same position upstream
of the terminator. On the other hand, the primary sequence
specificity of the Bacillus enzymes is apparently low, because
there is little primary sequence similarity between the AG-box
and the T-box cleavage sites identified in the thrS and thrZ
leaders (Figures 1 and 5). Cleavages occurred rather in single-
stranded regions and loops, with structured regions in the
vicinity, but without a strong consensus at the sequence
level or even a bias toward specific bases as observed for
RNaseE.
Another significant correlation between B.subtilis RNase J
and E.coli RNase E, is the sensitivity of cleavage with respect
to the 50 end phosphorylation state of the substrate (12,33).
RNases J1 and J2 cleave 50 monophosphorylated transcripts
more rapidly than transcripts with a 50 triphosphate. Interest-
ingly, the two cleavage sites in the thrS leader behave very
differently. While the rate of cleavage 2 upstream of the
terminator is increased <2-fold on a 50 monophosphorylated
mRNA, cleavage 1 in the AG-box is not even detectable on a
50 triphosphorylated transcript synthesized by T7 RNA poly-
merase (Figure 4). This difference suggests that both RNases
J1 and J2 may use two different processing/maturation
pathways, one being 50 end dependent, thus sensitive to its
phosphorylation state, and the other able to bypass this
requirement for efficient cleavage to occur. A similar situation
has been described for RNase E. Monophosphorylation of the
50 end accelerates the reaction, but RNase E seems to also
cleave 50 triphosphorylated transcripts at a basal rate in a
50 end-independent manner, which is directly related to the
intrinsic susceptibility of the site (33). This internal entry
pathway with reduced sensitivity to the nature of the 50 end
has been demonstrated by the insertion of ’ectopic’ RNase E
cleavage sites with high intrinsic susceptibility into an mRNA
(43). The B.subtilis RNase J cleavage site 2 upstream of the
thrS leader terminator is thus a good candidate for an equi-
valent internal entry site. However, in that case, why did we
not observe processing at this site in the course of the RNase J
purification process from B.subtilis? The simplest explanation
is based on the fact that even the most purified fraction of
RNase J still contained some exoribonucleolytic activity. In
contrast to the 220 nt fragment observed by cleavage in the
AG-box (Figure 2A), the 245 nt fragment produced by cleav-
age 2 near the T-box (Figure 2E) lacks a protective secondary
structure (the terminator) at its 30 end. Similarly, the unpro-
tected full-length transcript is also barely detectable under the
assay conditions (Figure 2A). However, we will also invest-
igate potential differences in the cleavage specificity of RNase
J when isolated from B.subtilis or E.coli: oligomerization state,
existence of heteromultimers in B.subtilis, post-translational
modifications and presence of a co-factor.
Finally, in a further analogy to RNase E, we measured
an increase in global mRNA half-life in a double mutant
compared to a wild-type strain (3.6 versus 2.6 min). This effect
is small compared to a 2- to 3-fold increase in an E.coli
RNase E mutant (44), but is nevertheless comparable to that
of a null mutant for polynucleotide phosphorylase in B.subtilis
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 7 2149
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 3, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
(2.8 versus 3.7 min) (36). The latter enzyme plays an important
role in mRNA turnover since the primary mode of RNA
degradation in B.subtilis is phosphorolytic (45). Moreover,
in our experiment RNase J1 expression was not abolished
but only diminished thereby reducing the potential effect on
mRNA stability. However, the small effect of RNase J1/J2 on
global mRNA stability might also be due to a smaller set of
substrates compared to that of RNase E or to a compensatory
effect of stabilizing and destabilizing cleavages. Further
investigations will be needed to fully assess the potential
importance of this enzyme in mRNA turnover in addition
to the more regulatory role established here.
RNases J1 and J2 belong to the b-CASP family of
metallo-b-lactamases
From a structural point of view, the paralogous RNases J1 and
J2 belong to the b-CASP family of metallo-b-lactamases,
which comprise a large number of proteins in all three primary
kingdoms, eukaryotes, bacteria and archaea (37). These pro-
teins appear to be specialized towards nucleic acids as sug-
gested by functional data gained for at least one eukaryotic
member (46). RNases J1 and J2 are the first prokaryotic pro-
teins of the b-CASP family for which a clear function in RNA
metabolism has been demonstrated.
Active members of the metallo-b-lactamase superfamily
contain five conserved sequence motifs that participate in
zinc coordination and hydrolysis reaction (47,48). The hall-
mark of the b-CASP subfamily is the presence of three highly
conserved amino acids (37) shown as motifs A, B and C in
Figure 6. Motif A is an acidic residue (D or E), motif B is
always a histidine and motif C confers substrate specificity.
This residue is predicted to be a hydrophobic amino acid in
enzymes acting on DNA whereas it is always a histidine in
RNA-specific proteins. RNase J1, with a Histidine as the C
motif, is the first example in prokaryotes that confirms the
predictive power of these motifs. The presence of an aspar-
agine in the corresponding position of RNase J2 indicates that
motif C can also accommodate a polar amino acid without
compromising the endoribonuclease activity (Figure 6).
Orthologues of RNase J1/J2 are widely spread among
bacteria and archaea
Clear orthologues of RNase J1/J2 can be found in many
bacteria and archaea (see Figure 7). In our search, we con-
sidered not only high overall full-length similarity but also
checked every individual candidate for the presence of resi-
dues D/E in motif A, H in motif B and H or a polar amino acid
in motif C. Moreover, all orthologues identified also contain
two strictly conserved proline residues between motifs B and C,
Figure 6. Domain structure of B.subtilis RNases J1/J2. (A) RNases J1/J2
belong to the b-CASP family recently described by Callebaut et al. (37) as
a separate group within the metallo-b-lactamase superfamily. These proteins
appear to be specialized towards nucleic acids and are characterized by the
presence of three highly conserved amino acids, namely motifs A, B and C.
Motifs B and C are located in the RNA metabolizing metallo-b-lactamase
domain (RMMBL). (B) Comparison of motifs A, B and C between RNases
J1 and J2.
Figure 7. The phylogenetic distribution of RNase J orthologues in prokaryotes.
Subfamilies of organisms where at least one member contains an RNase J are
encircled. Grey-shaded circles indicate that every single member of this family
contains an RNase J orthologue. Ratios refer to the number of members of a
subfamily that possess one orthologue to RNase J1/J2 over the total number of
members. Subfamilies of the Firmicutes often contain several RNase J ortho-
logues (indicated by an asterisk). Within the Bacillales and Lactobacillales
groups, there is always one orthologue clearly more related to RNase J1 than
RNase J2, with the others being equally similar to both. Subfamilies of the
Proteobacteria containing the classical RNase E and G complement are marked
by the letter E.
2150 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 7
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 3, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
corresponding to residues 383 and 388 in B.subtilis RNase J1
(Figure 6). Most organisms have only a single orthologue,
more or less equally similar to RNases J1 and J2 of B.subtilis
but shorter at the C-terminal end (archaea) or, on the contrary,
carrying N-terminal extensions (actinobacteria) or C-terminal
extensions (cyanobacteria) compared to the Bacillus counter-
part. The firmicutes to which B.subtilis belongs often have
several copies of RNase J orthologues, up to four as in the
case of B.thuringiensis. Generally, one copy is clearly more
related to RNase J1 than RNase J2 with the other copies being
equally similar to both B.subtilis RNases. It is worth mention-
ing that the orthologues corresponding to the latter category
in the Lactobacillales always have a glutamine as motif C
equivalent to the asparagine of RNase J2 of B.subtilis.
Since we have shown that RNase J2 is a functional endoribo-
nuclease, it is likely that these orthologues are also involved in
RNA processing. In contrast, the second potential orthologues
of Lactobacillus gasseri/johnsonii have the hydrophobic
amino acid isoleucine as motif C and would thus be predicted
to act on DNA rather than RNA (37). The situation is similar in
the Mollicutes where in all cases a potential second ortho-
logue, despite good overall similarity, does not correspond
to the criteria concerning motifs A, B and C.
Finally, there is the case of the proteobacteria, which is
interesting because it allows to establish a relationship bet-
ween the occurrence of RNase E and RNase J. RNase E and
RNase G, a close analogue of the catalytic portion of RNase E,
always occur together within the b- and g-subdivisions of the
Proteobacteria. These two subfamilies do not have an RNase J
orthologue, with the unique exception of Methylococcus
capsulatus. However, a single RNase E/G family member
is found in many eubacterial species outside the b- and
g-Proteobacteria. In most cases, these enzymes are similar
to RNase G in size (500 amino acids) and equally similar
to both RNase G and the N-terminal half of RNase E.
The occurrence of these RNase E/G-like enzymes is not
correlated with that of RNase J. For example, Chlamidiae
have RNase E/G but no RNase J while the Actinobacteria
have both. A more detailed enzymatical and structural analysis
of RNase J and E/G-like proteins is clearly necessary to
establish to what extent the functions of RNase E/G and
RNase J overlap.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We wish to thank P. Regnier and J. Plumbridge for useful
discussions and critical reading of the manuscript. S.E. bene-
fited from financial support from INRA (ASC). This work
was supported by funds from the CNRS (UPR 9073), MRE
(Contract 92C0315), Universite´ Paris VII (Contract DRED)
and PRFMMIP from the Ministe`re de l’Education Nationale.
Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this
article was provided by CNRS (UPR 9073).
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Drider,D., DiChiara,J.M., Wei,J., Sharp,J.S. and Bechhofer,D.H. (2002)
Endonuclease cleavage of messenger RNA in Bacillus subtilis.
Mol. Microbiol., 43, 1319–1329.
2. Klug,G. and Cohen,S.N. (1990) Combined actions of multiple hairpin
loop structures and sites of rate-limiting endonucleolytic cleavage
determine differential degradation rates of individual segments within
polycistronic puf operon mRNA. J. Bacteriol., 172, 5140–5146.
3. Meinken,C., Blencke,H.M., Ludwig,H. and Stulke,J. (2003) Expression
of the glycolytic gapA operon in Bacillus subtilis: differential syntheses
of proteins encoded by the operon. Microbiology, 149, 751–761.
4. Homuth,G., Mogk,A. and Schumann,W. (1999) Post-transcriptional
regulation of the Bacillus subtilis dnaK operon. Mol. Microbiol.,
32, 1183–1197.
5. Mader,U., Hennig,S., Hecker,M. and Homuth,G. (2004) Transcriptional
organization and posttranscriptional regulation of the Bacillus subtilis
branched-chain amino acid biosynthesis genes. J. Bacteriol., 186,
2240–2252.
6. Coburn,G.A. and Mackie,G.A. (1999) Degradation of mRNA in
Escherichia coli: an old problem with some new twists. Prog. Nucleic
Acid Res. Mol. Biol., 62, 55–108.
7. Grunberg-Manago,M. (1999) Messenger RNA stability and its role in
control of gene expression in bacteria and phages. Annu. Rev. Genet., 33,
193–227.
8. Regnier,P. and Arraiano,C.M. (2000) Degradation of mRNA in bacteria:
emergence of ubiquitous features. Bioessays, 22, 235–244.
9. Ehretsmann,C., Carpousis,A.J. and Krisch,H.M. (1992) Specificity of
Escherichia coli endoribonuclease RNAse E: in vivo and in vitro analysis
of mutants in a bacteriophage T4 mRNA processing site. Genes Dev.,
6, 149–159.
10. Mackie,G.A. and Genereaux,J.L. (1993) The role of RNA structure in
determining RNase E-dependent cleavage sites in the mRNA for
ribosomal protein S20 in vitro. J. Mol. Biol., 234, 998–1012.
11. McDowall,K.J., Lin-Chao,S. and Cohen,S.N. (1994) A+U content rather
than a particular nucleotide order determines the specificity of
RNase E cleavage. J. Biol. Chem., 269, 10790–10796.
12. Mackie,G.A. (1998) Ribonuclease E is a 50-end-dependent endonuclease.
Nature, 395, 720–723.
13. Mackie,G.A. (2000) Stabilization of circular rpsT mRNA demonstrates
the 50-end dependence of RNase E action in vivo. J. Biol. Chem.,
275, 25069–25072.
14. Xu,F. and Cohen,S.N. (1995) RNA degradation in Escherichia coli
regulated by 30 adenylation and 50 phosphorylation. Nature,
374, 180–183.
15. Cheng,Z.F. and Deutscher,M.P. (2005) An important role for RNase R in
mRNA decay. Mol. Cell, 17, 313–318.
16. Panganiban,A.T. and Whiteley,H.R. (1983) Purification and properties
of a new Bacillus subtilis RNA processing enzyme. Cleavage of
phage SP82 mRNA and Bacillus subtilis precursor rRNA. J. Biol. Chem.,
258, 12487–12493.
17. Wang,W. and Bechhofer,D.H. (1997) Bacillus subtilis RNase III gene:
cloning, function of the gene in Escherichia coli, and construction of
Bacillus subtilis strains with altered rnc loci. J. Bacteriol., 179,
7379–7385.
18. Oussenko,I.A., Sanchez,R. and Bechhofer,D.H. (2004) Bacillus subtilis
YhcR, a high-molecular-weight, nonspecific endonuclease with a
unique domain structure. J. Bacteriol., 186, 5376–5383.
19. Condon,C., Putzer,H., Luo,D. and Grunberg-Manago,M. (1997)
Processing of the Bacillus subtilis thrS leader mRNA is RNase
E-dependent in Escherichia coli. J. Mol. Biol., 268, 235–242.
20. Hambraeus,G., Karhumaa,K. and Rutberg,B. (2002) A 50 stem–loop and
ribosome binding site but not translation are important for the stability of
Bacillus subtilis aprE leader mRNA. Microbiology, 148, 1795–1803.
21. Dreyfus,M. and Joyce,S. (2002) The interplay between translation and
mRNA decay in procaryotes. In Lapointe,J. and Brakier-Gingras,L. (eds),
Translational Mechanisms. Landes Bioscience, Georgetown, TX,
pp. 165–183.
22. Agaisse,H. and Lereclus,D. (1996) STAB-SD: a Shine–Dalgarno
sequence in the 50 untranslated region is a determinant of mRNA stability.
Mol. Microbiol., 20, 633–643.
23. Sharp,J.S. and Bechhofer,D.H. (2003) Effect of translational signals on
mRNA decay in Bacillus subtilis. J. Bacteriol., 185, 5372–5379.
24. Condon,C., Putzer,H. and Grunberg-Manago,M. (1996) Processing of the
leader mRNA plays a major role in the induction of thrS expression
following threonine starvation in B. subtilis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA,
93, 6992–6997.
25. Putzer,H. and Laalami,S. (2002) Regulation of the expression of
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases and translational factors. In Lapointe,J. and
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 7 2151
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 3, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Brakier-Gingras,L. (eds), Translational Mechanisms. Landes
Bioscience, Georgetown, TX, pp. 388–415.
26. Putzer,H., Gendron,N. and Grunberg-Manago,M. (1992) Co-ordinate
expression of the two threonyl-tRNA synthetase genes in Bacillus
subtilis: control by transcriptional antitermination involving a conserved
regulatory sequence. EMBO J., 11, 3117–3127.
27. Studier,F.W. and Moffatt,B.A. (1986) Use of bacteriophage T7 RNA
polymerase to direct selective high-level expression of cloned genes.
J. Mol. Biol., 189, 113–130.
28. Spizizen,J. (1958) Transformation of biochemically deficient strains of
Bacillus subtilis by deoxyribonucleate. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA,
44, 407–408.
29. Guerout-Fleury,A.M., Shazand,K., Frandsen,N. and Stragier,P. (1995)
Antibiotic-resistance cassettes for Bacillus subtilis. Gene,
167, 335–336.
30. Gendron,N., Putzer,H. and Grunberg-Manago,M. (1994) Expression of
both Bacillus subtilis threonyl-tRNA synthetase genes is autogenously
regulated. J. Bacteriol., 176, 486–494.
31. Moran,C.P. (1990) Measuring gene expression in Bacillus.
In Harwood,C.R. and Cutting,S.M. (eds), Molecular Biological
Methods for Bacillus. John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Chichester,
pp. 267–293.
32. Putzer,H., Condon,C., Brechemier-Baey,D., Brito,R. and
Grunberg-Manago,M. (2002) Transfer RNA-mediated antitermination
in vitro. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 3026–3033.
33. Jiang,X., Diwa,A. and Belasco,J.G. (2000) Regions of RNase E important
for 50-end-dependent RNA cleavage and autoregulated synthesis.
J. Bacteriol., 182, 2468–2475.
34. Uzan,M., Favre,R. and Brody,N.E. (1988) A nuclease that cuts
specifically in the ribosome binding site of some T4 mRNAs.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 85, 8895–8899.
35. Li,Z., Pandit,S. and Deutscher,M.P. (1998) Polyadenylation of
stable RNA precursors in vivo. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA,
95, 12158–12162.
36. Wang,W. and Bechhofer,D.H. (1996) Properties of a Bacillus subtilis
polynucleotide phosphorylase deletion strain. J. Bacteriol., 178,
2375–2382.
37. Callebaut,I., Moshous,D., Mornon,J.P. and de Villartay,J.P. (2002)
Metallo-beta-lactamase fold within nucleic acids processing enzymes:
the beta-CASP family. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 3592–3601.
38. Putzer,H., Laalami,S., Brakhage,A.A., Condon,C. and
Grunberg-Manago,M. (1995) Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase gene
regulation in Bacillus subtilis: induction, repression and growth-rate
regulation. Mol. Microbiol., 16, 709–718.
39. Rollins,S.M., Grundy,F.J. and Henkin,T.M. (1997) Analysis of cis-acting
sequence and structural elements required for antitermination of the
Bacillus subtilis tyrS gene. Mol. Microbiol., 25, 411–421.
40. Kobayashi,K., Ehrlich,S.D., Albertini,A., Amati,G., Andersen,K.K.,
Arnaud,M., Asai,K., Ashikaga,S., Aymerich,S., Bessieres,P. et al. (2003)
Essential Bacillus subtilis genes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA,
100, 4678–4683.
41. Bechhofer,D.H. (1993) 50 mRNA stabilisers. In Belasco,J.G. and
Brawerman,G. (eds), Control of Messenger RNA Stability. Academic
Press, San Diego, pp. 31–52.
42. Emory,S.A., Bouvet,P. and Belasco,J.G. (1992) A 50-terminal stem-loop
structure can stabilize mRNA in Escherichia coli. Genes Dev.,
6, 135–148.
43. Baker,K.E. and Mackie,G.A. (2003) Ectopic RNase E sites promote
bypass of 50-end-dependent mRNA decay in Escherichia coli.
Mol. Microbiol., 47, 75–88.
44. Babitzke,P. and Kushner,S.R. (1991) The Ams (altered mRNA stability)
protein and ribonuclease E are encoded by the same structural gene of
Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 88, 1–5.
45. Deutscher,M.P. and Reuven,N.B. (1991) Enzymatic basis for hydrolytic
versus phosphorolytic mRNA degradation in Escherichia coli and
Bacillus subtilis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 88, 3277–3280.
46. Ryan,K., Calvo,O. and Manley,J.L. (2004) Evidence that
polyadenylation factor CPSF-73 is the mRNA 30 processing
endonuclease. RNA, 10, 565–573.
47. Daiyasu,H., Osaka,K., Ishino,Y. and Toh,H. (2001) Expansion of the zinc
metallo-hydrolase family of the beta-lactamase fold. FEBS Lett.,
503, 1–6.
48. Aravind,L. (1999) An evolutionary classification of the
metallo-beta-lactamase fold proteins. In Silico Biol., 1, 69–91.
2152 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 7
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on M
arch 3, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
