miRBase: microRNA sequences, targets and gene
nomenclature
Sam Griffiths-Jones*, Russell J. Grocock, Stijn van Dongen, Alex Bateman and
Anton J. Enright
The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK
Received September 12, 2005; Revised and Accepted October 18, 2005
ABSTRACT
The miRBase database aims to provide integrated
interfaces to comprehensive microRNA sequence
data, annotationandpredictedgene targets.miRBase
takes over functionality from the microRNA Registry
and fulfils three main roles: the miRBase Registry
acts as an independent arbiter of microRNA gene
nomenclature, assigning names prior to publication
of novel miRNA sequences. miRBase Sequences is
the primary online repository for miRNA sequence
data and annotation. miRBase Targets is a compre-
hensive new database of predicted miRNA target
genes. miRBase is available at http://microrna.
sanger.ac.uk/.
INTRODUCTION
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of non-coding RNA gene
whose final product is a 22 nt functional RNA molecule.
They play important roles in the regulation of target genes
by binding to complementary regions of messenger transcripts
to repress their translation or regulate degradation (1–3).
miRNAs have been implicated in cellular roles as diverse
as developmental timing in worms, cell death and fat meta-
bolism in flies, haematopoiesis in mammals, and leaf devel-
opment and floral patterning in plants [reviewed in (4,5)].
Recent reports have suggested that miRNAs may play roles
in human cancers (6–8).
The biogenesis of miRNA sequences has been largely
elucidated [reviewed in (9)]. The mature miRNA (often des-
ignated miR) is processed from a characteristic stem–loop
sequence (called a pre-mir), which in turn may be excised
from a longer primary transcript (or pri-mir). Only a handful
of primary transcripts have been fully described, but evidence
suggests that miRNAs are transcribed by RNA polymerase II,
and that the transcripts are capped and polyadenylated.
Since the discovery of the founding members of the miRNA
class, lin-4 and let-7 in Caenorhabditis elegans [reviewed in
(10)], over 2000 miRNA sequences have been described in
vertebrates, flies, worms and plants, and even in viruses.
However, the functions of only a handful of these miRNAs
have been experimentally determined. In parallel with novel
gene identification efforts, the miRNA community is therefore
focused on predicting and validating miRNA gene targets.
The miRBase database brings together the gene naming and
sequence database roles previously fulfilled by the microRNA
Registry (11), with the first automated pipeline for predicting
miRNA target genes in multiple animal genomes. These three
functions are briefly discussed in turn.
miRBase REGISTRY
The rapid growth of the miRNA field has been facilitated by the
adoption of a consistent gene naming scheme, which has been
applied since the first large-scale miRNA discoveries (12–14).
The miRNARegistry (11) has acted as an independent arbiter of
gene names, and this function is continued by the miRBase
Registry. Names are assigned by the Registry based on guide-
lines agreed by a number of prominent miRNA researchers and
discussed elsewhere (15). In order to minimize the gaps in the
naming scheme and to take advantage of the peer review pro-
cess to assess the validity of submitted miRNAs, names are
assigned after a manuscript describing their discovery is accep-
ted for publication. Official gene names should be incorporated
into the final version of a manuscript. The nomenclature guide-
lines require that novel miRNA genes are experimentally veri-
fied by cloning or with evidence of expression and processing.
Homologous miRNAs from related organisms that are identi-
fied by sequence analysis methods may be named without the
need for further experimental evidence.
miRNAs are assigned sequential numerical identifiers. The
database uses abbreviated 3 or 4 letter prefixes to designate the
species, such that identifiers take the form hsa-miR-101 (in
Homo sapiens). The mature sequences are designated ‘miR’ in
the database, whereas the precursor hairpins are labelled ‘mir’.
The gene names are intended to convey limited information
about functional relationships between mature miRNAs. For
example, hsa-miR-101 in human and mmu-miR-101 in mouse
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +44 1223 834244; Fax: +44 1223 494919; Email: sgj@sanger.ac.uk
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
D140–D144 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gkj112
are orthologous. Paralogous sequences whose mature miRNAs
differ at only one or two positions are given lettered suffixes—
for example, mmu-miR-10a and mmu-miR-10b in mouse.
Distinct hairpin loci that give rise to identical mature miRNAs
have numbered suffixes (e.g. dme-mir-281-1 and dme-mir-
281-2 in Drosophila melanogaster). It should be noted that
plant and viral naming schemes differ subtly.
However, miRNA names should not be relied upon to
convey complex relationship information. Naming criteria
may be subtly redefined over time, and opinion on the degree
of conservation of mature sequence required for functional
redundancy varies—some recent studies suggest that only
the 50 so-called seed region of the sequence forms a tight
duplex with the target mRNA (16). Related hairpin precursor
sequences may give rise to mature sequences with only mar-
ginal similarity and different miRNA numbers. The naming
scheme is also complicated by instances where two different
mature miRNA sequences appear to be excised from opposite
arms of the same hairpin precursor. Such mature sequences
are currently named of the form miR-17-5p (50 arm) and miR-
17-3p (30 arm). Complex sequence relationships and names are
discussed with the submitting author on a case by case basis.
miRBase SEQUENCES
In parallel with the miRNA community’s need for a consistent
naming scheme, miRNA research and informatics has bene-
fited greatly from a dedicated database of miRNA sequences
and annotation. The miRBase Sequence database takes over
from the microRNA Registry database as the primary repos-
itory for miRNA data. We briefly describe recent growth and
database improvements.
Rapid database growth
The miRBase Sequence database contains sequences of all
published mature miRNA sequences, together with their pre-
dicted source hairpin precursors and annotation relating to
their discovery, structure and function. The database has
grown rapidly in the past 2 years, from 506 entries represent-
ing miRNA hairpin precursors in six species (release 2.0, June
2003) to 2909 entries in 36 species (release 7.0, June 2005).
Stable accessions
miRNA names may change in time to reflect newly discovered
relationships between sequences. Stable database accession
Figure 1. The sequence database entry for hsa-mir-25. The three sections of the page describe the predicted stem–loop hairpin, mature sequences and primary
references. The genomic coordinates and contextual information link to theEnsembl database. EachmaturemiRNAcontains an evidence field, and links are provided
to predicted target pages.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D141
numbers are therefore assigned to both hairpin (e.g.
MI0000015) and mature (e.g. MIMAT0000029) sequences
to enable tracking of sequence entities. A summary of the
differences between releases is available. In addition,
human and mouse gene symbols are provided in consultation
with the Genome Nomenclature Committees (HGNC and
MGNC).
Evidence tracking
The database contains miRNAs from two fundamentally dif-
ferent sources. Experimentally verified mature miRNAs are
annotated with primary literature references and the experi-
mental method used for discovery. The database also contains
sequences that are predicted homologs of miRNAs verified in
a related organism. For example, 223 of 313 distinct mature
miRNA sequences from human (71%) have experimental
evidence in human, while the remainder are clearly identifi-
able homologs of verified miRNAs from mouse, rat and zebra-
fish. Homologs are predicted based on sequence similarity and
folding characteristics of the precursor hairpin, synteny ana-
lysis and conservation of the mature miRNA. The source of
every miRNA is clearly annotated on the miRNA entry page
(Figure 1) and distributed in the flat file downloads. The miR-
Base Sequence database does not currently contain predicted
miRNAs that are without experimental evidence in any related
organism.
Genomic context
For organisms with an assembled genome sequence we pro-
vide coordinates of the genomic position of each miRNA
sequence on the entry page (Figure 1) and also in GFF format
on the FTP site. miRNA genes may be located within other
genes, both protein-coding and non-coding (17,18), and the
context of the genomic location with respect to Ensembl genes
is also annotated (Figure 1). 35% of mammalian miRNA loci
overlap annotated genes—over 90% of these are located in
introns. In comparison, 14% of worm and fly miRNAs are
intronic. Distributed annotation system (DAS) sources provide
easy access to miRNA genomic locations, and the data are
available for viewing within the Ensembl (19) and UCSC
browsers (20).
miRBase TARGETS
As focus shifts from miRNA gene identification to functional
characterization, miRBase includes not only miRNA sequence
data but also information about their genomic targets. The
function of a specific miRNA can be thought of as a product
of the genes that it regulates. Although large-scale experi-
mental detection of targets is currently difficult, a number
of computational techniques exist for the prediction of
miRNA targets in mRNA sequences (16,21–27). These meth-
ods can be used both to predict potential targets for miRNAs
Figure 2.miRBase Target view page for transcript F13D11.2. The alignment view shows the alignment ofmiRNAbinding sites in orthologous 30-UTRs. Bits scores,
P-values, folding energies and alignments are shown for each miRNA match.
D142 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
and for the selection of targets for experimental validation. For
the most part, computational methods rely on first detecting
potential binding sites (with a large degree of complementarity
to the miRNA), followed by filtering out those sites that do not
appear to be conserved in multiple species. This approach
appears to work well, at least for species that have clearly
defined orthologs in closely related species (e.g. human,
mouse and rat). However, the conservation criterion is poor
for those species for which we do not have closely neighbour-
ing genome sequences.
The miRBase Targets database uses a novel fully automated
pipeline (which will be described in detail elsewhere) to
address some of these issues. All animal miRNA sequences
from the miRBase Sequence database are scanned against
30-untranslated regions (30-UTRs) predicted from all available
species in Ensembl (19) along with Caenorhabditis briggsae
and Drosophila pseudoobscura. The core algorithm assigns
P-values to individual miRNA–target binding sites, multiple
sites in a single UTR, and sites that appear to be conserved in
multiple species based on robust statistical models (22). The
interface connects each miRNA to a list of predicted gene
targets. The detailed target view page (Figure 2) illustrates
individual binding sites for one or more miRNAs and their
target in an orthologous 30-UTR alignment. We are in the
process of including annotation of experimentally validated
miRNA targets.
The miRBase Target database is designed with two main
aims: to make available high-quality targets in a timely man-
ner, and to remain as inclusive as possible with respect to the
target prediction community. To this end, we provide a core
set of predictions that are updated concurrently with the rest of
the miRBase system. We also intend to provide a mechanism
for viewing and comparing third-party target predictions con-
tributed via DAS. The core predictions are generated in-house
using the miRanda algorithm (v3.0) (21). The strengths of
miRanda are that it is open source, scalable and incorporates
robust statistical models. The provision of a P-value for each
miRNA–target assignment allows the user to assess the con-
fidence in the prediction. In addition, the method does not
assume that the miRNA binding sites must be conserved,
although in practice the most highly significant P-values
tend to represent miRNA–target interactions that are con-
served across multiple species. As new insights into
miRNA–target binding mechanisms and improved prediction
algorithms become available, they will be integrated into the
system to provide the highest-quality target predictions to the
user. In parallel with the miRBase Target pipeline, miRNA
sequence entries also provide links to third-party target pre-
diction websites (Figure 1).
AVAILABILITY
The miRBase database is freely available to all for online
searching at http://microrna.sanger.ac.uk/. Sequences and
annotation are also available for download from the FTP
site in a number of formats, including FASTA format
sequences and relational database dumps for easy upload to
a MySQL or other database. Queries, feedback and data sub-
missions and revisions are welcome by email to microrna@
sanger.ac.uk.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Mhairi Marshall and John Tate for website design,
and are grateful to David Bartel and Tom Tuschl for ongoing
nomenclature discussion. We also thank Michel Weber for
assistance in providing data for viewing in the UCSC genome
browser, Marc Rehmsmeier for discussion of P-value statistics
and Antonio Giraldez for experimental work on target verifica-
tion.Work at the Sanger Institute is supported by theWellcome
Trust. Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for
this article was provided by the Wellcome Trust.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Bartel,D.P. (2004) MicroRNAs: genomics, biogenesis, mechanism, and
function. Cell, 116, 281–297.
2. Filipowicz,W., Jaskiewicz,L., Kolb,F.A. and Pillai,R.S. (2005)
Post-transcriptional gene silencing by siRNAs and miRNAs.
Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., 15, 331–341.
3. Sontheimer,E.J. and Carthew,R.W. (2005) Silence from within:
endogenous siRNAs and miRNAs. Cell, 122, 9–12.
4. Ambros,V. (2004) The functions of animal microRNAs. Nature, 431,
350–355.
5. Kidner,C.A. and Martienssen,R.A. (2005) The developmental role of
microRNA in plants. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol., 8, 38–44.
6. He,L., Thomson,J.M., Hemann,M.T., Hernando-Monge,E., Mu,D.,
Goodson,S., Powers,S., Cordon-Cardo,C., Lowe,S.W., Hannon,G.J. and
Hammond,S.M. (2005) A microRNA polycistron as a potential human
oncogene. Nature, 435, 828–833.
7. Lu,J., Getz,G., Miska,E.A., Alvarez-Saavedra,E., Lamb,J., Peck,D.,
Sweet-Cordero,A., Ebert,B.L., Mak,R.H., Ferrando,A.A. et al. (2005)
MicroRNA expression profiles classify human cancers. Nature, 435,
834–838.
8. O’Donnell,K.A., Wentzel,E.A., Zeller,K.I., Dang,C.V. and Mendell,J.T.
(2005) c-Myc-regulated microRNAs modulate E2F1 expression.Nature,
435, 839–843.
9. Kim,V.N. (2005) MicroRNA biogenesis: coordinated cropping and
dicing. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 6, 376–385.
10. Pasquinelli,A.E. and Ruvkun,G. (2002) Control of developmental timing
bymicroRNAs and their targets.Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol., 18, 495–513.
11. Griffiths-Jones,S. (2004) The microRNA Registry. Nucleic Acids Res.,
32, D109–D111.
12. Lagos-Quintana,M., Rauhut,R., Lendeckel,W. and Tuschl,T. (2001)
Identification of novel genes coding for small expressed RNAs. Science,
294, 853–858.
13. Lau,N.C., Lim,L.P., Weinstein,E.G. and Bartel,D.P. (2001) An abundant
class of tiny RNAs with probable regulatory roles in Caenorhabditis
elegans. Science, 294, 858–862.
14. Lee,R.C. and Ambros,V. (2001) An extensive class of small RNAs in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Science, 294, 862–864.
15. Ambros,V., Bartel,B., Bartel,D.P., Burge,C.B., Carrington,J.C., Chen,X.,
Dreyfuss,G., Eddy,S.R., Griffiths-Jones,S., Marshall,M. et al. (2003) A
uniform system for microRNA annotation. RNA, 9, 277–279.
16. Lewis,B.P., Burge,C.B. and Bartel,D.P. (2005) Conserved seed pairing,
often flanked by adenosines, indicates that thousands of human genes are
microRNA targets. Cell, 120, 15–20.
17. Rodriguez,A., Griffiths-Jones,S., Ashurst,J.L. and Bradley,A. (2004)
Identification of mammalian microRNA host genes and transcription
units. Genome Res., 14, 1902–1910.
18. Weber,M.J. (2005) New human and mouse microRNA genes found by
homology search. FEBS J., 272, 59–73.
19. Hubbard,T., Andrews,D., Caccamo,M., Cameron,G., Chen,Y.,
Clamp,M., Clarke,L., Coates,G., Cox,T., Cunningham,F. et al. (2005)
Ensembl 2005. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D447–D453.
20. Karolchik,D., Baertsch,R., Diekhans,M., Furey,T.S., Hinrichs,A.,
Lu,Y.T., Roskin,K.M., Schwartz,M., Sugnet,C.W., Thomas,D.J. et al.
(2003) The UCSC Genome Browser Database. Nucleic Acids Res., 31,
51–54.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D143
21. Enright,A.J., John,B., Gaul,U., Tuschl,T., Sander,C. and Marks,D.S.
(2003) MicroRNA targets in Drosophila. Genome Biol., 5, R1.
22. Rehmsmeier,M., Steffen,P., Hochsmann,M. and Giegerich,R. (2004)
Fast and effective prediction of microRNA/target duplexes. RNA,
10, 1507–1517.
23. Stark,A., Brennecke,J., Russell,R.B. and Cohen,S.M. (2003)
Identification of Drosophila microRNA targets. PLoS Biol, 1, E60.
24. Rajewsky,N. and Socci,N.D. (2004) Computational identification
of microRNA targets. Dev Biol., 267, 529–535.
25. Lewis,B.P., Shih,I.H., Jones-Rhoades,M.W., Bartel,D.P. and Burge,C.B.
(2003) Prediction of mammalian microRNA targets. Cell, 115,
787–798.
26. Brennecke,J., Stark,A.,Russell,R.B. andCohen,S.M. (2005)Principles of
microRNA–target recognition. PLoS Biol., 3, e85.
27. Krek,A., Grun,D., Poy,M.N., Wolf,R., Rosenberg,L., Epstein,E.J.,
MacMenamin,P., da Piedade,I., Gunsalus,K.C., Stoffel,M. and
Rajewsky,N. (2005) Combinatorial microRNA target predictions.
Nature Genet., 37, 495–500.
D144 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
