BASys: a web server for automated bacterial
genome annotation
Gary H. Van Domselaar, Paul Stothard, Savita Shrivastava, Joseph A. Cruz,
AnChi Guo, Xiaoli Dong, Paul Lu, Duane Szafron, Russ Greiner and David S. Wishart*
Departments of Biological Sciences and Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB,
T6G 2E8, Canada
Received February 13, 2005; Revised April 14, 2005; Accepted May 6, 2005
ABSTRACT
BASys (Bacterial Annotation System) is a web
server that supports automated, in-depth annotation
of bacterial genomic (chromosomal and plasmid)
sequences. It accepts raw DNA sequence data and
an optional list of gene identification information
and provides extensive textual annotation and hyper-
linked image output. BASys uses .30 programs to
determine 60 annotation subfields for each gene,
including gene/protein name, GO function, COG func-
tion, possible paralogues and orthologues, molecular
weight, isoelectric point, operon structure, sub-
cellular localization, signal peptides, transmembrane
regions, secondary structure, 3D structure, reactions
and pathways. The depth and detail of a BASys
annotation matches or exceeds that found in a stand-
ard SwissProt entry. BASys also generates colorful,
clickable and fully zoomable maps of each query
chromosome to permit rapid navigation and detailed
visual analysis of all resulting gene annotations. The
textual annotations and images that are provided by
BASys can be generated in 24 h for an average bac-
terial chromosome (5 Mb). BASys annotations may be
viewed and downloaded anonymously or through a
password protected access system. The BASys ser-
ver and databases can also be downloaded and run
locally. BASys is accessible at http://wishart.biology.
ualberta.ca/basys.
INTRODUCTION
Over the last decade, the rate at which bacterial genomes have
been sequenced and made public has accelerated from roughly
three per year to three per week. This surfeit of genomic
sequence data should offer researchers an unprecedented
opportunity to gain new insights into the inner workings of
life; to develop novel vaccines, to discover new antimicrobial
compounds or therapeutics; and to develop effective strategies
for re-engineering bacteria for such applications as biore-
mediation. However, distilling useful knowledge from the
enormous volume of data is a growing challenge for both
bioinformaticians and microbiologists alike. To assist with
the interpretation of genomic data, a number of automated
genome annotation tools have been created, including Gene-
Quiz (1), PEDANT (2), Genotator (3), MAGPIE/BLUEJAY
(4,5), GenDB (6) and the TIGR CMR (7). In order for these
systems to perform at a high level of quality and throughput,
these annotation systems are quite sophisticated that require a
high degree of skill to implement and maintain, and also
require considerable computing power to operate. The average
microbiology laboratory, lacking these resources, has become
reliant on centralized operations to provide them with their
genome-scale annotations. This reliance creates a problem if
the specific organisms they study have not been annotated, if
the annotations they require are not available, or if the annota-
tions are not current. Clearly, there is a need for the members
of the scientific community to have the ability to generate their
own detailed, up-to-date genome-scale annotations of the
bacterial organisms they study.
An additional and critically important challenge is to pre-
sent large volumes of data in an organized and intuitive way.
Graphical genome maps are preferred for their ability to dis-
play genomic data in a format that is familiar and intuitive
to microbiologists. Graphical maps, particularly those with
zooming capability, also provide valuable information regard-
ing the organization of open reading frames (ORFs), genes and
operons. Most existing annotation systems provide genomic
information in a text-only or a relatively unsophisticated
graphical format with limited feature labeling and zooming.
The ideal graphical system should provide multiple views of
data at different scales, and should provide a convenient way
to switch from graphical views to textual views and vice versa.
Here, we present a publicly available web server for bac-
terial genome annotation called BASys (Bacterial Annotation
System). BASys accepts a bacterial genome (chromosome or
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 780 492 0383; Fax: +1 780 492 1071; Email: david.wishart@ualberta.ca
 The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W455–W459
doi:10.1093/nar/gki593
plasmid) file and optional gene identification file as input and
then performs an exhaustive analysis of the genomic data,
producing up to 60 separate annotations per gene. The annot-
ated genomic data is returned as a colorful and navigable
circular genome map with hyperlinks to detailed textual
annotations for each gene, which include information regard-
ing their source and validity. The complete set of maps and
annotations is provided for download for off-line viewing
using any modern web browser.
PROGRAM DESCRIPTION
BASys is composed of three parts: (i) a front-end web interface
for submitting the raw genomic data, for scheduling the anno-
tation and for monitoring or reporting the annotation progress;
(ii) an annotation engine for analyzing the chromosome data
and for generating the annotations; and (iii) a reporting system
for rendering the various graphics, HTML and textual output
produced by BASys. Each of these components is discussed in
detail below.
Data submission and scheduling
BASys allows both anonymous and login-based access for the
submission, monitoring and retrieval of genome annotations.
For anonymous submissions, the user is emailed a secure URL
for monitoring the progress of their annotations and for retriev-
ing the annotations when they are complete. Alternatively,
the user may register with BASys and then use a password-
protected login to interact with the system. The login system
allows users to submit and monitor multiple chromosomes and
plasmid annotations, whereas the anonymous login is designed
for single chromosome submissions. In either case, access
to the submitted genomic data and results are restricted to
the submitters, thus protecting possibly sensitive data from
viewing by third parties.
BASys provides a web-based form for submitting the bac-
terial chromosome for annotation. The chromosome data must
be uploaded as a FASTA-formatted file. Also required are the
chromosome topology (circular or linear), the Gram-stain sub-
type, and a user-assigned string (i.e. name of chromosome) for
monitoring annotation progress and for identifying the output
files. If no additional information is supplied, BASys will
attempt to predict the coding sequences within the chromosome
using ‘Glimmer’, a popular ab initio microbial gene prediction
program (8). Glimmer performs very well for genomes with GC
content below60%. Above this value, Glimmer may generate
a high number of false positive predictions and therefore should
be used with caution. Other gene prediction programs, includ-
ing extrinsic gene finders such as Critica (9) are currently being
evaluated for inclusion in BASys. If gene positions are already
known, or predicted in advance using an alternate gene finder,
they can be supplied to BASys in a simple TAB-delimited
format or as an NCBI ‘.ffn’-formatted FASTA file. NCBI
‘.ffn’ files, which are available for many bacterial genomes
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/lproks.cgi), include
the nucleotide coding sequences along with the location and
direction along the chromosome, and thus can be used to
‘correct’ the coding regions from the chromosomal data con-
taining frame shifts or other translational anomalies. Descrip-
tions and links to examples of the various required and optional
files are provided on the submission form for easy reference.
Once the sequence file and optional input files have been
submitted to BASys, they are added to a queue and scheduled
for processing by the BASys annotation engine.
The computing power required to fully annotate a bacterial
genome is unavoidably high. The BASys annotation engine
running on a modern 32-bit Intel/Linux PC and annotating
an average-sized bacterial genome of 5 Mb or 3000 genes
requires 24 h to complete. To accommodate multiple users
simultaneously performing long-running, resource-intensive
genome annotations, we have implemented BASys as a dis-
tributed system operating in a clustered computing environ-
ment (Figure 1). The master node hosts the web server, and
runs the queuing and scheduling system. Each slave node hosts
a BASys annotation engine and genome report system. Upon
receiving and validating the bacterial genomic data for annota-
tion, the master node examines the current processing load for
each slave, assigns the genome annotation job to the node with
the highest availability, and then notifies the slave of the new
job. The master node can also issue directives to suspend,
resume, restart and remove the genome annotation jobs on the
Figure 1. A schematic outline of the BASys architecture. (A) The web server,
hosted on the master node, accepts genome data and schedules it for processing
by the slave nodes. (B) Each slave node hosts a BASys annotation engine. The
annotation pipeline combines similarity searching and sequence analysis to
generate annotations.
W456 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
slave nodes. Each slave node continually communicates its
progress to the master node while generating the annotations
and reports. Once complete, the master node notifies the sub-
mitter by email that the annotations are ready. The master and
slave nodes use a MySQL client/server protocol to commun-
icate directives and status, and the Apache web server/HTTP
protocol to transfer the sequence data and reports.
The BASys annotation engine
The BASys annotation engine combines database comparison
and computational sequence analysis in its processing pipeline
(Figure 1). Translated coding sequences are initially compared
using BLAST (10) to the extensively and expertly annotated
reference databases UniProt (11) and the CyberCell compre-
hensive molecular database on Escherichia coli (12). These
databases are valuable sources of high quality genomic and
proteomic information including function, metabolic role,
structural family and enzyme classification. Associated with
each type of annotation is a similarity threshold. The similarity
score between the query and database sequence is compared to
the threshold value for each annotation type and qualifying
annotations are transitively applied to the query sequence. For
example, transferring feature information such as transmem-
brane domain locations requires a perfect match between
query and database sequence, whereas the transfer of a general
function assignment is more lenient, requiring a BLAST
Expect-value of only 1 · 1010 or better.
BASys attempts to fill the remaining annotations by sub-
jecting the query sequence to a battery of additional similarity
searches and sequence analyses. BLAST searches are conduc-
ted against a number of specialized databases including
the protein sequences of model organisms (Caenorhabditis
elegans, Homo sapiens, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and
Drosophila melanogaster); a non-redundant database of bac-
terial protein sequences, the PDB database of 3D biological
macromolecular structure data (13), and the COG database of
orthologous groups of proteins (14). Various sequence ana-
lyses are also performed on the query sequence, including
protein family analysis with Pfam (15), sequence motif ana-
lysis with PROSITE (16), signal peptide and transmembrane
domain prediction with PredictSPTM (J. Cruz, unpublished
data), and predicted secondary structure with PSIPRED (17).
If the sequence has sufficient similarity to a sequence
represented in the PDB database, then BASys may use
HOMODELLER (X. Dong, unpublished data) to generate a
homology model and subsequently perform a structural ana-
lysis using VADAR (18). Several additional annotations, such
as protein molecular weight, isoelectric point and operon
structure are calculated directly from the chromosomal,
protein-coding nucleotide and translated protein sequence
data. In all, a collection of 60 distinct annotations is gener-
ated for each gene. A detailed summary of the annotation
process for each field, along with its relevance and the program
or database versions used, is available on the BASys web site
(http://wishart.biology.ualberta.ca/basys/cgi/annotations.pl).
BASys is an ambitious annotation system. It draws on many
different sources for its information and tries to assign as many
annotations as possible to each gene. Although every precaution
has been taken to provide the highest quality annotations pos-
sible, it is inevitable that some annotations will be incorrect, as
is the case with all fully automated genome annotation systems.
For this reason BASys provides, whenever possible, informa-
tion on the source of the annotation, the evidence used to support
the annotation and a rough indication of the quality of the
annotation. For example, an annotation assigned from a simil-
arity search would include the BLAST report as evidence, the
database and version as the source, and a quality indicator such
as ‘marginal’, ‘strong’ or ‘clear’. This information is kept in a
separate file to prevent cluttering up the main annotation report,
but a hyperlink is provided to the file for easy inspection.
The BASys report generator
BASys provides its annotations in the form of a navigable
circular genome map with hyperlinks to gene cards containing
the annotations for each identified gene. A montage illustrating
the various types of output produced by BASys is provided in
Figure 2. For genome visualization and exploration, BASys
relies heavily on the CGView application (19), a highly cus-
tomizable circular genome rendering system that is well suited
for use in bioinformatics pipelines. BASys passes information
generated during the annotation process to CGView in the form
of an XML document. CGView then renders this information
as a series of hyperlinked PNG image files. The resulting maps
show annotated genes and COG category classifications, when
available. CGView renders the images at several different
levels of resolution and maintains the circular view at every
resolution level, making navigation quick and intuitive.
Each displayed gene in the genome map is labeled and
hyperlinked to a gene card containing the corresponding anno-
tations in a tabular format. Gene card fields derived from
external sources are hyperlinked to those sources, and those
derived from a similarity search are presented with a code
identifying the source: [S] 100% sequence match to SwissProt,
[H] Homology to a SwissProt entry or [C] Homology to a
CCDB entry. Each gene card contains a hyperlink to an asso-
ciated file containing more detailed descriptions of the source
and quality of the annotations. Additionally, BASys annota-
tions can be conveniently searched using server-side text and
BLAST searching tools. Each search hit is hyperlinked to a
corresponding BASys gene map and gene card. These text and
sequence searching services are only available for annotations
left on the BASys server. Downloaded (HTML or text) BASys
files must be searched using client-side tools (such as standard
word-processing software or local BLAST tools).
VALIDATION
Many of the algorithms and annotation strategies used in
BASys were originally developed and validated during the
construction of the CyberCell database (12), and the BacMap
bacterial genome atlas (20). Several of the BASys annotations
are calculated directly from gene and protein sequences, and
hence are trivial to validate. Those derived from predictive
programs or assigned transitively from a similarity search
require somewhat deeper scrutiny. The protein functional
assignment is generally considered to be the most important
annotation, and most automated genome annotation programs
are evaluated in terms of their ability to produce a correct
functional assignment. However, objectively assessing the
correctness of such assignments is a problem, as currently
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W457
there exists no single fully validated standard for comparing
genome-scale annotations (21).
To assess the accuracy of our protein function assignments,
we chose to use expertly annotated Chlamydia trachomatis
proteins as a reference set (22). BASys and the complete and
up-to-date non-redundant bacterial and SwissProt (Version 45)
databases (with the C.trachomatis entries removed) were used
to re-annotate the reference proteins. Matching functional
assignments were obtained for 762 of the 894 entries
(Table 1). BASys failed to assign a function to 33 entries
having an assigned function in the reference set, corresponding
to a false negative rate of 3.7%. BASys assigned 53 functions
Figure 2. A screenshot montage of the BASys server showing the different kinds of graphical and textual output available. Shown are the annotation progress monitor
for two genome annotation projects (E.coli and C.trachomatis) in various states of completion, a full-scale and expanded graphical genome map for E.coli and a
sample annotation report.
W458 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
that conflicted with those in the reference set, and 46 functions
were assigned to proteins lacking function annotations in the
reference set (see the following link: http://wishart.biology.
ualberta.ca/basys/cgi/validation.pl for more details). Assuming
these are overpredictions on the part of BASys, these values
combine to give a false positive rate of 11%. BASys is not a
conservative annotation system as it was specifically designed
to attempt to annotate each gene as fully as possible. For this
purpose, we feel that the observed false positive and false
negative rates are acceptable. Overall, the prediction accuracy
is very good and compares favorably with other automated
systems (22). Because of the potential for error propagation,
especially for automated annotation systems, some caution
should be taken in using BASys annotations as a primary
reference source. Certainly BASys results can be used as a
first pass annotation that can serve as a useful starting point for
later, downstream manual curation or correction. Furthermore,
all annotations can be evaluated by examining the corres-
ponding evidence file provided by BASys. Because users
can download both HTML and text versions of the BASys
annotations, it is relatively easy to use standard text editing
software to manually correct or update any annotations at any
time, without interfering with its graphic hyperlinks.
CONCLUSION
To summarize, BASys is a web server that permits high
throughput, detailed and fully automated annotation of bacter-
ial genomes. BASys consists of >30 separate and well-tested
programs which are used to provide 60 annotation fields for
each gene. A fully navigable graphical map, which is hyper-
linked to textual gene descriptions, is also generated to allow
results to be easily browsed and evaluated. BASys’ strengths
are in its web accessibility, its depth and comprehensiveness of
annotation and its user-friendly graphical interface. BASys
does not (yet) handle partially assembled genomes nor does
it offer the sophisticated ORF handling of stand-alone pro-
grams like GenDB or Magpie. The BASys web server is freely
accessible at http://wishart.biology.ualberta.ca/basys.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Funding for this project was provided by the AICML,
the Protein Engineering Network Centres of Excellence
(PENCE Inc.) and Genome Prairie (a division of Genome
Canada). Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges
for this article was provided by Genome Canada.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Andrade,M.A., Brown,N.P., Leroy,C., Hoersch,S., de Daruvar,A.,
Reich,C., Franchini,A., Tamames,J., Valencia,A., Ouzounis,C. and
Sander,C. (1999) Automated genome sequence analysis and annotation.
Bioinformatics, 15, 391–412.
2. Frishman,D., Mokrejs,M., Kosykh,D., Karstenmuller,G., Kolesov,G.,
Zubrzycki,I., Gruber,C., Geier,B., Kaps,A., Volz,A. et al. (2003)
The PEDANT genome database. Nucleic Acids Res., 31,
207–211.
3. Harris,N.L. (1997) Genotator: a workbench for sequence annotation.
Genome Res., 7, 754–762.
4. Gaasterland,T. and Sensen,C.W. (1996) MAGPIE: automated genome
interpretation. Trends Genet., 12, 76–88.
5. Gordon,P. and Sensen,C. (1999) Bluejay: a browser for linear
units in Java. Proceedings of the 13th Annual International
Symposium on High Performance Computing Systems and Applications,
Kingston, ON, Canada, pp. 183–194.
6. Meyer,F., Goesmann,A., McHardy,A.C., Bartels,D., Bekel,T.,
Clausen,J., Kalinowski,J., Linke,B., Rupp,O., Giegerich,R. and Puhler,A.
(2003) GenDB—an open source genome annotation system for
prokaryote genomes. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 2187–2195.
7. Peterson,J.D., Umayam,L.A., Dickinson,T., Hickey,E.K. and White,O.
(2001) The comprehensive microbial resource. Nucleic Acids Res.,
29, 123–125.
8. Delcher,A.L., Harmon,D., Kasif,S., White,O. and Salzberg,S.L.
(1999) Improved microbial gene identification with GLIMMER. Nucleic
Acids Res., 27, 4636–4641.
9. Bader,J.H. and Olsen,G.J. (1999) CRITICA: coding region
identification tool invoking comparative analysis. Mol. Biol. Evol.,
16, 412–424.
10. Altschul,S.F., Gish,W., Miller,W., Myers,E.W. and Lipmann,D.J.
(1990) Basic local alignment search tool. J. Mol. Biol., 215,
403–420.
11. Apweiler,R., Bairoch,A., Wu,C.H., Barker,W.C., Boeckmann,B.,
Ferro,S., Gasteiger,E., Huang,H., Lopez,R., Magrane,M. et al. (2004)
UniProt: the universal protein knowledgebase. Nucleic Acids Res.,
32, D115–D119.
12. Sundararaj,S., Guo,A., Habibi-Nazhad,B., Rouani,M., Stothard,P.,
Ellison,M. and Wishart,D.S. (2004) The CyberCell Database (CCDB):
a comprehensive, self-updating, relational database to coordinate and
facilitate in silico modeling of Escherichia coli. Nucleic Acids Res.,
32, D293–D295.
13. Berman,H.M., Westbrook,J., Feng,Z., Gilliland,G., Bhat,T.N.,
Weissig,H., Shindyalov,I.N. and Bourne,P.E. (2000) The Protein Data
Bank. Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 235–242.
14. Tatusov,R.L., Koonin,E.V. and Lipman,D.J. (1997) A genomic
perspective on protein families. Science, 278, 631–637.
15. Bateman,A., Coin,L., Durbin,R., Finn,R.D., Hollich,V.,
Griffiths-Jones,S., Khanna,A., Marshall,M., Moxon,S.,
Sonnhammer,E.L. et al. (2004) The Pfam protein families database.
Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D138–D141.
16. Hulo,N., Sigrist,C.J., Le Saux,V., Langendijk-Genevaux,P.S., Bordoli,L.,
Gattiker,A., De Castro,E., Bucher,P. and Bairoch,A. (2004) Recent
improvements to the PROSITE database. Nucleic Acids Res., 32,
D134–D137.
17. McGuffin,L.J., Bryson,K. and Jones,D.T. (2000) The PSIPRED protein
structure prediction server. Bioinformatics, 16, 404–405.
18. Willard,L., Ranjan,A., Zhang,H., Monzavi,H., Boyko,R.F., Sykes,B.D.
and Wishart,D.S. (2003) VADAR: a web server for quantitative
evaluation of protein structure quality. Nucleic Acids Res., 31,
3316–3319.
19. Stothard,P. and Wishart,D.S. (2005) Circular genome visualization and
exploration using CGView. Bioinformatics, 21, 537–539.
20. Stothard,P., Van Domselaar,G., Shrivastava,S., Guo,A., O’Neill,B.,
Cruz,J.A., Ellison,M. and Wishart,D.S. (2005) BacMap: an interactive
picture atlas of annotated bacterial genomes. Nucleic Acids Res.,
33, D317–D320.
21. Ouzounis,C.A. and Karp,P.D. (2002) The past, present and future of
genome-wide re-annotation. Genome Biol., 3, Comment 1–6.
22. Iliopoulos,I., Tsoka,S., Andrade,M.A., Enright,A.J., Carroll,M.,
Poullet,P., Promponas,V., Liakopoulos,T., Palaios,G., Pasquier,C. et al.
(2003) Evaluation of annotation strategies using an entire genome
sequence. Bioinformatics, 19, 717–726.
Table 1. BASys annotation comparison with expert annotation
Category Number
BASys assigment matches reference 492
No assignment by BASys or reference 270
Conflicting assignments 53
Assignment by BASys/unassigned by reference 46
Unassigned by BASys/assigned by reference 33
Protein function annotations were compared against an expertly annotated set of
proteins from C.trachomatis. Additional analysis and discussion of the results
are presented in the text.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W459
