BiologicalNetworks: visualization and analysis tool
for systems biology
Michael Baitaluk1,*, Mayya Sedova2, Animesh Ray3 and Amarnath Gupta1
1San Diego Supercomputer Center, University of California San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093,
USA, 27564 Charmant Drive, #1814, La Jolla, CA 92122, USA and 3Keck Graduate Institute, 535 Watson Drive,
Claremont, CA 91711, USA
Received February 15, 2006; Revised March 2, 2006; Accepted March 11, 2006
ABSTRACT
Systems level investigationofgenomicscale informa-
tion requires thedevelopmentof truly integrateddata-
bases dealingwith heterogeneous data, which can be
queried for simple properties of genes or other data-
base objects as well as for complex network level
properties, for the analysis andmodelling of complex
biological processes. Towards that goal, we recently
constructed PathSys, a data integration platform for
systemsbiology,whichprovidesdynamic integration
over a diverse set of databases [Baitaluk et al.
(2006) BMC Bioinformatics 7, 55]. Here we describe
a server, BiologicalNetworks, which provides visual-
ization, analysisservicesandan informationmanage-
ment framework over PathSys. The server allows
easy retrieval, construction and visualization of com-
plex biological networks, including genome-scale
integrated networks of protein–protein, protein–
DNA and genetic interactions. Most importantly,
BiologicalNetworks addresses the need for system-
atic presentation and analysis of high-throughput
expression data by mapping and analysis of expres-
sion profiles of genes or proteins simultaneously
on to regulatory, metabolic and cellular networks.
BiologicalNetworks Server is available at http://
brak.sdsc.edu/pub/BiologicalNetworks.
INTRODUCTION
Networks of molecular interactions are widely studied to
reveal the complex roles played by genes, gene products
and the cellular environments in biological processes. In
these networks (or graphs), the nodes represent genes or
gene products and the edges represent specific interactions.
In a protein–DNA network, an edge may represent the
binding of a transcription factor to a promoter region, while
in a protein–protein physical interaction network it might rep-
resent a recorded evidence of co-immunoprecipitation or a
two-hybrid interaction. The nodes of the network are typi-
cally associated with additional information about the genes
(or gene products), such as positions in the chromosome
(or localization sites), or their Gene Ontology (GO) classifica-
tion. A number of specialized and publicly accessible data-
bases are available, which contain data about the nodes [the
SGD database (1)] and the interactions [BIND database
(2)], and some databases contain information about both
[such as KEGG (3)]. In addition, individual researchers
often publish their data as part of their publications or project
web sites. Currently, a number of analysis and visualization
tools have been developed by different groups for assimilat-
ing, visualizing and for the analysis and modeling of these
molecular interaction network data, of which the most
notable are Cytoscape (4), Osprey (5), PathwayAssist (6),
Pathways Database System (7), GeneGO (www.genego.
com), VisANT (8,9). Yet another direction of effort is the
storage and analysis of large-scale gene and protein expres-
sion data (10–14). While some of these store and display
expression data, they do not allow query or analysis of
such data or integration of novel gene expression data with
existing network models.
Ideally, an analysis tool for molecular interaction networks
should enable a user to import, efficiently store, effectively
retrieve and perform analysis on single genes, gene families,
patterns of molecular interactions, as well as on the global
structure of the network. The tool needs to be sufficiently
flexible for both micro-scale and macro-scale analysis using
heterogenous data, and extract the data from a large number
of disparate databases; it should allow one to construct inter-
action networks by curation as well as computation [e.g.
using algorithms that convert a time-series microarray dataset
into an influence network (15)]; it should enable the users to
retrieve different interaction graphs through on-demand
queries and construct new graphs by assembling them in a
variety of ways. It should also allow the incorporation of
novel datasets locally, such as the user’s own microarray
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 858 8225418; Fax: +1 858 5345152; Email: baitaluk@sdsc.edu
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
W466–W471 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gkl308
expression data, and/or overlay these on biological networks
to explore novel relationships among genes. These critical
needs are the minimal requirements of a systems level anal-
ysis of biological pathways.
Previously we reported a general-purpose scalable ware-
house of biological information, PathSys (16). PathSys is a
comprehensive data warehouse resulting from the integration
of molecular interaction data with other graph-structured
data, such as ontologies, e.g. GO (17) and taxonomies, e.g.
enzyme classification system and functional classification of
yeast proteins (3), and state data such as gene expression pro-
files, from over 20 curated and publicly contributed data
sources, biological experimental and PubMed data for the
eight representative organisms (Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Drosophila melanogaster, etc. for full list see website). It
contains more than 100 000 events of regulation, interaction
and modification among genes, proteins, cell processes and
small molecules. Here we present BiologicalNetworks, the
web-based query tool built on top of PathSys, and show
how it enables a user to derive novel biological insights at
the single gene level and functional relationships at the
systems level.
Data integration
PathSys’s data integration model achieves the following:
(i) Integration of object and property types from over 20
databases (for a full list see the website), thus creating
a controlled vocabulary (ontology) of object/attribute
types.
(ii) Integration of nomenclature for genes/proteins. Naming
conventions between different datasets can be different,
and the server-side parser translates between standard
nomenclatures and an automated reconciliation procedure
assigns multiple names as synonyms to the same ORF.
(iii) Integration of different types of networks. Biological-
Networks supports an arbitrary number of interaction
types. Users can upload different types of interactions
by specifying different evidence codes that are supported
in the BiologicalNetworks (see software documentation
for a full list of interaction types).
To illustrate the novelty and capabilities of Biological-
Networks, in Table 1 we compare BiologicalNetworks
against Cytoscape and VisANT. A limitation of Cytoscape
and VisANT is that the query capability of these systems
is exactly the same as the graph-data manipulation and
filtering capability visible on the interface. Thus, the visual
integration tools do not have the capacity to take any com-
bination of operations in any order and yet have the system
retrieve the specified data in a fashion that optimizes memory
and disk operations. We have circumvented this limitation of
visual integration by a database-level integration method
using a query evaluation engine implementing a query
algebra.
Data representation
Pathways are represented as a graph with three types of
nodes. The nodes of the first type are reserved for genes,
proteins, small molecules, cellular processes, etc. The
nodes of the second type (controls) represent events of
functional regulation, chemical reactions or protein–protein
interactions; they can have physical meaning, may denote
general associations; they can represent shared characteristics
between components. The nodes of the third type represent
complex objects, such as macromolecular complexes,
functional groups, pathways etc. In this case components
are made up of subcomponents, being compound or modular,
and the connections between modular components (or
modules) exist along with interconnections between their
subcomponents. Interactions in BiologicalNetworks can also
be defined as successively higher-level connections between
groups of proteins, complexes, pathways or sub-networks.
Most importantly, a classification scheme of Property
Types representation (about 2000 unique Property Types
and 25 000 nodes of the Property Types tree) allows
BiologicalNetworks to represent detailed micro-level infor-
mation. For example, a protein/process is not only localized
in the ‘nucleus’, but it is represented as the starting point of
finer subdivisions, such as ‘within the nuclear membrane’ and
ending in ‘outer surface of the nuclear membrane’ as
a ‘component’ or as simply ‘peripherally associated’
(Figure 1). Such a data model and integration environment
align well with data representations of existing databases,
such as BIND (2), KEGG (3), TransPath (18), eMaze (19)
and significantly extends the concepts of other tools, such
as Cytoscape and VisANT. To aid biological understanding,
interaction networks and protein complexes can be viewed
within the context of GO (17) annotations or KEGG (3)
pathway assignments.
Interactions have not only information about the relevant
literature, but also the experimental system used and a rich
array of details on the evidence and classification of the bio-
logical properties. For example, a ‘genetic interaction’
between two genes may have information on the wild type/
mutant forms, ‘phenotype’ (invasiveness, etc.), mutant
‘allele’, the number of gene copies, etc. Such a rich degree
of annotation should play a vital role in understanding the
nature of the interaction (see manual for description).
An important goal of systems biology is to generate
dynamical models of molecular interaction networks (20).
To enable this capability we have stored kinetic parameters
as properties of reactions, reactants and products. This has
been possible to achieve because of our representation of
all three above objects as nodes in the interaction graph.
This allows the user to represent the process graphs in
SBML (21) format for dynamical simulation using a variety
of computational methods.
To accompany BiologicalNetworks, we have developed a
preliminary standard for exchanging files that have visual
markup and annotation of network layouts. Users of Biologi-
calNetworks can input several basic data types, including
data in standardized network and interaction data exchange
formats, such as PSI-MI (22), BioPAX (http://www.biopax.
org) and SBML (21).
Data analysis
Once a network dataset has been imported or loaded into
BiologicalNetworks, the genes or proteins within it can be
queried for other known and predicted interactions from
the PathSys’s database. Additionally, a repository of curated
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue W467
pathways (100 for S.cerevisiae and several hundreds
from other organisms) is available for analysis. Imported
interactions and components define a network ‘workspace’,
which can be annotated and saved for sharing inside user
groups working with BiologicalNetworks.
To enable data analysis, the following tools are available:
Search: find and display a list of objects based on a name
or a keyword.
Expand: searches the database and displays objects func-
tionally linked to a selected node or a set of nodes. Thus,
by alternating expand and filtering options, users can browse
through the database building their favorite pathways.
Build pathways: finds a set of links between two or more
nodes by searching for the shortest path in the total network
of all links in the database. This tool assists in finding
regulatory paths between all selected objects.
Find common targets/regulators: searches for common
targets or regulators for the group of molecules. This tool
as well as Build Pathway can find functional links between
proteins in the lists imported from other programs (e.g.
gene expression clusters).
Find intersection with curated pathways: searches a group
of nodes for other known and predicted interactions from the
PathSys’s repository of curated pathways.
BiologicalNetworks provides an advanced querying facil-
ity for retrieving the data of user’s interest by querying
Nodes and Properties types. User friendly querying interface
allows user to make query with any logical combination of
conditions both on Node and Property trees (Figure 1, see
User’s Tutorial for details).
Networks can also be analyzed for graph topological prop-
erties, such as degree distributions, path lengths, shortest
paths or clustering coefficients.
Microarray data analysis
Expression data are easily imported through the Import
Expression Data Wizard with a minimal amount of data
Table 1. Comparison of BiologicalNetworks against Cytoscape and VisANT
BiologicalNetworks Cytoscape VisANT
Graph manipulation Developed in house Based on yFiles package
graph engine
Developed in house
Project workspace Project workspace; data sharing,
through user/account/user
privileges mechanism
Not available Project workspace could be
shared by e-mail
Data representation Generic data model having
three types of nodes (primary,
connector and graph nodes representing
modularity) and Node/Attribute
types hierarchies
Ternary relations; no modularity Ternary relations;
modularity presented
Input Local file, database load .sif formatted file Database load
Output Local (tab delimited, xml, SBML,
BN project) file; database edit/update;
image printing
Local file; Image printing .visML file
Data integration Data integration engine performing
data and property types integration,
thus creating biological data
and properties ontologies
GO database SGD, KEGG, GO are
integrated
Filtering Filtering by any combination of
Attribute/Node types
from Attribute/Node type hierarchies
Flexible filters with
different attributes of
node and edge
Several ‘select’ filters
available
Search Analytical search tools; Search node name on the graph Search by keyword and node
name on the graphKeyword search;
Build/expend pathways;
Find direct interactions;
Find covering pathways (all shortest paths);
Find common targets/regulators;
Find intersections with curated pathways;
Network operations Various layouts, Network intersection/
union/subtraction, statistics, search for
cycles, Networks comparison (Network
BLAST)
Various layouts, several
plug-ins for network
operations available
Relaxing layout and
statistical tool available
Microarray data Import/Export microarray data; Several plug-ins available Not available
Expression patterns;
Clustering analysis (different
clustering algorithms);
Visually display (static and dynamic time
display) gene expressions on the pathways;
Building pathways from expression values;
Building correlation (e.g. Pearson
correlation) networks;
Run GO terms overrepresentation analysis
(Fisher’s test) on expression clusters,
networks or group of genes
W468 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue
Figure 1. BiologicalNetworks data representation and querying.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue W469
preprocessing. BiologicalNetworks can interpret files of sev-
eral types, including Tab Delimited (Stanford) Multiple Sam-
ple format, the Affymetrix file format, the TIGR format and
GenePix file format.
The Expression Experiment Viewer is designed to display
a graphical representation of processed gene expression data.
It provides a workspace and a suite of algorithms for data
analysis, sorting and searching, clustering and normalization,
etc. These allow the user the flexibility in creating meaningful
views of the expression data.
Results of the clustering analysis are represented in the
form of tables and heat maps, and graphically as expression
graphs. These viewers appear as a subtree under the Analysis
Result within the main Project Properties tree.
Functionalities available from Microarray submenu and
Microarray Experiment Manager Menu bar, allows the
user to:
 Open an expression experiment in a form of a table and
heat map;
 Sort the experiment by a particular sample;
 Expression data can be visually displayed on an existing
pathway diagram by showing different shades of green/red
depending on the fold change of expression;
 Build pathways from expression values;
 Build correlation networks (e.g. Pearson correlation);
 Run GO terms overrepresentation analysis (Fisher’s test) on
expression clusters, networks or group of genes.
In Figure 2 a sample pathway incorporating expression
data from a microarray experiment has been assembled. On
the left panel is a hierarchical tree of analysis workspace,
where different types of microarray data as well as analysis
and associated results can be accessed.
On the pathway diagram genes that are up-regulated in a
particular experiment are shown in shades of red, while
genes that are down-regulated are shown in shades of
green; if no match is found the color gray is used. Using
these data it is now possible to provide further annotations
of edge property such as positive or negative regulation or
to provide new edges between nodes.
In conclusion, the BiologicalNetworks web server allows a
systems level analysis of genomic scale information as well as
single object queries over a variety of databases for integrative
views of biological function and for hypothesis generation.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Part of this work was funded by the National Science
Foundation grants EIA-0205061 and EIA-0130059 to A.G.
and A.R. The authors also thank the National Biomedical
Computational Resource for support. Funding to pay the
Open Access publication charges for this article was provided
by NSF grant FIBR-0527023.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
Figure 2. Microarray data analysis in BiologicalNetworks.
W470 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue
REFERENCES
1. Ball,C.A., Jin,H., Sherlock,G., Weng,S., Matese,J., Andrada,R.,
Binkley,G., Dolinski,K., Dwight,S., Harris,M. et al. (2001)
Saccharomyces Genome Database provides tools to survey gene
expression and functional analysis data. Nucleic Acid Res., 29, 80–81.
2. Bader,G., Betel,D. and Hogue,C. (2001) BIND–The Biomolecular
Interaction Network Database. Nucleic Acid Res., 29, 242–245.
3. Kanehisa,M. and Goto,S. (1999) KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes
and Genomes. Nucleic Acid Res., 27, 29–34.
4. Shannon,P., Markiel,A., Ozier,O., Baliga,N.S., Wang,J.T., Ramage,D.,
Amin,N., Schwikowski,B. and Ideker,T. (2003) Cytoscape: a software
environment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction
networks. Genome Res., 13, 2498–2504.
5. Breitkreutz,B.J., Stark,C. and Tyers,M. (2003) Osprey: a network
visualization system. Genome Biol., 4, R22.
6. Nikitin,A., Egorov,S., Daraselia,N. and Mazo,I. (2003) Pathway
Studio–the analysis and navigation of molecular networks.
Bioinformatics, 19, 2155–2157.
7. Krishnamurthy,L., Nadeau,J., Ozsoyoglu,G., Ozsoyoglu,M.,
Schaeffer,G., Tasan,M. and Xu,W. (2003) Pathways database system: an
integrated system for biological pathways. Bioinformatics, 19, 930–937.
8. Hu,Z., Mellor,J., Wu,J. and DeLisi,C. (2004) VisANT: an online
visualization and analysis tool for biological interaction data. BMC
Bioinformatics, 5, 17.
9. Hu,Z., Mellor,J., Wu,J., Yamada,T., Holloway,D. and DeLisi,C. (2005)
VisANT: data-integrating visual framework for biological networks
and modules. Nucleic Acid Res., 33, W352–W357.
10. Mlecnik,B., Scheideler,M., Hackl,H., Hartler,J., Sanchez-Cabo,F. and
Trajanoski,Z. (2005) PathwayExplorer: web service for visualizing
high-throughput expression data on biological pathways. Nucleic Acids
Res., 33, W633–W637.
11. Pandu,R., Guru,R.K. and Mount,D.W. (2004) Pathway Miner:
extracting gene association networks from molecular pathways for
predicting the biological significance of gene expression microarray
data. Bioinformatics, 20, 2156–2158.
12. Chung,H.J., Kim,M., Park,C.H., Kim,J. and Kim,J.H. (2004)
ArrayXPath: mapping and visualizing microarray gene-expression data
with integrated biological pathway resources using Scalable Vector
Graphics. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, W460–W464.
13. Goesmann,A., Haubrock,M., Meyer,F., Kalinowski,J. and Giegerich,R.
(2002) PathFinder: reconstruction and dynamic visualization of
metabolic pathways. Bioinformatics, 18, 124–129.
14. Pan,D., Sun,N., Cheung,K.H., Guan,Z., Ma,L., Holford,M., Deng,X.
and Zhao,H. (2003) PathMAPA: a tool for displaying gene expression
and performing statistical tests on metabolic pathways at multiple
levels for Arabidopsis. BMC Bioinformatics, 32, W460–W464.
15. Soinov,A., Krestyaninova,M. and Brazma,A. (2003) Towards
reconstruction of gene networks from expression data by supervised
learning. Genome Biol., 4, R6.
16. Baitaluk,M., Qian,X., Godbole,S., Raval,A., Ray,A. and Gupta,A.
(2006) PathSys: integrating molecular interaction graphs for systems
biology. BMC Bioinformatics, 7, 55.
17. Harris,M.A., Clark,J., Ireland,A., Lomax,J., Ashburner,M., Foulger,R.,
Eilbeck,K., Lewis,S., Marshall,B., Mungall,C. et al. (2004) The Gene
Ontology (GO) database and informatics resource. Nucleic Acids Res.,
32, D258–D261.
18. Schacherer,F., Choi,C., Gotze,U., Krull,M., Pistor,S. and Wingender,E.
(2001) The TRANSPATH signal transduction database: a knowledge
base on signal transduction networks. Bioinformatics, 17, 1053–1057.
19. van Helden,J., Naim,A., Lemer,C., Mancuso,R., Eldridge,M. and
Wodak,S.J. (2001) From molecular activities and processes to
biological function. Brief Bioinform., 2, 81–93.
20. Chen,K.C., Calzone,L., Csikasz-Nagy,A., Cross,F.R., Novak,B. and
Tyson,J.J. (2004) Integrative analysis of cell cycle control in budding
yeast. Mol. Biol. Cell, 15, 3841–3862.
21. Hucka,M., Finney,A., Sauro,H.M., Bolouri,H., Doyle,J.C., Kitano,H.,
Arkin,A.P., Bornstein,B.J., Bray,D., Cornish-Bowden,A. et al. (2003)
The systems biology markup language (SBML): a medium for
representation and exchange of biochemical network models.
Bioinformatics, 9, 24–31.
22. Hermjakob,H., Montecchi-Palazzi,L., Bader,G., Wojcik,J.,
Salwinski,L., Ceol,A., Moore,S., Orchard,S., Sarkans,U.,
von Mering,C. et al. (2004) The HUPO PSI’s molecular interaction
format—a community standard for the representation of protein
interaction data. Nat. Biotechnol., 22, 177–183.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Web Server issue W471
