Scooby-domain: prediction of globular domains in
protein sequence
Richard A. George1,2, Kuang Lin3 and Jaap Heringa4,*
1Inpharmatica Ltd, 60 Charlotte Street, London W1T 2NU UK, 2European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust
Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK, 3Division of Mathematical Biology, National Institute for
Medical Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill NW7 1AA, UK and 4Centre for Integrative Bioinformatics (IBIVU),
Faculty of Sciences and Faculty of Earth and Life Sciences, Vrije Universiteit, De Boelelaan 1081a,
1081HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Received February 14, 2005; Revised and Accepted March 8, 2005
ABSTRACT
Scooby-domain (sequence hydrophobicity predicts
domains) is a fast and simple method to identify
globular domains in protein sequence, based on the
observed lengths and hydrophobicities of domains
from proteins with known tertiary structure. The
prediction method successfully identifies sequence
regions that will form a globular structure and those
that are likely to be unstructured. The method does
not rely on homology searches and, therefore, can
identify previously unknown domains for structural
elucidation. Scooby-domain is available as a Java
applet at http://ibivu.cs.vu.nl/programs/scoobywww.
It may be used to visualize local properties within a
protein sequence, such as average hydrophobicity,
secondary structure propensity and domain bound-
aries, as well as being a method for fast domain
assignment of large sequence sets.
INTRODUCTION
The suggestion that there might be a relationship between the
ratio of hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues and molecular
structure was first noted by Waugh (1) and later observed by
Fisher (2). The globular structure of a protein cannot be
achieved by any combination of amino acids, as certain prin-
ciples of structure must be obeyed. Proteins with too many
hydrophobic residues will aggregate in solution: a small poly-
peptide cannot tolerate >30% of hydrophobic residues (3).
Furthermore, a largely hydrophilic protein will fail to form
a stable hydrophobic core (4).
Long polypeptides will fold into compact, semi-
independent, structural units called domains (5). Given the
observed random distribution of hydrophobic residues in
proteins (6), domain formation appears to be the optimal solu-
tion for a large protein to bury its hydrophobic residues while
keeping hydrophilic residues at the surface (7). Consequently,
there are no observed protein structures of >250 residues that
contain a single hydrophobic core (8).
Methods to correctly define domains in protein sequence are
extremely important in many areas of biology. Successful
domain delineation would enable: the correct design of soluble
constructs for high throughput structural genomics, the design
of site directed mutagenesis experiments, the optimization of
secondary structure prediction and threading methods; and
comparative sequence analysis (9).
The Scooby-domain (sequence hydrophobicity predicts
domains) algorithm identifies the location of domains in a
protein query sequence based on the distribution of observed
lengths and hydrophobicities in domains with known 3D struc-
ture. Scooby-domain uses a multilevel smoothing window to
average the hydrophobic content of domain-sized regions in a
sequence of unknown structure. Using the window length and
average hydrophobicity, the probability that the region can fold
into a domain is then calculated and regions that are likely to be
unstructured are also identified. Scooby-domain is available as
a Java applet that can be used to visualize local properties of a
protein sequence, such as average hydrophobicity and second-
ary structure propensity, as well as being a tool to manually
assign domain boundaries. A web server is also available to
automatically assign domain boundaries to a query sequence.
METHODS
Multilevel smoothing window
Hydrophobicity plots were designed to display the distribution
of hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues along a protein
sequence and are useful to identify transmembrane regions
or antigenic sites (10,11). To generate a hydrophobicity
plot for a sequence each residue is first assigned a value of
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +31 2059 87649; Fax: +31 2059 87653; Email: heringa@cs.vu.nl
ª The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
W160–W163 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gki381
hydrophobicity, and then a smoothing window, of a given size,
is scanned along the sequence. Starting at the N-terminus of
the sequence, the average hydrophobicity of the amino acids
encapsulated by the window is calculated and the value is
plotted at the centre of the window. The window then moves
along the sequence, one residue at a time, calculating the
average hydrophobicity of the residues it encapsulates until
the window reaches the end of the sequence. A window size of
19 residues is useful for identifying transmembrane regions
and a window size of 7 is useful to identify surface regions.
Scooby-domain applies a multilevel smoothing window
to visualize properties of amino acids in a sequence, which
means that it uses windows of increasing size, starting from a
length of three residues. Each smoothing window calculates
the average property of the residues it encapsulates, placing
the value at its central position. This leads to a 2D matrix,
where the value at cell (i, j) is the average hydrophobicity
encapsulated by a window of size j that is centred at residue
position i. The matrix has a triangular shape, the apex of which
will correspond to a window size equal to the length of the
sequence or the maximum window size (Figure 1). This adds a
new dimension to the traditional hydrophobicity plot and is
useful for identifying both local and global properties for a
protein sequence.
Generating a domain probability matrix for
a query sequence
Scooby-domain uses the multilevel smoothing window to pre-
dict the location of domains in a query sequence. A window
size, representing the length of a putative domain, is incre-
mented starting from the smallest domain size observed in the
database to the largest domain size. Based on the window
length and its average hydrophobicity, the probability that it
can fold into a domain is found directly from the distribution of
domain size and hydrophobicity, calculated using the S-level
domain representatives from the CATH domain database (12).
For each domain, percentage hydrophobicity is calculated
using a binary hydrophobicity scale, where 11 amino acid
types are considered as hydrophobic: Ala, Cys, Phe, Gly, Ile,
Leu, Met, Pro, Val, Trp and Tyr (6). Visualization of the
Scooby-domain probability matrix for a sequence can be
used to effectively identify regions that are likely to fold
into domains or are likely to be unstructured (Figure 2).
Automatic domain boundary assignment
The Scooby-domain web server performs fast, automatic,
domain annotation by identifying the most domain-like
regions in the query sequence. The highest probability in
the domain probability matrix represents the first predicted
domain. The corresponding stretch of sequence for this
domain is removed from the sequence. Therefore, the first
predicted domain will always have a continuous sequence
and further domain predictions can encompass discontinuous
domains. If the excised domain is at a central position in the
sequence, the resulting N- and C-termini fragments are
rejoined and the probability matrix recalculated as before.
The second highest probability is then found and the corres-
ponding sub-sequence removed.
AVAILABILITY
Scooby-domain Java applet
The Scooby-domain algorithm is available as a Java applet
(http://ibivu.cs.vu.nl/programs/scoobywww) to both visualize
a domain probability matrix and to analyse local sequence
features for a query sequence (Figure 2). Once a query seq-
uence has been entered, several options are available from the
drop-down menu.
 ‘Domain’: creates a domain probability matrix that can be
used to visually assign domains.
 ‘HP Runs’: first identifies non-random regions in a sequence,
e.g. long stretches of hydrophilic residues, that are unlikely
to form a globular structure and then creates a domain prob-
ability matrix.
 ‘Binary HP’: plots the average hydrophobicity for each
smoothing window using the binary assignment described
above.
 ‘Eisenberg’: plots the average hydrophobicity for each
smoothing window using the residue hydrophobicity scale
described by Eisenberg (13).
 ‘Alpha’: plots the propensity for a sequence region to be
a-helical based on the residue propensities described by
Chou and Fasman (14).
 ‘Beta’: plots the propensity for a sequence region to be a
b-strand based on the residue propensities described by
Chou and Fasman (14).
 ‘Coil’: plots the propensity for a sequence region to be in a
random coil conformation based on the residue propensities
described by Chou and Fasman (14).
 ‘Linker’: plots the propensity of a sequence region to be an
inter-domain linker based on the linker propensities
described in the linker database (15).
 ‘Walkies’: plots a random walk representation of the query
sequence. A random walk moves up for every hydrophobic
residue and down for every hydrophilic residue encountered
as it moves along the sequence.
Figure 1. Multilevel smoothing window. Each smoothing window sums the
properties of the residues it encapsulates along a sequence, and places the value
at its central position. This leads to a 2D matrix, where the value at cell (i, j) is the
average property encapsulated by a window of size j that is centred at residue
position i. The matrix has a triangular shape, the apex of which will correspond
to a window size equal to the length of the sequence or the maximum window
size.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W161
All calculated probabilities and propensities are normalized
to values between zero and one, and are identified using a
colour gradient of blue to red. Therefore, a region with a
high probability of domain occurrence will appear red in
the ‘Domain’ probability plot, while a region of low probab-
ility will appear blue. Using the mouse pointer, it is possible to
identify the residue position, the window length being used,
the probability value at that position, and the start and end
points (limits) of the window. The limits will represent the
domain boundaries when analysing a domain probability plot.
Scooby-domain prediction server
The option to automatically delineate domains for a query
sequence is also available. The prediction server is simple to
use, requiring a single query sequence and a few parameters.
The ‘N- and C-termini weighting’ option can be used to encour-
age the domain-cutting algorithm to begin domain assignments
at the start or end of the query sequence. The option to include
external domain data, such as the boundary predictions from
Domaination (9), is also available. The additional boundary
information can be fed directly into the domain probability
matrix to help improve predictions. Domain predictions for
a query sequence are presented with the highest scoring pre-
diction first, out of 10 possible results. A GIF image of the
domain probability matrix is displayed below the predictions
and is available for download as a postscript image file.
The Scooby-domain prediction algorithm performed relat-
ively well on a test set of 193 multidomain proteins, correctly
predicting the location of over half (113/224) of the domain
boundaries within an error of –20 residues. The predictions
are, for simple cases, accurate. But errors in domain boundary
prediction are expected due to the intrinsic simplicity of our
method. Further improvements can be achieved by searching
the domain databases (16) and adding the results from other
domain prediction methods. Using the option to include pre-
dictions made by Domaination (9) improved the Scooby-
domain performance to 60%.
CONCLUSIONS
The multilevel smoothing window applied by Scooby-domain
is a useful tool to visualize local and global properties of amino
acids in a protein sequence. The Java applet can also be used to
Figure 2. Scooby-domain Java applet. The Scooby-domain plot shows the probability for regions in a sequence to fold into a domain. Average hydrophobicities are
converted into domain probability scores by referring to the observed distribution of domain sizes and hydrophobicities, i.e. given an average hydrophobicity and
window length the probability that it can fold into a domain is found directly from the observed data. Regions coloured red represent the centre of a putative domain.
The mouse-pointer highlights a likely domain between residues 102 and 212. Please note that the multilevel smoothing window is plotted upside-down when
compared to Figure 1.
W162 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
identify if a region in a protein can form a globular structure or
is likely to be unstructured.
Methods to predict the location of domains are extremely
important. Percentage hydrophobicity and domain size is a
good predictor of domain location and has been applied to
predict domain boundaries by the Scooby-domain algorithm.
Domain prediction algorithms that have utilized the hydro-
phobicity of proteins, such as SnapDragon (7), and the con-
straints of domain size, such as Domain Guess by Size (17),
have shown some success but are limited to small proteins,
often with only two or three domains. Scooby-domain can
quickly locate domains in a protein sequence, regardless of
its length.
Precise identification of domain boundaries is a very diffi-
cult problem. Here we have presented a simple method which
shows promising results. However, predictions are not accur-
ate enough to be exclusively reliable. It is advised that other
methods are used in combination with the Scooby-domain
algorithm such as those methods that rely on homology
searches of the domain databases. The Scooby-domain algo-
rithm is flexible, in that it can accept boundary predictions
from other sources to improve its prediction success.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank Victor Simossis and Jens Kleinjung for test-
ing the web server. The Open Access publication charges for
this article were waived by Oxford University Press.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Waugh,D.F. (1954) Protein–protein interactions. Adv. Protein Chem.,
9, 325–437.
2. Fisher,H.F. (1964) A limiting law relating the size and shape of protein
molecules to their composition. Biochemistry, 51, 1285–1291.
3. Van Holde,K.E. (1966) The molecular architecture of multichain
proteins. Molecular Architecture in Cell Physiology. Society of General
Physiologists, pp. 81–96.
4. Dill,K.A. (1985) Theory for the folding and stability of globular proteins.
Biochemistry, 24, 1501–1509.
5. Richardson,J.S. (1981) The anatomy and taxonomy of protein structure.
Adv. Protein Chem., 34, 167–339.
6. White,S.H. andJacobs,R.E. (1990)Statistical distributionof hydrophobic
residues along the length of protein chains. Implications for protein
folding and evolution. Biophys. J., 57, 911–921.
7. George,R.A. and Heringa,J. (2002) SnapDRAGON: a method to
delineate protein structural domains from sequence data. J. Mol. Biol.,
316, 839–851.
8. Garel,J. (1992) Folding of large proteins: multidomain and multisubunit
proteins. In Creighton,T. (ed.), Protein Folding. 1st edn. W.H. Freeman
and Company, New York, pp. 405–454.
9. George,R.A. and Heringa,J. (2002) Protein domain identification and
improved sequence similarity searching using PSI-BLAST. Proteins,
48, 672–681.
10. Hopp,T.P. and Woods,K.R. (1981) Prediction of protein antigenic
determinants from amino acid sequences. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA,
78, 3824–3828.
11. Kyte,J. and Doolittle,R.F. (1982) A simple method for displaying the
hydropathic character of a protein. J. Mol. Biol., 157, 105–132.
12. Orengo,C.A., Michie,A.D., Jones,S., Jones,D.T., Swindells,M.B. and
Thornton,J.M. (1997) CATH—a hierarchic classification of protein
domain structures. Structure, 5, 1093–1108.
13. Eisenberg,D. (1984) Three-dimensional structure of membrane and
surface proteins. Annu. Rev. Biochem., 53, 595–623.
14. Chou,P.Y. and Fasman,G.D. (1974) Conformational parameters for
amino acids in helical, beta-sheet, and random coil regions calculated
from proteins. Biochemistry, 13, 211–222.
15. George,R.A. and Heringa,J. (2002) An analysis of protein domain linkers:
their classification and role in protein folding. Protein Eng., 15, 871–879.
16. Mulder,N.J., Apweiler,R., Attwood,T.K., Bairoch,A., Bateman,A.,
Binns,D., Bradley,P., Bork,P., Bucher,P., Cerutti,L. et al. (2005)
InterPro, progress and status in 2005. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, 201–205.
17. Wheelan,S.J., Marchler-Bauer,A. and Bryant,S.H. (2000) Domain size
distributions can predict domain boundaries. Bioinformatics, 16,
613–618.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W163
