173
! 2009 by JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH, Inc. ● Vol. 36 ● August 2009
All rights reserved. 0093-5301/2009/3602-0008$10.00. DOI: 10.1086/597160
In Search of Homo Economicus: Cognitive
Noise and the Role of Emotion in Preference
Consistency
LEONARD LEE
ON AMIR
DAN ARIELY*
Understanding the role of emotion in forming preferences is critical in helping firms
choose effective marketing strategies and consumers make appropriate con-
sumption decisions. In five experiments, participants made a set of binary product
choices under conditions designed to induce different degrees of emotional de-
cision processing. The results consistently indicate that greater reliance on emo-
tional reactions during decision making is associated with greater preference con-
sistency and less cognitive noise. Additionally, the results of a meta-analytical study
based on data from all five experiments further show that products that elicit a
stronger emotional response are more likely to yield consistent preferences.
The notion of preference consistency lies at the veryfoundation of understanding, predicting, and influencing
consumer behavior. Most marketing activities, such as market
research, new product development, marketing communica-
tions, and customer relationship management, assume
consumers behave in somewhat consistent patterns. For
example, if a customer indicates that he or she prefers
chocolate to ginger, it is generally assumed that he or she is
more likely than not to maintain such a preference in a
following purchase occasion. Moreover, even people
themselves like to think they are somewhat consistent decision
makers (e.g., Bem 1972; Festinger 1957). On a related note,
preference consistency is one of the cornerstones of Homo
*Leonard Lee is assistant professor of marketing, Columbia Business
School, 3022 Broadway, Uris 508, New York, NY 10027 (leonardlee@
columbia.edu). On Amir is assistant professor of marketing, Rady School
of Management, University of California at San Diego, Pepper Canyon Hall,
Room 324, 9500 Gilman Dr., MC 0093, La Jolla, CA 92093 (oamir@ucsd
.edu). Dan Ariely is the James B. Duke Professor of Behavioral Economics,
The Fuqua School of Business, Duke University, 1 Towerview Drive,
Durham, NC 27708 (dandan@duke.edu). Correspondence: Leonard Lee.
The authors would like to thank Andrew Mitchell, Michel Tuan Pham, and
Duncan Simester for their comments and suggestions, Daniel Mochon,
Anastasiya Pocheptosova, Danielle Suh, Xing Yuan, and SurveySpot for
research assistance, and John Deighton, the associate editor, and the re-
viewers for their insightful comments.
John Deighton served as editor and Baba Shiv served as associate editor
for this article.
Electronically published January 22, 2009
Economicus and assumed to be characteristic of rational
decision makers.
As a way to conceptualize preference consistency,
consider a consumer who is faced with a series of binary
choices. For each choice pair, this consumer has to evaluate
the two alternatives and consider which one he or she
prefers. Such a value assessment process is likely to fluctuate
from case to case based on the exact information the
consumer considers (e.g., the particular facts the consumer
retrieves from memory), the context of the choice, as well
as the particular computations that the consumer carries out;
any of these process components is a potential source of
“noise” and thus decision inconsistency. For example, when
shopping for a new Canon digital camera, it is possible that
consumers might change the aspects of the camera they
focus on, the particular information they retrieve from
memory, the relative importance weights they assign to the
various attributes, or the process of integrating these
weights.
As researchers, we often treat such inconsistencies as
“noise” and use statistical inference tools that allow us to
examine the data while mostly ignoring these fluctuations.
Yet, such noise can convey important information about the
ability of decision makers to perform good decisions, and,
in particular, it can reflect their ability to conceptualize their
own preferences. Moreover, from a psychometric perspective,
reliability is a necessary condition for validity (Nunnally
and Bernstein 1994); this property of classical test theory
suggests that a decision is valid only to the extent that it is
reliable. In the current work, we focus on one source of
174 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
such inconsistencies or noise in decision making and its
relation to preference stability: we explore whether decisions
based more on emotional as opposed to cognitive processes
are more prone to this kind of error. We propose that relying
on one’s emotional responses during decision making can
promote greater preference consistency.
Dual-System Models
Prior research has established that both the emotional sys-
tem and the cognitive system contribute to decision making
but provide different types of inputs (Damasio 1994; Loew-
enstein and O’Donoghue 2004) and apply with different
force within different decision environments (e.g., see Mc-
Clure et al. 2004 for the different degrees of relative dom-
inance of the two systems in choosing delayed versus im-
mediate monetary rewards). In general, the emotional
system has been characterized as being more holistic, af-
fective, concretive, and passive, while the cognitive system
is relatively more analytic, logical, abstract, and active.
This fundamental distinction between cognition and emo-
tion is also evident across a wide array of research programs,
including the emotion-cognition dual-process model (see
Loewenstein and O’Donoghue 2004 for a recent review),
type I versus type II processes (Kahneman and Frederick
2002), associative system versus rule-based system (Sloman
1996), nonverbal processes versus verbal processes (Paivio
1986), hot system versus cold system (Metcalfe and Mischel
1999), reflexive system versus reflective system (Lieberman
et al. 2002), experiential system versus rational system (Ep-
stein 1994, 2003), and the “approach/avoidance” versus
“true/false” distinction (Zajonc 1998, 591), to name a few.
Moreover, neuroscience evidence adds additional support to
this distinction by demonstrating the relationship between
automatic emotional response and activity in the limbic sys-
tem (with the amygdala and the anterior cingulate being the
prime players) and the relationship between more controlled
processes and the front regions (orbital and prefrontal) of
the brain (Damasio 1994; LeDoux 1996; Panksepp 2004).
It should be noted that while such a dual-system concep-
tualization is undoubtedly an oversimplification and an im-
precise representation of the complex human mind, this
emotion-cognition distinction has substantial value in ex-
plaining a wide variety of human behavior.
Given this distinction between emotion and cognition and
the growing discourse as to their roles in decision making,
it is important to ask whether decisions that are based more
on emotional inputs or more on cognitive inputs are better,
or which approach individuals should adopt in decision mak-
ing (e.g., should people actively suppress affective reactions
when making decisions? See Pham 2007; Vohs, Baumeister,
and Loewenstein 2007). Specifically, we ask the following
question in the current research: to what extent does relying
on one’s emotional response during decision making affect
the consistency of one’s preferences? Following the above
discussion of dual-system models and acknowledging that
decisions are generated by some combination of emotion
and cognition, our question centers around the relative mag-
nitude of reliance on emotional versus cognitive responses.
Why Might Emotions Hurt Preference
Consistency?
Broadly speaking, rational behaviors (calculated, forward
looking, self-controlled, value maximizing) are often attrib-
uted to the cognitive system, while irrational behaviors (my-
opic, transitory, lack of self-control, hyperbolic discounting,
hot-cold empathy gap) are attributed to the emotional system
or to a misalignment between both the emotional and the
cognitive systems (Ainslie and Haslam 1992; Loewenstein
and Schkade 1999; McClure et al. 2004; Mischel, Cantor
and Feldman 1996; Prelec and Loewenstein 1998; Werten-
broch 2003). Given this distinction, a view appertaining to
higher matching between the cognitive system and ratio-
nality and between the emotional system and irrationality
is emerging (see Camerer, Loewenstein, and Prelec 2005
for a general discussion on the relationship between the
automatic-controlled and affective-cognitive dichotomies).
These general associations between the cognitive system
and rationality, as well as between the emotional system and
irrationality, are also congruent with lay beliefs. For ex-
ample, in one study, we asked a group of 16 economics or
psychology PhD students to rate the extent to which they
viewed a set of behaviors (long-term planning, impulsivity,
self-control, etc.) as rational versus irrational, and another
group of 16 economics or psychology PhD students to rate
the extent to which they associated the same set of behaviors
with the cognitive system or the emotional system. The
results showed a high correlation ( ) between therp 0.95
irrationality-rationality ratings and the emotional-cognitive
ratings. Behaviors such as long-term planning were asso-
ciated with rationality and deliberate cognitive thought,
while behaviors such as impulsivity were associated with
irrationality and emotionality, suggesting that there is a gen-
eral assumed fit between the cognitive system and rationality
and between the emotional system and irrationality. Besides
face validity, this intuition also has ecological validity: in
a recent study of sequential financial decisions, for example,
Shiv and his colleagues (2005) found that people with brain
lesions focused in regions related to emotions were less
impacted by past gains or losses and consequently made
better, “more rational” investment decisions than normal
healthy people. Based on all these results, should we then
expect preference decisions that involve affective consid-
erations to be less consistent?
Why Would Emotions Generate Greater
Preference Consistency?
Despite the general associations between Homo Econ-
omicus and the cognitive system and between Homo Psy-
chologus and the emotional system, it is possible that some
aspects of behavior generally conceived as “rational” might
be better generated by the emotional system, as suggested
PREFERENCE CONSISTENCY AND EMOTION 175
by convergent evidence from evolutionary, social, and con-
sumer psychology.
Evolutionary psychologists posit that the emotional sys-
tem has evolved to carry out fast and accurate evaluations
of important judgments and decisions. They have described
emotions as a set of “programs” that have been specifically
designed to solve evolutionarily recurrent situations or con-
ditions, whether it is to fall in love, to escape from a predator,
or to confront an unfaithful spouse. According to this view,
such programs have the effect of activating, mobilizing, and
coordinating a pool of resources, mental processes, goals,
perceptual mechanisms, memory, attention, emotional ex-
pressions, and physiology toward the resolution of the adap-
tive problem at hand (Cosmides and Tooby 2000). Given
these roles of the emotional system, it is possible that the
emotional system is better attuned to consistently and re-
liably provide individuals with a reading of their prefer-
ences, thus creating higher speed, accuracy, and consistency.
This theorizing of the functions of emotions in evolu-
tionary psychology corroborate Epstein’s (2003) hypothesis
on the relative stability of the emotional system compared
with the cognitive system: whereas the former system only
changes with “repetitive or intense experience,” the latter
system changes more rapidly at the “speed of thought” (Ep-
stein 2003, 160). According to Epstein, assessments based
on the emotional system tend to be more holistic, while
those based on the cognitive system tend to be more ana-
lytical; as such, whereas holistic emotional processing might
focus more on the gist of the target under evaluation and is
hence relatively more consistent from time to time, analyt-
ical cognitive processing might be sensitive to fluctuations
in any of the elements in the aforementioned preference
formation process (e.g., information retrieved, decision
weights, integration of information and weights) and hence
susceptible to decision inconsistencies.
One source of empirical evidence for the idea that the
emotional system might be associated with a higher level
of consistency comes from the finding that feeling-based
judgments, compared with reason-based assessments, ex-
hibit greater interpersonal consistency (Pham et al. 2001;
see also Pham 2004). In a series of experiments, Pham and
his colleagues found that participants exhibited greater con-
sensus in their feelings toward news magazine pictures and
television commercials than their reason-based judgments
(e.g., “This picture is good/bad” and “This picture is val-
uable/worthless”) of the same stimuli.
Yet further suggestive evidence for the close association
between preference consistency and the emotional system
comes from findings in social psychology that have chal-
lenged the value of conscious thought toward rational de-
cision making. For instance, Wilson and his colleagues (Wil-
son and Schooler 1991; Wilson et al. 1993) found that
deliberating the positives and negatives when evaluating
hedonic experiences, such as food or art, can cause people
to erroneously focus their attention on nonoptimal criteria
and adversely affect the quality of their judgment. Their
results showed that participants who selected jams (or post-
ers) under thoughtful deliberation later consumed less of
their chosen jam (or were less likely to keep their chosen
posters on their walls), compared with those whose selection
was based on their immediate gut feelings. More recently,
Dijksterhuis (2004) extended this work to examine the rel-
ative merits of conscious and unconscious thought in de-
cision making. His experimental results suggest that uncon-
scious thinkers tend to make more accurate judgments than
conscious thinkers for very complex decisions. For example,
in one of his studies, participants who were asked to think
carefully for 4 minutes before choosing their favorite car
from a given set of cars made objectively poorer choices
(i.e., cars that had significantly fewer positive features) than
participants who were distracted for the same amount of
time with an anagram-solving task (Dijksterhuis et al. 2006,
study 1; see also Nordgren and Dijksterhuis 2009).
Based on these diverse sources of evidence implicating
the potentially close association between the emotional sys-
tem and preference consistency, we hypothesize that a higher
degree of reliance on emotional responses during decision
making will generate a higher level of preference consis-
tency.
Transitivity as a Measure of Preference
Consistency
In designing an appropriate experimental paradigm to test
our hypothesis, we noted the correspondence between pref-
erence consistency, the center of the current investigation,
and transitivity—one of the two basic axioms of rational
preference relations in economics which provide one set of
traditional normative benchmarks for decision quality (Mas-
Colell, Whinston, and Green 1995, 6). Transitivity implies
that a consumer should have a well-defined preference struc-
ture, such that for any set of bundles a, b, and c, if a ≥ b
and b ≥ c, it must also be the case that a ≥ c (where ≥
denotes relative preference).
In our experiments, we used transitivity (or the degree of
transitivity violation) as a way to operationalize the pref-
erence consistency construct and measure the degree of
(in)consistency in people’s preferences over time. Specifi-
cally, in each experiment, we took a set of P products and
presented participants with all pairwise combinations of
these P products (i.e., for eight products, this would mean
pairs) in a random order. Based on each par-7# 8/2p 28
ticipant’s choice pattern, we compute how many times he
or she violated transitivity (e.g., px ≥ py, py ≥ pz, and pz ≥
px, where px, py, and pz are products within the set) as a
measure of the degree of inconsistency in the participant’s
preferences. Obviously, given a large number of pairwise
decisions, it is inevitable that decision makers will make
random errors during choice and consequently violate tran-
sitivity from time to time. Thus, simply demonstrating that
such violations exist would be trivial and of negligible the-
oretical consequence. Instead, our interest here is to use the
degree of intransitivity to compare whether choices are more
consistent when individuals’ relative reliance on their emo-
176 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
tional responses is greater. To this end, we used different
experimental manipulations aimed at invoking different de-
grees of relative reliance on emotional reactions when mak-
ing decisions and examined whether these manipulations
affect the transitivity of people’s preferences, and hence their
preference consistency.
At this juncture, we should note that since May’s (1954)
and Tversky’s (1969) early demonstrations of people’s sys-
tematic preference intransitivity, there has been substantial
research examining the factors that can drive systematic
intransitive choices. Thus far, it has been found that people’s
preferences can be intransitive when driven by their social
context (Fishburn 1970), by the use of satisficing heuristics
(Gigerenzer 2000) or noncompensatory decision rules
(Tversky 1969), and by anticipated regret and counterfac-
tuals (Loomes, Starmer, and Sugden 1991). Intransitive pref-
erences can also occur when information for decision mak-
ing is missing (Kivetz and Simonson 2000) or costly to
obtain (Haines and Ratchford 1987). Given the challenge
that intransitivity poses for traditional choice models, several
researchers have proposed theoretical revisions to these
models to accommodate preference intransitivity (e.g., Clark
1994; Fishburn 1991; Iverson and Falmagne 1985; Kim and
Richter 1986; Loomes and Sugden 1983; Sopher and Gig-
liotti 1993).
The current work differs from these prior work in that
we focus not on systematic violations of transitivity (ones
that are due to biases in decision making), but on intran-
sitivity attributed to the instability in the way decision mak-
ers consider the choices they are facing as they encounter
them again and again—an intransitivity that is akin to sto-
chasticity and that leads to diminished predictability of con-
sumer behavior. In choice models, for example, such in-
transitivity would manifest as larger error terms and lower
reliability and predictability.
GENERAL EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
We used the same experimental paradigm—a pairwise
choice procedure—across all the five experiments we con-
ducted. In each experiment, we first presented participants
with the name, picture, and a short description of all products
used in the experiment and asked them to study the products
for as long as they wished (the products were electronic
gadgets, such as a voice-recording key chain and a pen with
a built-in FM tuner; see fig. 1 for a list of the stimuli used
in the experiments). After participants had familiarized
themselves with all stimuli, they were told that they would
see pairs of these products and had to make a choice within
each pair according to their preferences. The pairs of prod-
ucts were constructed by taking P products (eight products
in experiments 1b and 4, and 10 products in experiments
1a, 2, and 3) and presenting participants with all pairwise
combinations of these products (i.e., ; 28P# (P! 1)/2
pairs in experiments 1b and 4, and 45 pairs in experiments
1a, 2, and 3) in a random order.
As a measure of preference (in)consistency, we computed
the number of transitivity violations participants committed
during the task for a subset of N product options, where N
ranged from 3 to P. For simplicity in reporting the results,
we focus on violations in the form of three-way preference
cycles (e.g., px ≥ py, py ≥ pz, and pz ≥ px; Kendall and
Babington Smith 1940). If there is no error in decision mak-
ing (or if it is very low), individuals will evaluate the dif-
ferent options in a consistent way every time and will show
no (or very few) violations of transitivity in this pairwise
choice paradigm. However, if individuals are prone to error
in decision making, they will assess their utility very dif-
ferently every time and will commit many violations of
transitivity in this paradigm. Thus, we use the measure of
intransitivity to capture the amount of inconsistency in eval-
uations, arguing that higher levels of observed intransitivity
mean that the underlying process is more prone to fluctuating
evaluations, inconsistencies, and random errors.
Besides the three-way-cycles measure used in the current
research, other measures have been proposed for the degree
of intransitivity in a sequence of pairwise choices (see Mon-
suur and Storcken 1975 and David 1988 for comprehensive
reviews). For example, Slater’s (1961) i counts instead the
minimum number of preference reversals (on the binary
level) needed to resolve all intransitivities. The experimental
results in the current work are robust to the type of measure,
and we adopt the three-way-cycles approach for its sim-
plicity.
To test our research hypothesis, we used four different
approaches to manipulate how much participants depend on
the emotional system during choice drawing upon findings
from the extant literature on the general two-system model,
and compare the individual transitivity scores across the
different experimental conditions. In experiments 1a and 1b,
we manipulated how the stimuli were presented during the
choice task (pictorial vs. verbal) based on prior research that
has demonstrated that pictures trigger more emotional pro-
cessing than words or symbols (Hsee and Rottenstreich
2004; see also Epstein 2003, and Lieberman et al. 2002).
In experiment 2, we adapted a manipulation used by Shiv
and Fedorikhin (1999) whereby color photos of the products
generate greater emotional reactions than black-and-white
versions of the same photos. In experiments 3 and 4, we
kept the form of the choice stimuli constant, and instead
manipulated participants’ trust in their feelings and their
cognitive capacity during choice, respectively. Prior research
has demonstrated that individuals who trust their feelings
more have a greater propensity to rely on their emotional
system during decision making (Avnet and Pham 2007; Ste-
phen and Pham 2008); however, choice under high cognitive
load limits cognitive ability, thus generating a greater degree
of reliance on emotional reactions than choice under low
cognitive load (Lieberman et al. 2002; Siemer and Reisen-
zein 1998). Finally, we pooled together all the data from
these five experiments in a meta-analytical study and ex-
amined how the nature of the products—the degree to which
they generate greater affective response in consumers—can
influence their contribution toward greater preference con-
sistency. We next describe the procedures and report the re-
FIGURE 1
EXPERIMENTAL STIMULI
NOTE.—The eight products in the top two rows were used in all the experiments. The additional two products in the bottom row were also used in experiments
1a, 2, and 3. (Color version available as an online enhancement.)
178 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
sults of all five experiments and the meta-analytic study in
detail.
EXPERIMENT 1A: PICTURES
VERSUS NAMES
Overview and Method
In the first experiment, we attempted to influence the
extent to which participants relied on their emotional re-
sponse during choice using a characteristic distinction of the
emotional system from the cognitive system—while the
emotional system is more experiential and concretive (i.e.,
encoding reality in concrete images, metaphors, and nar-
ratives), the cognitive system is more logical and abstract
(i.e., encoding reality in abstract symbols, words, and num-
bers; Epstein 2003; Lieberman et al. 2002). Drawing upon
this distinction, we manipulated the manner in which the
visual stimuli were represented. After studying the infor-
mation (name, picture, and description) of all products as
described in the general procedure for an unlimited amount
of time, participants were randomly assigned to one of two
conditions: in the names condition, the pairs of products
were presented in terms of their names, while in the pictures
condition, the pairs of products were presented in terms of
their pictures (Hsee and Rottenstreich 2004).
We conducted the experiment with the assistance of a
commercial Web-based survey research company. A total
of 534 online respondents participated and in return were
entered into a sweepstakes to win a variety of prizes.
Results
A comparison of the number of three-way intransitivity
errors participants made in the names and pictures conditions
was performed using the unpaired sample t-test. Participants
in the pictures condition made significantly fewer transitivity
violations (Mpicp 2.7, SDp 4.7) than those in the names
condition (Mnamesp 4.6, SDp 6.3), (t(532)p 4.08, p !
.001). In addition, they spent significantly less time to make
their choices (Mpicp 142.0 sec. vs. Mnamesp 199.0 sec.),
(t(532)p 4.32, p ! .001). There was, however, no difference
in the amount of time participants between conditions took
to study the 10 given products (Mpicp 149.2 sec. vs.
Mnamesp 143.1 sec.), (t(532)p .58, pp .56).
Discussion
In experiment 1a, we found preliminary support for the
thesis that preference consistency is associated with greater
reliance on emotional responses. When the stimuli were
richer in affect, participants made significantly fewer in-
transitivity errors. While this result is consistent with our
account, it suffers from two major shortcomings: first, al-
though pictures (vs. words) may indeed have generated a
higher degree of emotional processing, they could also have
facilitated participants’ memory of their prior choices, hence
increasing transitivity; second, because the choices that par-
ticipants made were inconsequential, it is hard to regard any
of their choices as truly erroneous. We thus designed ex-
periment 1b to address these two issues while replicating
our general finding.
EXPERIMENT 1B: CONSEQUENTIAL
PICTURES AND/OR NAMES
Overview and Method
Experiment 1b replicated experiment 1a in a laboratory
setting with two important differences. First, in addition to
the names condition and the pictures condition, we added
a third condition in which both the names and pictures of
the product options were available at the choice stage. Ar-
guably, this new (combined) condition presents more in-
formation than pictures or words alone; thus, if the ease-of-
recall account were sufficient to explain our results in
experiment 1a, participants ought to be most transitive in
this combined condition. However, if our hypothesis is true,
then the inclusion of the names of the products (with their
pictures) should activate semantic cognitive processing and
render this condition no different from the names-only con-
dition, given that we hypothesize that it is the cognitive
processing that adds noise to the decision process. Second,
choices were consequential as participants had the chance
to receive one of their product choices, hence making the
experiment incentive compatible. Specifically, participants
were told that at the end of the experiment, one of the 28
pairs of products would be picked at random and they would
be entered into a lottery to win the product they picked in
this pair.
A total of 75 students recruited at the MIT Stratton student
center participated in this experiment and were randomly
assigned to one of the three conditions: names-only, pic-
tures-only, and names-and-pictures. They were each paid $1
for their participation and were told they would be entered
into a lottery to win one of the products they chose.
Results
The results paralleled closely those of experiment 1a: par-
ticipants in the pictures-only condition who chose between
products presented in the form of pictures made significantly
fewer intransitivity errors (Mpic-onlyp .4, SDp 1.0) than
those in the names-only condition who chose between prod-
ucts presented in the form of names (Mname-onlyp 1.4, SD
p 1.7), (t(48)p 2.51, pp .02). In addition, when the prod-
uct pairs were displayed in terms of both types of infor-
mation (picture and name), the number of violations (Mname-
&-picp 1.2, SDp 1.4) were similar to those in the
names-only condition (t(48)p .46, pp .65), but greater
than those in the pictures-only condition (t(48)p 2.20, p
p .03). (This result pattern continued to hold when we
tested for differences in the number of larger cycles across
conditions, as shown in fig. 2.)
Overall, these results (overall ANOVA: F(2, 72)p 3.37,
pp .04) suggest that alternative accounts that speak to the
PREFERENCE CONSISTENCY AND EMOTION 179
FIGURE 2
COMPARISON OF THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF
INTRANSITIVITY CYCLES (EXPERIMENT 1B)
product pictures’ being a better memory retrieval cue may
not be sufficient to explain our results. The availability of
product names (in addition to the pictures) was sufficient to
deteriorate choice consistency. Given that different modes of
stimuli presentation generate different degrees of emotional/
cognitive processing, the current results suggest that prefer-
ence consistency is more closely associated with affective
processing than more controlled cognitive processing. Fur-
thermore, there was no significant difference across the three
conditions in the amount of time participants took to study the
products prior to choice (Mpic-onlyp 113.7 sec. vs. Mname-only
p 114.7 sec. vs. Mname-&-picp 104.2 sec.), (F(2, 72)p .14,
pp .87) or the amount of time they took to choose their
preferred products (Mpic-onlyp 100.5 sec. vs. Mname-onlyp
118.1 sec. vs. Mpic-only p 98.2 sec.), (F(2, 72)p 1.5, pp
.23).
Discussion
Consistent with the hypothesis that greater reliance on
emotional responses contributes toward a higher degree of
preference consistency, the results of this experiment show
that manipulations (i.e., color images of products) designed
to tap automatic emotional processes to a greater extent than
controlled cognitive processes can generate higher levels of
preference consistency than manipulations (i.e., names of
products) designed to tap cognitive processes to a greater
extent than emotional processes. While the levels of pref-
erence consistency differed across the experimental condi-
tions, it is also worthwhile to obtain a sense of the overall
magnitude of consistency observed in this experiment. One
approach is to consider the following: if the participants had
chosen at random in this experiment, they would have made
an average of about 14 intransitivity cycles (computed based
on a simulation of 10,000 participants who made random
choices). Clearly, this quantity is much higher than anything
we found; in comparison with this benchmark, the overall
level of intransitivity in experiment 1b was rather low.
The manipulation of pictures versus names used in the
first two experiments is consistent with our proposed ac-
count, but it is also clear that there are many differences
between pictorial information and textual information.
Though we have managed to rule out some potential alter-
native explanations (particularly with the combined names-
and-pictures condition), a different approach for testing the
main hypothesis would provide useful converging evidence.
Experiment 2 was designed to test the hypothesis using a
different manipulation of the extent to which different stim-
uli-display modes evoke emotional responses.
EXPERIMENT 2: COLOR VERSUS BLACK-
AND-WHITE PICTURES
Overview and Method
Previous research has shown that the vividness of pictorial
information influences the degree of emotionality experi-
enced by consumers (Loewenstein 1996; Mischel and Moore
1973; Shiv and Fedorikhin 1999). In experiment 2, we used
a similar approach to manipulate the vividness and emo-
tionality of the product options by presenting participants
either color pictures or black-and-white (B&W) pictures of
the products in the choice task.
A total of 88 students recruited at Princeton participated
in this lab experiment. After participants had familiarized
themselves with the 10 products (in the same unhindered
manner as before), each picture being represented by a name,
a picture, and a short description, they proceeded to make
a sequence of 45 pairwise choices. Participants were ran-
domly assigned to one of two conditions: half the partici-
pants were presented with the names and color pictures of
the 10 products; the other half were presented with the
names and pictures of the same products, but the pictures
were in B&W. To examine whether the different presentation
modes of the pictures affect the participants’ perception of
how much information they were obtaining from the pic-
tures, at the end of the choice task, we asked all participants
to complete a postchoice survey in which they had to rate,
on a scale of 1 (not at all) to 7 (very well), how well they
thought each of the given pictures adequately represented
the corresponding product described. As in experiment 1b,
participants were told that they would be entered into a
lottery to win one of the products they chose. Based on the
previous experiments, we hypothesize that participants who
were presented with the color pictures of the product options
would exhibit greater preference consistency and more tran-
sitive choices than those in the B&W condition.
Results
An analysis of the number of intransitivity errors partic-
ipants made between the two conditions revealed that par-
ticipants who saw the black-and-white pictures during the
choice task committed twice as many transitivity violations
180 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
(Mb&wp 2.2, SDp 2.74) as participants who were pre-
sented with the color pictures instead (Mcolorp 1.1, SDp
1.86), (t(86)p 2.05, pp .04). The participants in the B&W
condition also took marginally more time both to study the
products (Mb&wp 123 sec. vs. Mcolorp 98.5 sec.), (t(86)
p 1.92, pp .06) and to make their choices (Mb&wp 120
sec. vs. Mcolorp 109.7 sec.), (t(86)p 1.66, pp .10) than
those in the color condition. Furthermore, the results of the
postchoice representation survey revealed that participants
across the two conditions did not report any significant dif-
ference in how adequately they thought the pictures rep-
resented the products (for each of the 10 products: pp .25
to .95; for the total ratings of all 10 products: (Mb&wp 49.6,
SDp 8.7 vs. Mcolorp 49.1 sec., SDp 8.9), (t(86)p .29,
pp .77)).
Discussion
The results of this experiment continue to implicate the
close association between relying on emotional reactions
and preference consistency. In this experiment, instead of
manipulating the type of information participants saw during
choice (names vs. pictures), we focused on eliciting different
degrees of emotional reactions during decision making by
manipulating the vividness of the stimuli presented to par-
ticipants. The results of the postchoice survey also suggest
that this difference in preference consistency cannot be ad-
equately explained by any potential difference in the per-
ceived amount of product information obtained through the
different presentation modes. Participants did not seem to
discern any significant difference in objective product in-
formation between the two conditions; rather, the color ver-
sus B&W pictures elicited different degrees of emotional
reactions in participants. This finding also renders alternative
accounts such as differential memory recall or differential
processing fluency less likely.
EXPERIMENT 3: TRUST IN FEELINGS
Overview and Method
So far, we have manipulated the manner in which the
choice stimuli were presented to participants in order to
evoke different degrees of emotional responses in partici-
pants. One way to test our hypothesis more directly is to
explicitly manipulate the cognitive state of participants when
making decisions while keeping the choice stimuli constant
across conditions. To this end, we used a method by Avnet
and Pham (2007; see also Stephen and Pham 2008) to ma-
nipulate participants’ situational trust in their emotions and
thus their reliance on affect as information during decision
making. If reliance on emotional reactions indeed generates
greater preference consistency, then participants who trust
their feelings more should exhibit more consistent prefer-
ences (regardless of the presentation format of choice stim-
uli) and make fewer intransitivity errors than those who trust
their feelings less during decision making. Conversely, par-
ticipants who trust their feelings less might display different
degrees of preference consistency depending on how much
emotional response the choice stimuli generate.
This experiment was conducted as two purportedly sep-
arate online studies. (Participants’ response to a postexper-
iment survey question indicated that they were not aware
of the relationship between these two online studies.) In the
first study, participants were asked to describe either two
(high-trust) or 10 (low-trust) past situations in which they
trusted their feelings to make a decision and it turned out
to be the right decision. This manipulation is based on the
premise that participants who had to describe two situations
would find the task relatively easy, whereas those who had
to describe 10 situations would find the task relatively dif-
ficult (Schwarz et al. 1991); this experienced ease or dif-
ficulty of retrieving two versus 10 instances, respectively,
would then result in respondents’ perceiving that such in-
stances are common versus uncommon, thus generating
higher (two) versus lower (10) trust in their feelings when
making subsequent decisions. In the second study, partici-
pants were given the same general two-stage binary choice
task as used in all earlier experiments. However, as in ex-
periment 1a, half the participants saw the products presented
in terms of pictures during the choice stage, while the other
half saw the products presented in terms of names. We pre-
dict that while high-trust participants would demonstrate a
similar degree of choice consistency regardless of whether
the products were presented in terms of names or pictures,
low-trust participants would be more affected by the pre-
sentation format of the products: in particular, when the
products were represented in terms of pictures instead of
names, low-trust participants would be more likely to rely
on their feelings when choosing between the products and
demonstrate greater consistency.
A total of 208 individuals recruited from an online panel
participated in this experiment. (Six participants were ex-
cluded from the analysis because the amount of time they
took to complete the task was more than three SDs away
from the average time based on a logarithmic transformation
of the completion time; including these participants within
the data set, however, did not change the general result
pattern.) Each participant was randomly assigned to one of
the four conditions in the 2 (trust in feelings: high vs. low)
# 2 (product representation: pictures vs. names) between-
subjects design and stood a chance to win one of the chosen
products in a lottery after the experiment.
Results
The number of intransitivity errors that participants made
in the binary choice task was submitted to a two-factorial
(trust in feelings # product representation) ANOVA. As
shown in figure 3, the results revealed a statistically significant
main effect of product representation (F(1, 198)p13.92; p
! .001), a significant main effect of trust in feelings
(F(1, 198)p 4.04, pp .05), and a marginally significant in-
teraction between the two independent factors (F(1, 198)p
2.73, p ! .10). Most central to the objective of this experi-
ment, planned contrasts revealed that whereas high-trust par-
PREFERENCE CONSISTENCY AND EMOTION 181
FIGURE 3
COMPARISON OF THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF INTRANSITIVITY CYCLES (EXPERIMENT 3)
NOTE.—Error bars denote standard errors.
ticipants did not differ significantly in the number of in-
transitivity errors that they made regardless of whether the
products were presented in terms of pictures (Mp 2.27,
SDp 3.06) or names (Mp 3.72, SDp 3.55), (F(1, 198)
p 2.54, pp .11), low-trust participants made significantly
fewer intransitivity errors when the products were presented
in terms of pictures (Mp 2.52, SDp 4.36) compared with
names (Mp 6.28, SDp 8.19), (F(1, 198)p 13.92, p !
.001).
In contrast, ANOVAs comparing the amount of time par-
ticipants across conditions took to make their choices re-
vealed only a significant main effect of product represen-
tation (F(1, 198)p 11.83, p ! .001), with participants
taking less time to complete the task when pictures (Mp
111.88 sec., SDp 45.21 sec.) were presented instead of
names (Mp 138.44 sec., SDp 57.80 sec.). Neither the
main effect of trust in feelings or the interaction effect be-
tween the two independent factors on decision time was
significant (both p’s 1 .44). The amount of time participants
took to study the products before choice was also not sig-
nificant across conditions (all p’s 1 .37)
Discussion
In addition to conceptually replicating our previous find-
ings involving different ways in which the choice stimuli
were represented, experiment 3 adds an important insight
into the processes underlying preference consistency: by
encouraging trust in feelings, we can induce greater emo-
tional processing and increase preference consistency, es-
pecially when products are not presented in a way that nat-
urally engenders affective processing. This approach seems
to contradict potential lay advice to inhibit one’s feelings
in order to generate more consistent preferences.
One alternative explanation to the results is that, com-
pared with participants who had to recall only two previous
incidents, those who had to recall 10 previous incidents
experienced greater cognitive depletion and hence were less
careful with their decisions, thereby making more intran-
sitivity errors. This account seems inadequate at explaining
the observed transitivity pattern since participants who were
asked to recall 10 previous incidents did not take a signif-
icantly different amount of time on average to make their
choices compared with those asked to recall only two pre-
vious incidents (pp .55). Nonetheless, in the next exper-
iment, we directly manipulated participants’ cognitive ca-
pacity and hence their relative reliance on their emotional
processing.
EXPERIMENT 4: COGNITIVE CAPACITY
Overview and Method
In this experiment, we used the same general procedure
as in the earlier experiments, first presenting participants
with the names, pictures, and descriptions of the products
for study and then asking them to choose within pairs of
these products (represented by both their names and pic-
tures). As in experiment 3, the choice stimuli did not vary
in how they were presented to participants across conditions.
182 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
Instead, to induce different degrees of relative reliance on
emotional reactions, we used a cognitive load manipulation
that has been widely adopted in the psychology literature
(Shiv and Fedorikhin 1999; Trope and Alfieri 1997; see also
Gilbert, Pelham, and Krull 1988): half the participants in
the experiment were asked to memorize a three-digit code
(low-load condition) during the choice task, while the other
half were asked to memorize a 10-digit code (high-load
condition). The pretext for the code recall was that partic-
ipants had to reproduce the correct code at the end of the
choice task to enter a lottery to win one of the products
they had selected.
Based on prior research (Lieberman et al. 2002; Siemer
and Reisenzein 1998), we expected participants in the high-
load condition—whose cognitive capacities were con-
strained by the requirement to memorize a long numeric
code—to rely more on their emotional responses when
choosing their preferred products. Thus, if preference con-
sistency is indeed associated with a greater reliance on emo-
tional reactions, then participants in the high-load condition
should make fewer intransitivity errors than those in the
low-load condition. However, if preference consistency is
associated with cognitive processing instead, then we would
see the opposite pattern of results.
Forty students at MIT participated in this study in ex-
change for the opportunity to win one of the products they
chose in the choice task. The students were randomly as-
signed to one of the two experimental conditions.
Results
An unpaired-sample t-test revealed that the high-load par-
ticipants committed significantly fewer transitivity viola-
tions (Mhighp .7, SDp 1.03) than the low-load participants
(Mlowp 1.9, SDp 2.49), (t(38)p 1.99, pp .05). There
was, however, no significant difference between the two
conditions in the amount of time participants took to study
the products prior to choice (Mlowp 89 sec. vs. Mhighp 78
sec.), (t(38)p .46, pp .65), nor the amount of time they
took to choose the products (Mlowp 85.3 sec. vs. Mhighp
85.3 sec.), (t(38) ! .01, p 1 .99).
Discussion
Consistent with our hypothesis, we found that participants
whose cognitive capacity was constrained were more con-
sistent in their choices. In accordance with prior research,
participants in the high-load condition had to rely more on
emotional as opposed to cognitive processes than their low-
load counterparts when selecting between each pair of prod-
ucts. That participants in the high-load condition made fewer
intransitivity errors provides further support for our claim
that preference transitivity is associated more closely with
reliance on emotional reactions than with deliberate cog-
nitive thought. Put differently, cognitive processes are more
prone to stochastic noise. Note that an alternative account
based on cognitive depletion, as discussed in experiment 3,
can be effectively ruled out here given that participants in
the high-load condition, despite being cognitively more de-
pleted than participants in the low-load condition, actually
made fewer, not more (as the alternative account would
predict), intransitivity errors.
A META-ANALYTICAL STUDY: THE
ROLE OF PRODUCT TYPES
Our data from the five experiments allow for an even
stronger test of our hypothesis. If indeed, as we claim, the
choice inconsistencies we observe in our experiments were
driven by the cognitive system’s greater susceptibility to
decisional noise (or “cognitive noise”) compared with the
emotional system, then this effect should be larger for prod-
ucts that generate little emotional reaction than for products
that generate greater emotional response. In other words, if
we could classify the products themselves based on the ex-
tent to which they generate emotional responses in people,
then we expect those products that elicit a greater emotional
reaction to generate greater preference consistency.
To test this hypothesis in the most conservative manner,
we took all product choices (across all of our experiments)
and asked the following question: are products that generate
a stronger emotional reaction less likely to belong to in-
transitivity cycles than products that generate a more cog-
nitive response? To answer this question, we presented the
same product information (i.e., names and pictures) that was
available to all of our experimental participants to an in-
dependent group of 30 university students and asked them
to rate on a 10-point scale the extent to which each of the
products was “functional/useful” and the extent to which
the product was “exciting/cool.” The correlation between
the two scores for each product was rp .89 (pp .0004).
Nevertheless, for each product, the average difference be-
tween these two measures represented the extent to which
the product elicited a greater emotional versus cognitive
reaction. We then analyzed whether being “more exciting
than useful” (METU) indeed predicted a smaller likelihood
for a product to belong to an intransitivity cycle.
A random-effects probit regression analysis of the like-
lihood of a product to belong to an intransitivity cycle on
the product’s METU measure as an independent variable,
and controlling for individual heterogeneity, revealed that
the stronger is a product’s emotional relative to cognitive
appeal (i.e., greater METU), the less likely is the product
to belong to an intransitivity cycle (p ! .001; see table 1,
model I). (Adding interaction terms between product attrib-
utes and specific within-experiment manipulations into the
regression equation did not produce any reliable effects; the
same basic result pattern also held when alternative methods
were used to account for participant heterogeneity.) Inter-
estingly, although decision times across conditions (within
the individual experiments) were not always significantly
different and could not fully explain the observed difference
in preference consistency between conditions, consistent
with a theory that making emotionally-based choices is
somewhat faster, adding decision time as a predictor in the
PREFERENCE CONSISTENCY AND EMOTION 183
TABLE 1
RESULTS OF INDIVIDUAL-SPECIFIC RANDOM-EFFECTS
PROBIT REGRESSIONS PREDICTING INTRANSITIVITY
Predictor Model I Model II
Intercept 1.508**
(.038)
1.510**
(.039)
METU !.078**
(.015)
!.077**
(.015)
Decision time 7.45e-07*
(3.63e-07)
n / # of groups 40,300 / 939 40,300 / 939
NOTE.—Standard errors are presented in parentheses below parameter
estimates.
* .p ! .05
** .p ! .001
regression (see table 1, model II) revealed a small yet sig-
nificant effect such that longer decision times for a product
were associated with a greater likelihood of transitivity vi-
olation (p ! .05). However, differences in decision time did
not mediate the role of product emotionality in fostering
transitivity, as the METU independent variable remained
statistically significant after controlling for decision time
(p ! .001).
We thus find that not only did more “emotion-laden” con-
ditions within experiments resulted in greater choice con-
sistency as shown in the previous five experiments, pref-
erences for products that evoke a stronger emotional reaction
across conditions also tend to be more consistent. This find-
ing lends further support to the differential roles of emo-
tional processing and cognitive processing in generating
consistent preferences. Again, we find that with greater re-
liance on emotional response comes a higher level of tran-
sitivity and greater preference consistency.
GENERAL DISCUSSION
We arrive at the truth, not by the reason
only, but also by the heart. (Blaise Pascal)
As the canonical symbol of rational decision making,
Homo Economicus has generally been depicted as a supra-
rational, self-interested breed that possesses immense fore-
sight and cognitive abilities (and perhaps, consequently, an
oversized and active cortical system) but at the same time,
“devoid of emotions.” In this work, we investigated one im-
portant property of Homo Economicus—transitivity—and its
relation to our emotional system and cognitive system. Our
examination of transitivity in the current work was not aimed
to test the validity of rational choice models or economic
theory. Instead, we used this very central concept in eco-
nomics as an apparatus to examine the consistency in which
individuals decide among their choices. Beyond its theo-
retical value, consistency is at the core of marketers’ ability
to forecast and predict consumer behavior.
The results of five experiments—in which we manipu-
lated the visual form of the choice stimuli and the mental
state of the decision maker—consistently demonstrate that
the predictability of behavior relies more on emotion than
what common conceptions of decision making might sug-
gest. Using a pairwise choice task and different experimental
manipulations designed to activate different degrees of re-
liance on emotional versus cognitive reactions, we found
that participants’ preferences were more consistent and less
susceptible to cognitive noise when they chose between
products presented in the more affective mode of pictures
instead of the less affective mode of names (experiments
1a, 1b, and 3); when they chose between products presented
in the more affective mode of color photos instead of the
less affective mode of black-and-white photos (experiment
2); when they made their choices with a higher degree of
trust in their feelings (experiment 3); and under higher cog-
nitive load (experiment 4), as well as when they were mak-
ing choices among products that naturally engender greater
emotional than cognitive response (product meta-analysis).
Together, these results imply that preference consistency is
greatly benefited by affective responses. From a methodo-
logical perspective, these results also highlight the impor-
tance of examining the consistency of individuals’ choices
over time as an indication of decision quality, rather than
treating choice variations and inconsistencies merely as
“noise.”
The ongoing discourse regarding the role of emotions in
decision making presents a complex set of evidence pointing
both for and against their merits in decision making. A closer
analysis of the various sets of findings, including the results
presented here, suggests that there are some situations in
which relying on one’s emotions may be the right strategy,
but other situations in which such reliance may be detri-
mental for decision making (Vohs et al. 2007). For instance,
there are various degrees of emotional reactions, ranging
from attention toward affective information (even automat-
ically) to violent mood swings, which may have different
effects on the quality of the decision making process. In the
same vein, Baumeister, DeWall, and Zhang (2007) distin-
guished between “automatic affect” (i.e., quick reactions of
liking and disliking) and “conscious emotions” (i.e., com-
plete emotional experiences imbued with conscious feelings
and cognitive interpretations). (See also Camerer, Loew-
enstein, and Prelec 2005 for a discussion of the distinction
between automatic emotions and controlled emotions.) In
this work, we focus on the former rather than the latter type
of emotional processes; nevertheless, this distinction is im-
portant here because it cautions us when generalizing our
results to the realm of very conscious or very strong emo-
tional states.
Our experimental findings also extend the stream of re-
search on preference transitivity: in addition to other ante-
cedents that have already been identified, preference tran-
sitivity can be impaired by too much deliberate cognitive
thinking. Our results are also consistent with the evolution-
ary account that our emotional processes might have been
adapted to perform common and important tasks effectively
and efficiently (Cosmides and Tooby 2000; Damasio 1994).
184 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
To the extent that transitive preferences are objectively “bet-
ter” and more optimal than intransitive preferences, our re-
sults join other prior work that demonstrate the positive roles
emotions play in decision making (Bechara et al. 1997; Da-
masio 1994; Davidson et al. 2000; Dijksterhuis 2004; Loew-
enstein and Lerner 2002; LeDoux 1996; Peters and Slovic
2000; Pham et al. 2001; Wilson and Schooler 1991). In
particular, whereas Pham and his colleagues (2001) dem-
onstrated that feeling-based processes (compared with rea-
son-based processes) lead to more stable and consistent
judgments across individuals, our results show that emo-
tional processes can also contribute toward greater prefer-
ence stability and consistency within individuals.
Alternative Accounts
Alternative accounts bear the burden of explaining why
we observed greater preference consistency in conditions
that induced more emotional and/or less cognitive process-
ing across all the experiments and analyses presented. One
such possible account for our experimental results in general
is that different experimental manipulations, or the different
circumstances under which participants had to make their
product choices, changed the type of decision strategies par-
ticipants used, and that some of these strategies somehow
increase internal preference consistency. It should be noted
that to the extent that these latter strategies involve more
emotional processing (and hence less cognitive processing),
they are essentially the rationale for our argument. There-
fore, for this alternative account to be valid, the manipu-
lations must have led to different types (and not degrees)
of cognitive processing.
For example, in experiment 4 where we manipulated the
degree of cognitive capacity under which participants had
to choose their preferred products, one might argue that
participants under higher cognitive load could have used a
simplifying noncompensatory decision strategy, which in
turn could have resulted in the greater degree of transitivity
observed. However, Tversky’s (1969) transitivity findings
with gamble choice would lead us to predict the opposite
result: if a simplifying or lexicographic decision strategy
was indeed used by participants under high cognitive load,
then we would expect participants under low cognitive load
to have greater attentional capacity to use a more optimizing,
more compensatory strategy in making their choices, and
thus be more, not less, consistent in their choices! (See also
Gigerenzer 2000 for examples of intransitivity caused by
the use of satisficing, noncompensatory decision strategies.)
Moreover, the timing results that we found in this experi-
ment—that there was no significant difference in how long
participants took to choose across both conditions—further
challenge the validity and adequacy of this alternative ac-
count in explaining our results. Furthermore, we also de-
signed the experimental procedure such that participants
were provided with full information of all products at the
outset and were given as much time to familiarize them-
selves with the products as they wanted before being as-
signed to one of the experimental conditions. Thus, we do
not expect participants to make vastly different choices
among the products in any of the experiments (which had
identical product assortments).
To test this alternative account more directly using the
choice data from the experiments, we examined whether
there was a change in participants’ overall preference or-
dering among the given products across conditions, assum-
ing that a change in decision strategy would lead to a change
in preference structure. We can infer a participant’s pref-
erence order by computing his or her Kendall score for each
product (i.e., the number of times the participant chooses
the product in preference to the other products in the set),
and rank order his or her Kendall scores for all the products
(Cook and Kress 1992). (In other words, there is a set of P
Kendall scores for each participant, where P is the number
of products in the given set.) To compare participants’ pref-
erence structure between conditions in each experiment, we
submitted participants’ Kendall scores to a MANOVA, using
the specific experimental manipulation as the independent
factor. The MANOVA results (using Wilks’s lambda) re-
vealed no significant difference in product preference order
across conditions in any of the experiments.
Together, these results support our proposed account as
a valid parsimonious explanation for the experimental re-
sults—participants who rely on more intuitive, emotional
processing rather than deliberative, cognitive processing
tend to exhibit greater preference consistency.
Future Research
In this research, we measured preference consistency by
computing the number of transitivity violations among all
pairwise choices of a product set. There are no doubt other
ways to measure consistency, and it would be worthwhile
to design and conduct further experiments based on other
measures of consistency. Other potential factors, such as
choice context (e.g., Amir and Levav 2008) or the consid-
eration of specific product attributes (e.g., Lee, Bertini, and
Ariely 2008) that could influence the degree of emotional
or cognitive processing and in turn preference consistency
can also be further explored.
One important way to extend the results is to implement
a design with greater temporal distance between consecutive
pairwise choices, for example, getting participants to make
one pairwise choice a day over an extended period of time,
and examining whether the same transitivity patterns we
observed across different emotional versus cognitive deci-
sion making scenarios persist. Another possible area for
future research stems from an application of Piaget’s (1969)
theory of cognitive development in developmental psy-
chology. Piaget proposed four stages of cognitive devel-
opment, which includes a stage (III) for concrete operations
(approximately at ages 7–11) when children master logic
and develop “rational” thinking. Piaget’s work suggests that
age could be a factor that moderates the degree of transitivity
of an individual’s choices. As such, it would be worthwhile
and interesting to examine how adults compare with children
in terms of their degrees of preference consistency. At a
PREFERENCE CONSISTENCY AND EMOTION 185
more rudimentary (neural) level, while our experimental
results point toward the close association between the emo-
tional system and preference consistency, further experi-
ments involving the direct examination of individuals’ neu-
ral activities during choice and decision making under
varying conditions are imperative if we are to identify the
precise neural substrates associated with consistent prefer-
ences.
Practical Implications
Our results suggest that marketers who study consumer
preferences may improve their methods by using affect-rich
stimuli. For example, a conjoint analysis that includes pic-
tures in addition to descriptions in its choice stimuli may
do a far better job at tapping the more consistent components
of consumer preferences. Moreover, the emotional system’s
contribution to stable preferences suggested by our findings
points toward yet another advantage in emotional ap-
proaches to persuasion: it may be important to tap consum-
ers’ emotional systems when assessing their consumption
satisfaction as this approach might yield better predictions
of their future choices. Finally, our results have one other
practical implication if we were to consider an important
difference between brick and mortar shopping and Internet
shopping: the former affords consumers a richer affective
shopping experience and may lead to greater preference con-
sistency over time. As our results suggest, the degree to
which a shopping Web site provides rich affective cues
might have a great influence on consumer preference con-
sistency.
For the consumer, contrary to lay perceptions, attending
to one’s emotional responses may prove to be very valuable
in understanding one’s inherent preferences (Simonson
2008). It is possible consumers would be much happier with
choices based more on their emotional reaction. For ex-
ample, if one buys a house and relies on very cognitive
attributes such as resale value, one may not be as happy
actually living in it, as opposed to a person who attends to
his or her emotional reaction to the house prior to purchasing
it. Indeed, our results suggest that the heart can very well
serve as a more reliable compass to greater long-term hap-
piness than pure reason.
REFERENCES
Ainslie, George and Nick Haslam (1992), “Hyperbolic Discount-
ing,” in Choice over Time, ed. George Loewenstein and Jon
Elster, New York: Russell Sage, 57–92.
Amir, On and Jonathan Levav (2008), “Choice Construction versus
Preference Construction: The Instability of Preferences
Learned in Context,” Journal of Marketing Research, 45,
145–58.
Avnet, Tamar and Pham, Michel T. (2007), “Metacognitive and
Nonmetacognitive Reliance on Affect as Information in Judg-
ment,” working paper, Yeshiva University, New York.
Baumeister, Roy F., C. Nathan DeWall, and Liqing Zhang (2007),
“Do Emotions Hinder or Improve the Decision Making Pro-
cess?” in Vohs et al. 2007, 11–31.
Bechara, Antonine, Hanna Damasio, Daniel Tranel, and Antonio
R. Damasio (1997), “Deciding Advantageously before Know-
ing the Advantageous Strategy,” Science, 275, 1293–94.
Bem, Daryl J. (1972), “Self-Perception Theory,” in Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology, Vol. 6, ed. Leonard Ber-
kowitz, New York: Academic Press, 1–62.
Camerer, Colin, George Loewenstein, and Drazen Prelec (2005),
“Neuroeconomics: How Neuroscience Can Inform Econom-
ics,” Journal of Economic Literature, 43 (1), 9–64.
Clark, Stephen A. (1994), “Toward a Unified Model of Weakly
Rational Choice,” Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 38,
73–85.
Cook, Wade D. and Moshe Kress (1992), Ordinal Information and
Preference Structures: Decision Models and Applications,
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Cosmides, Leda and John Tooby (2000), “Evolutionary Psychol-
ogy and the Emotions,” in Handbook of Emotions, ed. Michael
Lewis and Jeannette M. Haviland-Jones, New York: Guilford,
91–115.
Damasio, Antonio R. (1994), Descartes’ Error, New York: Gros-
set/Putnam.
David, H. A. (1988), The Method of Paired Comparisons, London:
Griffin.
Davidson, Richard J., Daren C. Jackson, and Ned H. Kalin (2000),
“Emotion, Plasticity, Context, and Regulation: Perspectives
from Affective Neuroscience,” Psychological Bulletin, 126
(6), 890–909.
Dijksterhuis, Ap (2004), “Think Different: The Merits of Uncon-
scious Thought in Preference Development and Decision
Making,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87
(5), 586–98.
Dijksterhuis, Ap, Maarten W. Bos, Loran F. Nordgren, and Rick
B. van Baaren (2006), “On Making the Right Choice: The
Deliberation-without-Attention Effect,” Science, 311, 1005–7.
Epstein, Seymour (1994), “Integration of the Cognitive and the
Psychodynamic Unconscious,” American Psychologist, 49,
709–24.
——— (2003), “Cognitive-Experiential Self-Theory of Personal-
ity,” in Handbook of Psychology, Vol. 5, Personality and
Social Psychology, ed. Theodore Millon, Melvin J. Lerner,
and Irving B. Weiner, Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 159–84.
Festinger, Leon (1957), A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance, Ev-
anston, IL: Row, Peterson.
Fishburn, Peter C. (1970), “The Irrationality of Transitivity in So-
cial Choice,” Behavioral Science, 15, 119–23.
——— (1991), “Nontransitive Preferences in Decision Theory,”
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 4 (2), 113–34.
Gigerenzer, Gerd (2000), Adaptive Thinking: Rationality in the
Real World, New York: Oxford University Press.
Gilbert, Daniel T., Brett W. Pelham, and Douglas S. Krull (1988),
“On Cognitive Busyness: When Person Perceivers Meet Per-
sons Perceived,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 54 (May), 733–40.
Haines, George H., Jr. and Brian T. Ratchford (1987), “A Theory
of How Intransitive Consumers Make Decisions,” Journal of
Economic Psychology, 8, 273–98.
Hsee, Christopher K. and Yuval Rottenstreich (2004), “Music, Pan-
das, and Muggers: On the Affective Psychology of Value,”
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133 (1),
23–30.
186 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
Iverson, Geoffrey and J. C. Falmagne (1985), “Statistical Issues
in Measurement,” Mathematical Social Sciences, 10, 131–53.
Kahneman, Daniel and Shane Frederick (2002), “Representative-
ness Revisited: Attribution Substitution in Intuitive Judg-
ment,” in Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive
Judgment, ed. Tom Gilovich, Dale Griffin, and Daniel Kah-
neman, New York: Cambridge University Press, 49–81.
Kendall, M. G. and B. Babington Smith (1940), “On the Method
of Paired Comparisons,” Biometrika, 31, 324–45.
Kim, Taesung and Marcel L. Richter (1986), “Nontransitive-Non-
total Consumer Theory,” Journal of Economic Theory, 38 (2),
324–63.
Kivetz, Ran and Itamar Simonson (2000), “The Effects of Incom-
plete Information on Consumer Choice,” Journal of Market-
ing Research, 37 (4), 427–48.
LeDoux, Joseph E. (1996), The Emotional Brain: Mysterious Un-
derpinnings of Emotional Life, New York: Simon & Schuster.
Lee, Leonard, Marco Bertini, and Dan Ariely (2008), “Money
Muddles Thinking: The Effect of Price on Preference Con-
sistency,” working paper, Columbia University.
Lieberman, Matthew D., Ruth Gaunt, Daniel T. Gilbert, and Yaacov
Trope (2002), “Reflexion and Reflection: A Social Cognitive
Neuroscience Approach to Attributional Inference,” in Ad-
vances in Experimental Social Psychology, Vol. 34, ed. Mark
P. Zanna, San Diego: Academic Press, 199–249.
Loewenstein, George (1996), “Out of Control: Visceral Influences
on Behavior,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Process, 65 (March), 272–92.
Loewenstein, George and Jennifer Lerner (2002), “The Role of
Emotion in Decision Making,” in Handbook of Affective Sci-
ence, ed. Richard J. Davidson, Klaus R. Scherer, and H. Hill
Goldsmith, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 619–42.
Loewenstein, George and Ted O’Donoghue (2004), “Animal Spir-
its: Affective and Deliberative Processes in Economic Be-
havior,” working paper, Carnegie Mellon University.
Loewenstein, George and David Schkade (1999), “Wouldn’t It Be
Nice? Predicting Future Feelings,” in Well-Being: The Foun-
dations of Hedonic Psychology, ed. Daniel Kahneman, Ed
Diener, and Norbert Schwarz, New York: Russell Sage,
85–108.
Loomes, Graham, Chris Starmer, and Robert Sugden (1991), “Ob-
serving Violations of Transitivity by Experimental Methods,”
Econometrica, 59 (2), 425–39.
Loomes, Graham and Robert Sugden (1983), “A Rationale for
Preference Reversal,” American Economic Review, 73,
428–32.
Mas-Colell, Andreu, Michael Dennis Whinston, and Jerry R. Green
(1995), Microeconomic Theory, New York: Oxford University
Press.
May, Kenneth O. (1954), “Intransitivity, Utility, and the Aggre-
gation of Preference Patterns,” Econometrica, 22, 1–13.
McClure, Samuel M., David I. Laibson, George Loewenstein, and
Jonathan D. Cohen (2004), “Separate Neural Systems Value
Immediate and Delayed Monetary Rewards,” Science, 206,
503–7.
Metcalfe, Janet and Walter Mischel (1999), “A Hot/Cool-System
Analysis of Delay of Gratification: Dynamics of Willpower,”
Psychological Review, 106 (1), 3–19.
Mischel, Walter, Nancy Cantor, and Scott Feldman (1996), “Prin-
ciples of Self-Regulation: The Nature of Willpower and Self-
Control,” in Social Psychology: Handbook of Basic Princi-
ples, ed. E. T. Higgins and A. W. Kruglanski, New York:
Guilford, 329–61.
Mischel, Walter and Bert Moore (1973), “Effects of Attention to
Symbolically Presented Rewards on Self-Control,” Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 28, 172–79.
Monsuur, Herman and Ton Storcken (1997), “Measuring Intran-
sitivity,” Mathematical Social Science, 34, 125–52.
Nordgren, Loran F. and Ap Dijksterhuis (2009), “The Devil Is in
the Deliberation: Thinking Too Much Reduces Preference
Consistency,” Journal of Consumer Research, forthcoming.
Nunnally, Jum C. and Ira H. Bernstein (1994), Psychometric The-
ory, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Paivio, Allan (1986), Mental Representations: A Dual Coding Ap-
proach, New York: Oxford University Press.
Panksepp, Jaak (2004), Affective Neuroscience, New York: Oxford
University Press.
Peters, Ellen and Paul Slovic (2000), “The Springs of Action:
Affective and Analytical Information Processing in Choice,”
Personality and Social Psychological Bulletin, 26 (12),
1465–75.
Pham, Michel T. (2004), “The Logic of Feeling,” Journal of Con-
sumer Psychology, 14 (4), 360–69.
——— (2007), “Emotion and Rationality: A Critical Review and
Interpretation of Empirical Evidence,” Review of General Psy-
chology, 11, 155–78.
Pham, Michel T., Joel B. Cohen, John W. Pracejus, and G. David
Hughes (2001), “Affect Monitoring and the Primacy of Feel-
ings in Judgment,” Journal of Consumer Research, 28,
167–88.
Piaget, Jean (1969), The Psychology of the Child, New York: Basic
Books.
Prelec, Drazen and George Loewenstein (1998), “The Red and the
Black: Mental Accounting of Savings and Debt,” Marketing
Science, 17 (1), 4–28.
Schwarz, Norbert, Herbert Bless, Fritz Strack, Gisela Klumpp,
Helga Rittenauer-Schatka, and Annette Simons (1991), “Ease
of Retrieval as Information: Another Look at the Availability
Heuristic,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61,
195–202.
Shiv, Baba and Alexander Fedorikhin (1999), “Heart and Mind in
Conflict: The Interplay of Affect and Cognition in Consumer
Decision Making,” Journal of Consumer Research, 26 (De-
cember), 278–92.
Shiv, Baba, George Loewenstein, Antoine Bechara, Hanna Da-
masio, and Antonio Damasio (2005), “Investment Behavior
and the Negative Side of Emotion,” Psychological Science,
16 (6), 435–39.
Siemer, Matthias and Rainer Reisenzein (1998), “Effects of Mood
on Evaluative Judgments: Influence of Reduced Processing
Capacity and Mood Salience,” Cognition and Emotion, 12
(6), 783–805.
Simonson, Itamar (2008), “Will I Like a ‘Medium’ Pillow? Another
Look at Constructed and Inherent Preferences,” Journal of
Consumer Psychology, 18 (3), 155–69.
Slater, Patrick (1961), “Inconsistencies in a Schedule of Paired
Comparisons,” Biometrika, 48, 303–12.
Sloman, Steven A. (1996), “The Empirical Case for Two Systems
of Reasoning,” Psychological Bulletin, 119 (1), 3–22.
Sopher, Barry and Gary Gigliotti (1993), “Intransitive Cycles: Ra-
tional Choice or Random Error? An Answer Based on Esti-
mation of Error Rates with Experimental Data,” Theory and
Decision, 35, 311–36.
Stephen, Andrew and Michel T. Pham (2008)), “On Feelings as a
Heuristic for Making Offers in Ultimatum Negotiations,” Psy-
chological Science, 19, 1051–58.
PREFERENCE CONSISTENCY AND EMOTION 187
Trope, Yaacov and Thomas Alfieri (1997), “Effortfulness and Flex-
ibility of Dispositional Judgement Processes,” Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 73 (4), 662–74.
Tversky, Amos (1969), “Intransitivity of Preferences,” Psycholog-
ical Review, 76 (1), 31–48.
Vohs, Kathleen D., Roy F. Baumeister, and George F. Loewenstein
(2007), Do Emotions Help or Hurt Decision Making? A Hed-
gefoxian Perspective, New York: Russell Sage.
Wertenbroch, Klaus (2003), “Self-Rationing: Self-Control in Con-
sumer Choice,” in Time and Decision: Economic and Psy-
chological Perspectives on Intertemporal Choice, ed. George
Loewenstein, Daniel Read, and Roy Baumeister, New York:
Russell Sage, 491–516.
Wilson, Timothy D., Douglas J. Lisle, Jonathan W. Schooler, Sara
D. Hodges, Kristen J. Klaaren, and Suzanne J. LaFleur (1993),
“Introspecting about Reasons Can Reduce Post-choice Sat-
isfaction,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 19,
331–39.
Wilson, Timothy D. and Jonathan W. Schooler (1991), “Thinking
Too Much: Introspection Can Reduce the Quality of Prefer-
ences and Decisions,” Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 60 (2), 181–92.
Zajonc, Robert B. (1998), “Emotions,” in Handbook of Social
Psychology, Vol. 1, ed. Daniel T. Gilbert, Susan T. Fiske, and
Gardner Lindzey, Boston: McGraw-Hill, 591–632.
