Myocyte-Restricted Focal Adhesion Kinase Deletion
Attenuates Pressure Overload–Induced Hypertrophy
Laura A. DiMichele, Jason T. Doherty, Mauricio Rojas, Hilary E. Beggs, Louis F. Reichardt,
Christopher P. Mack, Joan M. Taylor
Abstract—Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is a ubiquitously expressed cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase strongly activated by
integrins and neurohumoral factors. Previous studies have shown that cardiac FAK activity is enhanced by hypertrophic
stimuli before the onset of overt hypertrophy. Herein, we report that conditional deletion of FAK from the myocardium
of adult mice did not affect basal cardiac performance, myocyte viability, or myofibrillar architecture. However, deletion
of FAK abolished the increase in left ventricular posterior wall thickness, myocyte cross-sectional area, and
hypertrophy-associated atrial natriuretic factor induction following pressure overload. Myocyte-restricted deletion of
FAK attenuated the initial wave of extracellular signal-regulated kinase activation and cFos expression induced by
adrenergic agonists and biomechanical stress. In addition, we found that persistent challenge of mice with
myocyte-restricted FAK inactivation leads to enhanced cardiac fibrosis and cardiac dysfunction in comparison to
challenged genetic controls. These studies show that loss of FAK impairs normal compensatory hypertrophic
remodeling without a concomitant increase in apoptosis in response to cardiac pressure overload and highlight the
possibility that FAK activation may be a common requirement for the initiation of this compensatory response. (Circ
Res. 2006;99:636-645.)
Key Words: FAK  integrins  heart  hypertrophy  heart failure  signaling
In the face of chronic pressure or volume overload, the adultheart undergoes pathological hypertrophic growth. This
response is characterized by an increase in cardiomyocyte
size and myofibrillar content as well as an altered pattern of
cardiac gene expression, including induction of immediate
early genes and reexpression of several fetal gene transcripts.
Initially these changes are compensatory, but may eventually
lead to decreases in cardiac performance and heart failure.1
The precise molecular mechanisms that regulate anabolic or
pathological myocardial hypertrophy are not completely
known, but studies have implicated a variety of neuroendo-
crine and autocrine factors, many of which act through G
protein–coupled receptors (in particular those coupled to
Gq).2
Extensive evidence indicates that extracellular matrix
(ECM)/integrin receptor signaling is also an important regu-
lator of myocardial hypertrophy. Upregulation of collagen III,
fibronectin, osteopontin, or their cognate integrin receptors,
1, 3, and 5, correlates with the advancement of cardiac
hypertrophy in animal models.3 Also transgenic mice that
express a myocyte-restricted activated 5 integrin develop
profound cardiac hypertrophy,4 whereas myocyte-restricted
deletion of the 1 integrin in adult mouse hearts leads to a
dilated cardiomyopathy and concomitant heart failure.5,6 In
addition, mutations in the structural focal adhesion proteins
muscle LIM protein and metavinculin are associated with
dilated cardiomyopathy in patients.7,8 Collectively, these
studies underscore the possibility that defects in integrin
signaling may play a direct role in regulating cardiomyocyte
sarcomere formation and function during cardiac develop-
ment and disease.
One of the major proteins involved in the integrin intra-
cellular signaling cascade is the nonreceptor protein tyrosine
kinase, focal adhesion kinase (FAK), which is strongly and
rapidly activated by various growth factors and by ligation of
all 1-, 3-, or 5-containing integrins.9 Through multiple
protein–protein interactions, activation of FAK results in the
subsequent activation of the extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) growth
promoting mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases and the
cytoskeletal regulating small molecular weight GTPases Rac
and Rho, some of the same molecules implicated in myocyte
hypertrophy.2,9
Although a direct role for FAK in cardiac growth and
development has yet to be examined, germline deletion of
FAK results in general mesodermal defects and embryonic
Original received February 1, 2006; resubmission received May 22, 2006; revised resubmission received July 12, 2006; accepted August 2, 2006.
From the Departments of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine (L.A.D., J.T.D., C.P.M., J.M.T.) and Medicine (M.R.) and the Carolina Cardiovascular
Biology Center (M.R., C.P.M., J.M.T.), University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill; and Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Departments of
Ophthalmology (H.E.B.) and Physiology (H.E.B., L.F.R.), University of California, San Francisco.
Correspondence to Joan M. Taylor, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 501 Brinkhous-Bullitt Bldg, CB 7525, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599. E-mail jmt3x@med.unc.edu
© 2006 American Heart Association, Inc.
Circulation Research is available at http://circres.ahajournals.org DOI: 10.1161/01.RES.0000240498.44752.d6
636
lethality between embryonic day 7.5 (E7.5) to E10 (similar to
both fibronectin/ and 5/ mice) and fak/ hearts lack
separate mesocardial and endocardial layers, indicative of a
defect in cardiomyocyte maturation.10–12 Interestingly, recent
work by our group and by others clearly indicates that FAK
is activated in cultured cardiomyocytes by a variety of
hypertrophic stimuli13–16 and that increased cardiac FAK
activity is induced following pressure overload in vivo.17–20
The idea that FAK activation may play a direct role in the
development of cardiomyocyte hypertrophy is evident from
our initial findings that the activation of FAK is required for
phenylephrine (PE)-stimulated hypertrophy of cultured cells
and similar findings from others that FAK is required for
maximal endothelin-1 and stretch-induced hypertrophy in
vitro.14,21,22
To test the possibility that FAK inactivation could prevent
cardiac hypertrophy in vivo, we generated a mouse model
that produces a conditional myocyte-specific deletion of FAK
in the adult heart. In support of recent findings from Peng et
al, we show that inactivation of FAK in the adult myocardium
does not affect basal cardiac function.23 However, we show
that hearts with myocyte-specific FAK depletion do not
develop concentric hypertrophy on induction of biomechani-
cal stress by transverse aortic constriction (TAC). These
studies show that FAK plays a significant role in the
development of compensatory hypertrophy in the intact
myocardium and highlight the possibility that FAK serves to
integrate growth signals from various hypertrophic stimuli.
Materials and Methods
Generation of MFKO Mice
Drs Louis Reichardt and Hilary Beggs (University of California, San
Francisco) graciously provided the fakflox mice, and Dr Kenneth
Chien (Harvard Medical School) graciously provided the mlc2vCre
knock-in mice.24,25 All mice were backcrossed to the C57black6
background at least 8 generations before subsequent breeding. DNA
isolated from tail snips or tissues was subjected to PCR analysis
using primers specific for Cre and the presence of the targeted or
recombined FAK allele as described previously.24,25 Mice were
housed in a University Animal Care Facility accredited by the
American Association for Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care.
Statistics
Data are presented as meanSEM. Means were compared by 2-tailed
Student t test. P0.05 was considered statistically significant.
See the online data supplement, available at http://circres.
ahajournals.org, for complete details of the experimental procedures
used herein.
Results
Myocyte-Restricted Deletion of FAK in Adult Mice
We used Cre/loxP technology to test the possibility that FAK
inactivation could prevent cardiac hypertrophy in the intact
myocardium. To inactivate the fak gene in a myocyte-
restricted fashion in mice, we bred fakflox mice to those that
express Cre recombinase under the control of the ventricle
specific mlc2v promoter (mlc2vCre/wt)25 to obtain fakflox/flox/
mlc2vCre/wt mice, hereafter, referred to as myocyte specific fak
knockout mice (MFKO) (Figure 1A).
MFKO mice were born with the expected Mendelian
frequency (Figure 1A), and we observed the selective appear-
ance of the excised, recombined fak gene in the MFKO
ventricles at 4 weeks postnatal (not shown), with maximal
recombination occurring by 3 months (Figure 1B). Western
analysis confirmed that FAK protein was dramatically re-
duced in MFKO ventricular lysate by 3 months postnatal,
whereas FAK protein levels remained constant in other
tissues including skeletal muscle, stomach, and brain (Figure
1C and 1D). The low level of FAK protein remaining in the
ventricular lysates from 3 months onward was likely attrib-
utable to its continuing expression in resident nonmyocyte
cells (ie, cardiac fibroblasts, smooth muscle, and endothelial
cells) that do not express Mlc2v.
FAK Is Not Required for Basal Cardiac Function
Disruption of FAK expression in the adult heart did not lead
to any overt abnormalities. Both sexes of MFKO mice lived
a normal lifespan, were fertile, and females did not exhibit
Figure 1. Targeted myocyte specific dis-
ruption of mouse focal adhesion kinase.
a, Diagrammatic representation of the
fakflox/flox and mlc2vCre/wt breeding strategy
(n725). b, PCR analyses of heart DNA
from wild-type mice (wt) (1.4-kb band),
Flox (1.6-kb band), and MFKO mice
(recombined allele generates 327-bp
band). c, Protein extracts from 3-month-
old control (C) and MFKO ventricles were
processed by SDS-PAGE and probed
with anti-FAK or anti-ERK antibodies.
Densitometry quantification of FAK
expression compared with an ERK load-
ing control (right, n3). d, Protein
extracts from skeletal muscle, stomach,
and brain from 3-month-old control (C)
and MFKO mice processed as described
above using an anti-FAK antibody.
DiMichele et al FAK Regulates Cardiac Hypertrophy 637
any complications during pregnancy, indicating that FAK is
not required for the maintenance of normal heart function. In
confirmation of this, we found no evidence of left ventricular
(LV) dysfunction as assessed by fractional shortening (FS)
and ejection fraction (EF) derived from M-mode echocardio-
graphs of the left ventricle of young (4-month) or old
(14-month) hearts from MFKO mice in comparison with aged
matched genetic controls (Figure 2A and the Table). At 14
months of age, both lines of mice had a significant reduction
in FS and MFKO mice had a significant reduction in EF when
compared with the 4-month-old controls, but no significant
differences in these parameters were observed between age-
matched controls (Figure 2A and the Table). Importantly, no
significant difference was observed in posterior (PW) or
intraventricular septal (IVS) wall thickness or LV chamber
size, between the 4-month-old MFKO and genetic controls
(fakflox/floxmlc2vwt [Table] or fakwt/wtmlc2vCre [data not shown]).
Hemodynamic analysis by cardiac catheterization also re-
Figure 2. FAK is required for myocyte growth but not for
maintenance of myocyte cyto-architecture. a, Baseline func-
tion of 4-month and 14-month-old control (C) and MFKO
hearts as determined by M-mode echocardiography (*P0.05
when compared with baseline genetic control; see the Table
for measured values and number of mice/condition). b, LV
weight to body weight ratio for 14-month-old control (n10)
and MFKO (n6) mice. *P0.05. c, Left ventricles from indi-
cated ages of control and MFKO mice were processed for his-
tology as described in Materials and Methods and stained
with Masson’s Trichrome to reveal myocyte organization and
level of fibrosis (blue). d, Sections of left ventricle from control
and MFKO mice were stained with an anti–cardiac troponin T antibody to reveal myofibrillar organization. e, Immunoblot of protein
extracts from 4-month control or MFKO ventricles were probed with anti-PYK2 (top) or anti-ERK antibodies (bottom). Densitometry
quantification of PYK2 expression compared with an ERK loading control (right, n4).
638 Circulation Research September 15, 2006
vealed no significant differences in intrinsic contractility,
diastolic function, and cardiac output between control and
MFKO mice at 4 months of age, consistent with a previous
report23 (and data not shown). In addition, 4- to 5-month-old
MFKO mice had similar LV weight (LVW):body weight
(BW) ratios (Figure 3C), cardiomyocyte cross-sectional area,
myofibrillar organization, and levels of fibrosis compared
with littermate controls (Figures 2C and 2D and 3C), indi-
cating that the young MFKO mice are phenotypically indis-
tinguishable from genetic controls.
Myocyte-restricted FAK deletion did have a slight but signif-
icant effect on heart growth during aging. HW/BW was signif-
icantly decreased in 14-month MFKO mice relative to aged
matched controls (Figure 2B), and myocyte cross-sectional area
was reduced slightly (by 5%; P0.04; data not shown). Con-
sistent with these findings, serial echocardiographic measure-
ments revealed a significant increase in thickness of LV poste-
rior wall from 4 to 14 months in control mice but not in MFKO
mice (Table). Histochemical analysis of hearts from aged
MFKO mice (14 months) revealed an increase in interstitial
fibrosis in comparison to age matched controls (Figure 2C and
supplemental Table I), but no noticeable differences were found
in sarcomeric integrity or myocyte alignment in comparison to
hearts from age-matched control mice (Figure 2C and 2D).
Thus, the absence of FAK in cardiac muscle is functionally
tolerated, but FAK may regulate anabolic myocyte growth.
We next asked whether the depletion of FAK from myo-
cytes was tolerated because of a compensatory increase in the
FAK-related protein PYK2/CADTK, which is known to have
increased expression in fak/ embryos and cells.26,27 How-
ever, we found comparable PYK2 protein levels (and activ-
ity) in control and MFKO hearts (Figure 2E; data not shown),
indicating that PYK2 does not compensate for loss of FAK in
this model.
Pressure Overload–Induced Structural Remodeling
and Hypertrophic Gene Expression Is Attenuated
in MFKO Mice
The absence of underlying developmental defects in the
conditional MFKO mice at 4 to 5 months of age renders this
model advantageous for determining whether FAK is impor-
tant for the progression of pathological cardiac hypertrophy.
Four-month-old control and MFKO mice were therefore
subjected to a minimally invasive aortic banding procedure
that provided an approximate 50% reduction in the lumen of
the ascending aorta. Blinded echocardiographic measure-
ments revealed several striking differences between the age-
matched genetic controls and MFKO hearts following 4
weeks of TAC (Figure 3A through 3C and the Table).
Notably, the control TAC mice developed significant thick-
ening of LVPW and IVS (approximately 50% and 30%
increases in systole respectively), a significant reduction in
left ventricular end diameter (LVED) (approximate 40%
decrease in end diastolic chamber dimension), and a 40%
increase in FS compared with nonbanded control mice. In
contrast, the MFKO mice did not exhibit significant increases
in left ventricular posterior wall thickness systole (LVPWT)
or FS comparison to the prebanded MFKO mice (Table).
Indeed, the percent change of each parameter from pre- to
post-TAC was significantly decreased in MFKO hearts in
comparison to control hearts (Figure 3A). Measurements
from serial cross-sections though banded control and MFKO
hearts confirmed a significant reduction in relative LVPWT
in 15 of 19 of the 4-week post-TAC MFKO hearts in
comparison with the control hearts (Figure 3B; data not
shown). Importantly, morphometric analysis revealed a sig-
nificant decrease in myocyte cross-sectional area in the
post-TAC MFKO hearts compared with post-TAC controls
(Figure 3C). Although a significant increase in LVW/BW
was observed following 4 weeks of TAC in MFKO hearts
(possibly attributable to increased fibrosis; see below), the
increase in MFKO hearts was reduced relative to control
hearts (Figure 3C). Notably, no significant difference in
the surgically induced intensity of pressure overload was
observed between MFKO and the genetic controls as
assessed by Doppler imaging (supplemental Figure I). A
comparable concentric hypertrophic response was ob-
served in our 2 groups of control mice (fakflox/floxmlc2vwt
[shown] and fakwt/wtmlc2vCre [data not shown]), indicating
Echocardiographic Analysis in Baseline, Banded, and Aged Mice
Control MFKO
4 Month (Baseline) 5 Month (Banded) 14 Month (Aged) 4 Month (Baseline) 5 Month (Banded) 14 Month (Aged)
LVEdD, mm 3.10.1 2.60.1† 3.90.3† 3.20.1 3.10.1§ 4.20.2‡
LVEsD, mm 2.10.1 1.30.1† 2.80.4† 2.0 0.1 1.80.2§ 3.00.2‡
LVPWTd, mm 0.80.06 1.30.1† 1.30.2† 1.00.1 1.20.1 1.10.2
LVPWTs, mm 1.10.1 1.60.1† 1.60.2† 1.20.1 1.50.1¶ 1.50.3
IVSd, mm 1.10.04 1.30.1† 1.30.2† 1.10.04 1.20.06¶ 1.30.3¶
IVSs, mm 1.50.1 1.90.1† 1.70.2* 1.60.1 1.70.1¶ 1.60.3
%FS 35.12.1 50.33.0† 28.55.6* 38.52.4 43.43.1 23.93.7¶
%EF 63.32.9 81.72.6† 54.54.0 68.20.03 72.70.04 47.03.3¶
HR 50131 64025 49232 56724 61125 47927
%FS, percent FS; %EF, percent EF; HR, heart rate; d, diastole; s, systole. Four-month (baseline) control, n22; 14-month control, n10; 4-month
(baseline) MFKO, n33; 14-month MFKO, n6; 4 weeks banded control, n15; 4 weeks banded MFKO, n2. †P0.001, *P0.05 vs baseline
control; ‡P0.01, ¶P0.05 vs baseline MFKO; §P0.01 vs banded control, n25. LVEdD indicates left ventricular end diastolic diameter; LVEsD,
left ventricular end systolic diameter; LVPWTd, left ventricular posterior wall thickness diastole; and LVPWTs, left ventricular posterior wall thickness
systole.
DiMichele et al FAK Regulates Cardiac Hypertrophy 639
that the lack of concentric hypertrophy observed in the
MFKO mice was not attributable to adverse effects of
either the LoxP-targeted fak allele, expression of Cre, or
haploinsufficiency of Mlc2v.
While this report was under review, a separate article was
published in which the authors suggested that cardiac-
restricted inactivation of FAK leads to cardiac dilation
because of an eccentric hypertrophic response.23 Therein,
Peng et al examined mice at only 1 time point following TAC
(10 days), which was not sufficient to induce concentric
hypertrophy in their control animals, but they observed a
significant increase LV chamber dimension in their CFKO
mice when compared with banded controls.23 To determine
whether the change in chamber size was a primary or
secondary response in our model, we banded a second group
of mice (n7 control and MFKO) and examined their
hypertrophic response by blinded echocardiography at 10
days and 4 weeks following TAC. As shown in Figure 3D, no
significant differences were observed between either LVPW
or LVED between MFKO and control hearts at 10 days
following banding. However, similar to our previous large
study of mice (the Table), this separate study revealed a
significant decrease in LVPW in 4-week banded MFKO
hearts in comparison with 4-week banded control hearts. This
change in LVPWT was accompanied by an increase in LVED
in MFKO hearts relative to banded genetic controls but, like
Figure 3. FAK is essential for pressure overload–induced hypertro-
phy. a, M-mode echocardiograph measurements of the left ventri-
cles from baseline and banded control and MFKO mice during di-
astole (d) and systole (s) were analyzed for percent change from
pre- to post-TAC. *P0.05 when compared with percent change in
control mice. b, Ventricles from sham and 4-week banded control
and MFKO hearts were stained with Trichrome to reveal gross
changes in wall thickness and chamber dimensions following
4-weeks of TAC. c, LVW to BW ratio (top). Cross-sectional myocyte
area of sham and 4-week banded control and MFKO myocytes
(middle, nat least 175 per condition). *P0.05 for indicated com-
parison. Representative LV sections stained with lectin reveals
reduced cross-sectional area in MFKO myocytes compared with
controls following 4-weeks of TAC (bottom). d, Comparison of LV
posterior wall and chamber size in both control and MFKO mice.
*P0.01 vs control 4-week banded control.
640 Circulation Research September 15, 2006
in our previous study, MFKO LVED was not significantly
increased from baseline MFKO hearts. Because the echocar-
diographic measurements for this new data set were taken
while mice were under heavier sedation (see Materials and
Methods for details), the data were analyzed separately and
are presented in full in supplemental Table II. These studies
confirm our contention that FAK inactivation inhibits the
compensatory concentric hypertrophic response following
TAC.
Enhanced perivascular fibrosis as assessed by Masson’s
Trichrome staining was observed following TAC in both
control and MFKO TAC hearts with more interstitial fibrosis
found in MFKO TAC hearts (blue staining, Figure 4A, top;
supplemental Table I). However, there was no significant
difference in sarcomeric structure or integrity between con-
trol and MFKO hearts following TAC as visualized by
troponin T staining (Figure 4A and 4B). Also, we did not find
any significant difference in the level of apoptosis in control
or MFKO hearts at baseline or following banding (Figure 4B
and supplemental Figure II). Although PYK2 expression did
increase following TAC, we found no significant difference
in PYK2 levels (or activity) in MFKO TAC hearts relative to
control TAC hearts (Figure 4C; data not shown). Collec-
tively, these data indicate that FAK is not required for the
maintenance of proper myocyte architecture but is required
for the promotion of biomechanical stress-induced myocyte
hypertrophy.
Hearts from control and MFKO nonbanded and 4-week
TAC-induced mice were also analyzed for hypertrophic
marker gene expression by quantitative RT-PCR. We exam-
ined the expression of atrial natruretic factor (ANF) because
increased levels of this gene correlate highly with the degree
of hypertrophy observed in several animal models.28 As
shown in Figure 5, ANF expression was, as expected,
dramatically increased in the control mice after TAC. This
increase was virtually abolished in the MFKO hearts (Figure
5A). Interestingly, banded MFKO hearts displayed a signif-
icant increase in –myosin heavy chain (-MHC) compared
with banded controls whereas no significant difference in
-MHC or skeletal -actin was observed between the 2
groups postbanding (data not shown). Collectively our data
indicate that loss of FAK alters the structural and a subset of
the molecular changes induced by pressure overload.
Persistent Pressure Overload in MFKO Mice
Leads to Cardiac Dysfunction
Because the MFKO TAC hearts exhibited a reduced compen-
satory response following 4 weeks of pressure overload, we
asked whether the MFKO mice would progress to heart
failure after a more persistent challenge. Although greater
Figure 4. Post-TAC MFKO hearts have increased fibrosis but MFKO myocytes display normal cytoarchitecture. a, Images of Trichrome-
stained sections (10) (top) or images of sections stained with cardiac troponin T antibody (bottom) (40) reveal increased fibrosis but
normal cell–cell interactions and myofibrillar organization in control and MFKO hearts. b, Transmission electron micrographs from the
mid-wall region of the left ventricle of 4-week banded control and MFKO mice taken at 4000, 10 000, and 20 000 magnification.
c, Western blot analysis of PYK2 protein levels following 4-week TAC of control (C) and MFKO mice. Densitometry quantification of
Pyk2 expression compared with an ERK loading control (right, n5).
DiMichele et al FAK Regulates Cardiac Hypertrophy 641
than 90% survival was observed in control and MFKO mice
banded for 8 to 12 weeks, the wet lung weights from the
MFKO 8-week TAC group were significantly higher than
nonbanded mice, indicating substantial congestion and the
likelihood that the MFKO hearts were failing (Figure 6A).
Accordingly, significant depression of cardiac output, a
measure of contractile performance, was apparent in MFKO
mice 12 weeks after TAC (Figure 6B). The decreased
contractility in the MFKO mice was associated with an
increase in interstitial fibrosis relative to control-banded
hearts at 8 and 12 weeks (supplemental Table I). However,
sarcomeric integrity was maintained in these hearts as as-
sessed by troponin T staining (data not shown). These data
indicate that the MFKO mice develop heart failure in re-
sponse to chronic pressure overload and suggest the possibil-
ity that the blunted compensatory hypertrophic response in
these mice was not sufficient to meet the increased hemody-
namic demand.
Absence of FAK Impairs MAP Kinase Activation
Following Hypertrophic Stimuli
It is possible that the requirement for functional signaling
through FAK in pressure overload–induced hypertrophy may
be attributable to the ability of FAK to coactivate an essential
growth pathway. Because ERK activation by hypertrophic
stimuli precedes the characteristic changes in gene expression
and inhibition of this signaling pathway can lessen maladap-
tive hypertrophic growth,29,30 we evaluated ERK activity in
control and MFKO hearts subjected to aortic banding for 1
and 4 days. Immunoblot analysis revealed reduced levels of
ERK phosphorylation in MFKO hearts in comparison with
control hearts after acute aortic constriction, although no
change was observed at baseline (Figure 7A). Because
cardiac hypertrophy induced by pressure overload and neu-
rohumoral signals share some common mechanisms, we also
examined ERK activation induced by adrenergic agonists in
control and MFKO hearts. We injected an adrenergic cocktail
previously shown to induce a strong hypertrophic response in
mice.31 As shown in Figure 7B, ERK was strongly activated
in control hearts following acute adrenergic agonist injection
but was significantly lower in the MFKO hearts. We also
examined activation of the immediate early gene cFos fol-
lowing acute banding. We found that cFos expression was
significantly upregulated in control hearts 4 days after TAC
but returned to baseline by the 7-day time point (Figure 7C).
However, no significant increase in cFos expression was
observed in MFKO hearts following banding, in accordance
with data indicating that activation of cFos is dependent on
ERK signaling (Figure 7C). These data indicate that ERK
activation is uncoupled in the absence of FAK and highlight
the possibility that FAK activity is required for the initial
wave of signaling induced by both pressure overload and
adrenergic stress.
Figure 5. FAK modulates ANF expression following TAC. Quan-
titative RT-PCR analysis for ANF (a) and -MHC (b) RNA levels
from sham and banded control and MFKO hearts. Data were
normalized to -actin levels and presented as fold over values
from sham control mice. *P0.03 vs banded control.
Figure 6. Chronic banding leads to systolic dysfunction in
MFKO mice. a, Wet lung and body weight measurements were
taken from control and MFKO sham-treated mice or mice
banded for 4 or 8-weeks. *P0.03 vs experimental control n4
(or more) for each group. b, Sham or 12-week banded control
and MFKO mice were subjected to cardiac catheterization as
described in Materials and Methods to examine contractile func-
tion. *P0.03 vs 12-week banded control (nat least 4 for each
group).
642 Circulation Research September 15, 2006
Discussion
Previous work by our group and others indicate that FAK is
important in the hypertrophic response. Herein, we have used
a mouse model in which myocyte-restricted FAK deletion in
early adulthood results in mice whose hearts are functionally
and morphologically similar those of control mice, confirm-
ing recent work from Peng et al.23 However, we found that
myocyte-restricted deletion of FAK depressed heart growth
during aging and markedly reduced the hypertrophic response
to transverse aortic constriction as assessed by examination of
several conserved features of pathological hypertrophy. Our
data indicate that inhibition of FAK signaling alone is
sufficient to suppress the diverse signaling inputs within the
complex myocyte microenvironment in vivo that can modu-
late cardiac growth induced by stress and aging.
Our findings that FAK inactivation attenuates concentric
hypertrophic remodeling differ with the conclusions drawn in
the aforementioned manuscript by Peng et al, who observed
chamber dilation (or eccentric growth) in FAK-null hearts
following 10 days of TAC.23 This discrepancy could be
attributable to differences in the timing of FAK deletion, the
extent of aortic constriction imposed in the 2 models, and/or
the genetic background of the mice used in these studies. (See
the online data supplement for further details.) The late onset
of recombination in our model system (3 months postnatal)
was somewhat surprising because the mlc2v promoter has
been reported to drive Cre expression as early as E8.5;
however, our results are consistent with several studies
showing that maximal recombination of targeted genes is not
observed until at least 6 weeks after birth (and some even
later) using the same line.5,32 A distinct advantage of using
our MFKO line is that it enables examination of a direct role
for FAK in the progression of adult onset cardiac diseases in
mice that do not have any underlying developmental defects.
It is interesting that FAK is dispensable for basal myocyte
function, whereas depletion of integrin receptors or various
cytoskeletal components including vinculin, muscle LIM
protein, desmin, plakoglobin, or N-cadherin all lead to rapid
defects in sarcomeric integrity accompanied by considerable
interstitial fibrosis.3 These data indicate that although FAK
co-resides with these cytoskeletal proteins in Z-disks, it is not
an integral component of the contractile apparatus in myo-
Figure 7. FAK is required for maximal
ERK activation induced by banding and
adrenergic stress. a, Western blot analy-
sis of phopspho-ERK1/2 following 1 or 4
days of aortic constriction in control and
MFKO mice. Densitometry quantification
of phospho-ERK1/2 compared with an
ERK loading control (right, n3). b, Con-
trol (C) and MFKO mice were injected
with a adrenergic cocktail for 7 minutes
containing PE and isoproterenol (30
mg/kg each) or PBS into the intraperito-
neal cavity. Ventricular lysate was pro-
cessed for Western blot analysis using
anti-FAK, phospho-ERK1/2, and total
ERK1/2 (loading control) antibodies.
Densitometry quantification of phospho-
ERK1/2 compared with an ERK loading
control (right, n3). c, RNA was
extracted from control and MFKO hearts
at days 0, 4, and 7 following banding
and processed for quantitative RT-PCR
using the c-fos probe and primers
detailed in Materials and Methods.
*P0.03 vs 4-day banded control mice.
DiMichele et al FAK Regulates Cardiac Hypertrophy 643
cytes. However, we did find that following persistent chal-
lenge MFKO hearts exhibited systolic dysfunction relative to
control-banded hearts. This was likely a secondary effect
attributable to insufficient compensation in response to TAC,
because this model induces a rapid and severe remodeling
response in control animals. There is some evidence indicat-
ing that the switch from hypertrophy to cardiac failure may
involve activation of apoptotic pathways. Although we did
observe a greater extent of interstitial fibrosis in banded and
aged MFKO hearts (likely because of increased myocyte
dropout), we did not observe an increase in apoptosis or
apoptotic markers at the time points examined. These data
corroborate our previous studies showing that FAK inhibition
in cultured cardiomyocytes did not induce programmed cell
death and studies from others, indicating that targeted dele-
tion of FAK in keratinocytes or neurons did not induce
apoptosis (see the online data supplement for further discus-
sion).14,24,33 Taken together, these data indicate that the
ensuing dysfunction in MFKO hearts is likely attributable to
a passive necrotic process.
As a multifunctional adapter protein that associates with
the integrin cytoplasmic tail, with actin, and with several
adapter proteins that regulate various catalytic signaling
molecules, FAK is an ideal candidate to sense and respond to
hormonal imbalances and/or alterations in the force-
generating actin cytoskeleton by inducing coordinate activa-
tion of downstream hypertrophic growth signaling pathways.
Our study revealed that myocyte-specific depletion of FAK
dramatically reduces biomechanical stress or hypertrophic
agonist–stimulated ERK activation. Given that activation of
the MEK1–ERK1/2 signaling pathway in vivo precedes the
induction of hypertrophic gene expression and that inhibition
of these signaling pathways can lessen hypertrophic growth,
it is reasonable to assume that reduced ERK activation may
be the primary mechanism responsible for the blunted hyper-
trophic response in MFKO hearts.2,29,30
In conclusion, our analysis of MFKO mice reveals that
FAK is essential for the heart to sense and transduce a
biomechanical insult into a compensatory hypertrophic re-
sponse. This effect is likely attributable to the ability of FAK
to modify the initial wave of ERK-dependent signaling
induced by hypertrophic stimuli. Because cardiac hypertro-
phy induced by pressure overload and neurohumoral signals
share common mechanisms, and because signaling from
adrenergic receptors is depressed in MFKO hearts, it is
possible that activation of FAK may be a common require-
ment for the initiation of the pathological hypertrophic
response. Interestingly, recent studies have shown that
whereas disruption of MEKK1 (like FAK) eventually leads to
cardiac decompensation following pressure overload, inacti-
vation of MEKK1 actually prevents systolic dysfunction
induced by Gq.34,35 Thus, further studies coupling various
hypertrophic model systems with cardiac-targeted FAK dis-
ruption should lead to important new information with regard
to the transition from compensatory to decompensated stages
of cardiac hypertrophy and aid in determining under which
circumstances FAK-dependent signaling pathways may be
protective or detrimental. Whether targeted inhibition of FAK
would be beneficial for the treatment of heart disease will
likely depend on the contributing factors for disease.
Acknowledgments
We thank Dr Oliver Smithies (University of North Carolina) and Dr
J. Thomas Parsons (University of Virginia) for a critical review of
the manuscript.
Sources of Funding
This work was supported in part by grants from the NIH/National
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (HL-081844 and HL-HL071054)
and the American Heart Association (0355776U to J.M.T and
NS19090 to L.F.R). L.A.D. was supported by an American Heart
Predoctoral Fellowship (0415384U).
Disclosures
None.
References
1. Frey N, Olson EN. Cardiac hypertrophy: the good, the bad, and the ugly.
Annu Rev Physiol. 2003;65:45–79.
2. Dorn GW 2nd, Force T. Protein kinase cascades in the regulation of
cardiac hypertrophy. J Clin Invest. 2005;115:527–537.
3. Brancaccio M, Hirsch E, Notte A, Selvetella G, Lembo G, Tarone G.
Integrin signalling: the tug-of-war in heart hypertrophy. Cardiovasc Res.
2006;70:422–433.
4. Valencik ML, McDonald JA. Cardiac expression of a gain-of-function
alpha(5)-integrin results in perinatal lethality. Am J Physiol Heart Circ
Physiol. 2001;280:H361–H367.
5. Shai SY, Harpf AE, Babbitt CJ, Jordan MC, Fishbein MC, Chen J, Omura
M, Leil TA, Becker KD, Jiang M, Smith DJ, Cherry SR, Loftus JC, Ross
RS. Cardiac myocyte-specific excision of the beta1 integrin gene results
in myocardial fibrosis and cardiac failure. Circ Res. 2002;90:458–464.
6. Valencik ML, Keller RS, Loftus JC, McDonald JA. A lethal perinatal
cardiac phenotype resulting from altered integrin function in cardiomyo-
cytes. J Card Fail. 2002;8:262–272.
7. Knoll R, Hoshijima M, Hoffman HM, Person V, Lorenzen-Schmidt I,
Bang ML, Hayashi T, Shiga N, Yasukawa H, Schaper W, McKenna W,
Yokoyama M, Schork NJ, Omens JH, McCulloch AD, Kimura A,
Gregorio CC, Poller W, Schaper J, Schultheiss HP, Chien KR. The
cardiac mechanical stretch sensor machinery involves a Z disc complex
that is defective in a subset of human dilated cardiomyopathy. Cell.
2002;111:943–955.
8. Olson TM, Illenberger S, Kishimoto NY, Huttelmaier S, Keating MT,
Jockusch BM. Metavinculin mutations alter actin interaction in dilated
cardiomyopathy. Circulation. 2002;105:431–437.
9. Parsons JT. Focal adhesion kinase: the first ten years. J Cell Sci. 2003;
116:1409–1416.
10. Furuta Y, Ilic D, Kanazawa S, Takeda N, Yamamoto T, Aizawa S.
Mesodermal defect in late phase of gastrulation by a targeted mutation of
focal adhesion kinase, FAK. Oncogene. 1995;11:1989–1995.
11. Ilic D, Furuta Y, Kanazawa S, Takeda N, Sobue K, Nakatsuji N, Nomura
S, Fujimoto J, Okada M, Yamamoto T. Reduced cell motility and
enhanced focal adhesion contact formation in cells from FAK-deficient
mice. Nature. 1995;377:539–544.
12. Yang JT, Bader BL, Kreidberg JA, Ullman-Cullere M, Trevithick JE,
Hynes RO. Overlapping and independent functions of fibronectin
receptor integrins in early mesodermal development. Dev Biol. 1999;215:
264–277.
13. Torsoni AS, Constancio SS, Nadruz W Jr, Hanks SK, Franchini KG.
Focal adhesion kinase is activated and mediates the early hypertrophic
response to stretch in cardiac myocytes. Circ Res. 2003;93:140–147.
14. Taylor JM, Rovin JD, Parsons JT. A role for focal adhesion kinase in
phenylephrine-induced hypertrophy of rat ventricular cardiomyocytes.
J Biol Chem. 2000;275:19250–19257.
15. Sadoshima J, Qiu Z, Morgan JP, Izumo S. Tyrosine kinase activation is
an immediate and essential step in hypotonic cell swelling-induced ERK
activation and c-fos gene expression in cardiac myocytes. EMBO J.
1996;15:5535–5546.
16. Kuppuswamy D, Kerr C, Narishige T, Kasi VS, Menick DR, Cooper G
4th. Association of tyrosine-phosphorylated c-Src with the cytoskeleton
of hypertrophying myocardium. J Biol Chem. 1997;272:4500–4508.
644 Circulation Research September 15, 2006
17. Laser M, Willey CD, Jiang W, Cooper Gt, Menick DR, Zile MR,
Kuppuswamy D. Integrin activation and focal complex formation in
cardiac hypertrophy. J Biol Chem. 2000;275:35624–35630.
18. Franchini KG, Torsoni AS, Soares PH, Saad MJ. Early activation of the
multicomponent signaling complex associated with focal adhesion kinase
induced by pressure overload in the rat heart. Circ Res. 2000;87:558–565.
19. Melendez J, Welch S, Schaefer E, Moravec CS, Avraham S, Avraham H,
Sussman MA. Activation of pyk2/related focal adhesion tyrosine kinase
and focal adhesion kinase in cardiac remodeling. J Biol Chem. 2002;277:
45203–45210.
20. Yi XP, Wang X, Gerdes AM, Li F. Subcellular redistribution of focal
adhesion kinase and its related nonkinase in hypertrophic myocardium.
Hypertension. 2003;41:1317–1323.
21. Pham CG, Harpf AE, Keller RS, Vu HT, Shai SY, Loftus JC, Ross RS.
Striated muscle-specific beta(1D)-integrin and FAK are involved in
cardiac myocyte hypertrophic response pathway. Am J Physiol Heart Circ
Physiol. 2000;279:H2916–H2926.
22. Kovacic-Milivojevic B, Roediger F, Almeida EA, Damsky CH, Gardner
DG, Ilic D. Focal adhesion kinase and p130Cas mediate both sarcomeric
organization and activation of genes associated with cardiac myocyte
hypertrophy. Mol Biol Cell. 2001;12:2290–2307.
23. Peng X, Kraus MS, Wei H, Shen TL, Pariaut R, Alcaraz A, Ji G, Cheng
L, Yang Q, Kotlikoff MI, Chen J, Chien K, Gu H, Guan JL. Inactivation
of focal adhesion kinase in cardiomyocytes promotes eccentric cardiac
hypertrophy and fibrosis in mice. J Clin Invest. 2006;116:217–227.
24. Beggs HE, Schahin-Reed D, Zang K, Goebbels S, Nave KA, Gorski J,
Jones KR, Sretavan D, Reichardt LF. FAK deficiency in cells con-
tributing to the basal lamina results in cortical abnormalities resembling
congenital muscular dystrophies. Neuron. 2003;40:501–514.
25. Chen J, Kubalak SW, Chien KR. Ventricular muscle-restricted targeting
of the RXRalpha gene reveals a non-cell-autonomous requirement in
cardiac chamber morphogenesis. Development. 1998;125:1943–1949.
26. Klingbeil CK, Hauck CR, Hsia DA, Jones KC, Reider SR, Schlaepfer
DD. Targeting Pyk2 to beta 1-integrin-containing focal contacts rescues
fibronectin-stimulated signaling and haptotactic motility defects of focal
adhesion kinase-null cells. J Cell Biol. 2001;152:97–110.
27. Sieg DJ, Ilic D, Jones KC, Damsky CH, Hunter T, Schlaepfer DD. Pyk2
and Src-family protein-tyrosine kinases compensate for the loss of FAK
in fibronectin-stimulated signaling events but Pyk2 does not fully
function to enhance FAK- cell migration. EMBO J. 1998;17:5933–5947.
28. Caron KM, James LR, Kim HS, Knowles J, Uhlir R, Mao L, Hagaman
JR, Cascio W, Rockman H, Smithies O. Cardiac hypertrophy and sudden
death in mice with a genetically clamped renin transgene. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2004;101:3106–3111.
29. Wang Y, Huang S, Sah VP, Ross J Jr, Brown JH, Han J, Chien KR.
Cardiac muscle cell hypertrophy and apoptosis induced by distinct
members of the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase family. J Biol
Chem. 1998;273:2161–2168.
30. Bueno OF, De Windt LJ, Tymitz KM, Witt SA, Kimball TR, Klevitsky
R, Hewett TE, Jones SP, Lefer DJ, Peng CF, Kitsis RN, Molkentin JD.
The MEK1-ERK1/2 signaling pathway promotes compensated cardiac
hypertrophy in transgenic mice. EMBO J. 2000;19:6341–6350.
31. Maass AH, Ikeda K, Oberdorf-Maass S, Maier SK, Leinwand LA. Hy-
pertrophy, fibrosis, and sudden cardiac death in response to pathological
stimuli in mice with mutations in cardiac troponin T. Circulation. 2004;
110:2102–2109.
32. Chien KR. To Cre or not to Cre: the next generation of mouse models of
human cardiac diseases. Circ Res. 2001;88:546–549.
33. Essayem S, Kovacic-Milivojevic B, Baumbusch C, McDonagh S,
Dolganov G, Howerton K, Larocque N, Mauro T, Ramirez A, Ramos
DM, Fisher SJ, Jorcano JL, Beggs HE, Reichardt LF, Ilic D. Hair cycle
and wound healing in mice with a keratinocyte-restricted deletion of
FAK. Oncogene. 2006;25:1081–1089.
34. Sadoshima J, Montagne O, Wang Q, Yang G, Warden J, Liu J, Takagi G,
Karoor V, Hong C, Johnson GL, Vatner DE, Vatner SF. The
MEKK1-JNK pathway plays a protective role in pressure overload but
does not mediate cardiac hypertrophy. J Clin Invest. 2002;110:271–279.
35. Minamino T, Yujiri T, Terada N, Taffet GE, Michael LH, Johnson GL,
Schneider MD. MEKK1 is essential for cardiac hypertrophy and dys-
function induced by Gq. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002;99:3866–3871.
DiMichele et al FAK Regulates Cardiac Hypertrophy 645
