 
BASAL GANGLIA MACROCIRCUITS IN: In: GABA and the Basal Ganglia: From Molecules to Systems, Progress in Brain Research, Tepper, J.M., Abercrombie, E.D., & 
Bolam, J.P. (eds.), 2007, Elsevier, Amsterdam                                                  
 
BASAL GANGLIA MACROCIRCUITS 
 
J.M. Tepper1, E.D. Abercrombie1 and J.P Bolam2 
 
1Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ 07102, USA 2Medical 
Research Council, Anatomical Neuropharmacology Unit, Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford,  
Oxford OX1 3TH, UK 
 
In: GABA and the Basal Ganglia: From Molecules to Systems, Progress in Brain Research, 
Tepper, J.M., Abercrombie, E.D., & Bolam, J.P. (eds.), 2007, Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 3-7. 
 
ABSTRACT 
  
This is the introductory chapter to an edited volume comprising 18 chapters written by 38 specially selected 
authors covering the anatomy, physiology, biochemistry/pharmacology and behavioral aspects of GABA in the 
basal ganglia.  In this chapter the various nuclei of the basal ganglia are defined and their cellular structure, 
connections and function reviewed in brief in order to provide an orientation for the subsequent 17 chapters.  
Specific reference is made to each of the succeeding 17 chapters that then describe this material in much greater 
detail. 
 
The purpose of this short introductory chapter is 
to give a brief overview of the functional 
organization of the basal ganglia.  The aim is to help 
orient the reader, especially one who is not so 
familiar with the basal ganglia, to the eighteen 
chapters that follow.  Chapters 2 through 5 deal with 
the basic aspects of the biochemistry (Chapter 2) 
receptor structure and pharmacology (Chapters 3 
and 4) and molecular and ionic bases of receptor 
signaling (Chapters 5) of GABA as a 
neurotransmitter in the basal ganglia.  Chapters 6 
through 18 review the state-of-the-art of our 
understanding of the functioning of GABAergic 
circuits in the basal ganglia from a systems 
perspective comprising anatomy, physiology and 
function. 
The basal ganglia are traditionally seen to be 
comprised of four major nuclei, the neostriatum, the 
globus pallidus (GP), the substantia nigra (SN), and 
the subthalamic nucleus (STN).  The neostriatum is a 
single nucleus in rodents but is divided by the 
internal capsule into the caudate nucleus and 
putamen in higher vertebrates.  The globus pallidus 
consists of two major parts, the external segment 
(GPe) and the internal segment (GPi).  The external 
segment is simply referred to as the globus pallidus 
in rodents and the internal segment is equivalent (in 
terms of inputs and outputs) to the entopeduncular 
nucleus (EP) in rodents.  The two divisions of the 
pallidal complex have different inputs and outputs 
and are functionally distinct.  Similarly, the 
substantia nigra is comprised of two major sub-
nuclei, the pars compacta (SNc) and the pars 
reticulata (SNr).  The two parts of the substantia 
nigra share similar inputs but have mostly different 
outputs and are comprised of neurochemically 
distinct neuron types (Gerfen and Wilson, 1996).  
These divisions are referred to as the dorsal aspects 
of the basal ganglia; the ventral division consists of 
the nucleus accumbens, the ventral pallidum (which 
probably includes a ventral equivalent of the GPi) 
and the medial aspects of the STN and SN.  The 
dorsal division of the basal ganglia is primarily 
associated with motor and associative functions 
whereas the ventral division is more related to 
limbic functions.   
The overwhelming majority neurons in the basal 
ganglia are GABAergic and most are projection 
neurons.  The neostriatum (Chapter 6), both 
segments of the GP (Chapters 7 and 8) and the SNr 
(Chapter 9) are each comprised principally of 
GABAergic projection neurons, whereas the 
subthalamic nucleus (Chapter 10) contains 
glutamatergic projection neurons and the SNc is 
made up almost exclusively of dopaminergic 
projection neurons. The neostriatum also contains 
clearly defined populations of interneurons (Chapter 
15), all but one of which (the cholinergic 
interneuron) are GABAergic.  Not surprisingly, each 
of these nuclei expresses high levels of GABAA and 
GABAB receptors, both pre- and postsynaptically 
(Chapters 13 and 14).  From the quantitative 
 
BASAL GANGLIA MACROCIRCUITS IN: In: GABA and the Basal Ganglia: From Molecules to Systems, Progress in Brain Research, Tepper, J.M., Abercrombie, E.D., & 
Bolam, J.P. (eds.), 2007, Elsevier, Amsterdam                                                  
 
analyses of Oorschot (1996) we know that the dorsal 
components of the basal ganglia in rats contain a 
total of 2886.3 x 103 neurons but only 32.8 x 103 are 
not GABAergic (i.e., the neurons of the STN, SNc 
and the cholinergic interneurons in the neostriatum).  
Thus 98.86% of neurons in the basal ganglia are 
GABAergic.  (Perhaps the title of this book should 
have been “GABA is the Basal Ganglia”.)   
The principal pathways for information flow 
through the basal ganglia, the macrocircuitry, is 
illustrated in Figure 1, which is also of course a 
simplification of the true state of affairs.  The 
principal afferents of the basal ganglia arise from the 
cerebral cortex (both ipsi- and contralateral), the 
intralaminar thalamic cell nuclei (e.g. centromedian 
and parafascicular nucleus), the dorsal raphé 
nucleus and the amygdala.  The densest innervation, 
and by far the greatest in quantitative terms, is from 
the cerebral cortex and thalamus, and the major 
recipient of these afferents is the neostriatum.  
Together, the cortical and thalamic inputs form 
about 85% of all the synapses in neostriatum.  These 
afferents are glutamatergic, contain small round 
vesicles and form Gray’s Type I (asymmetric) 
synapses.  The major target of these afferents, 
accounting for nearly 90% of corticostriatal 
synapses, are the heads of spines of the principal 
neurons of the neostriatum, the medium sized, 
densely spiny neurons (Wilson, 2004).  These are 
GABAergic neurons, account for as much as 95% of 
the neurons in neostriatum in rodents (and 75-80% 
in primates) and are the principal projection neurons 
of the neostriatum, innervating the substantia nigra 
and pallidal complex.  The spiny neurons emit a 
dense local axon collateral system that innervates 
other spiny cells and striatal interneurons (Chapter 
6), influencing them in a complex way that has been 
subject to computational modeling (Chapter 18).  
Cortical and thalamic terminals also innervate the 
dendrites of the aspiny cholinergic interneuron and 
the GABAergic interneurons and in the latter 
neurons at least, cortical afferents may account for 
the majority of their afferent synapses (Bolam et al., 
2000).    
Projections arising from discrete areas of cortex 
have terminal fields that extend for great distances 
in neostriatum particularly in the rostro-caudal 
plane. They tend to cross over the dendrites of the 
spiny neuron at right angles (“cruciform 
axodendritic arrangement”) with the result that each 
spiny neuron gets very few, at most only 1 or 2 
synapses from a single corticostriatal neuron  
(Wilson, 2004).  Similarly, thalamostriatal neurons 
extend their axons over wide regions of the 
neostriatum although the precise configuration 
varies with the thalamic nucleus of origin.  The fact 
that the spiny neurons possess in the region of 
15,000 spines implies that there is a massive degree 
of convergence of cortical and thalamic neurons at 
the level of individual spiny neurons in the 
neostriatum.  The other major input to the 
neostriatum, that from the substantia nigra pars 
compacta, is dopaminergic, and forms symmetric 
synapses with dendritic shafts or necks of spines of 
the spiny projection neurons, and, to a lesser extent, 
with other neostriatal cell types including the giant 
aspiny cholinergic neuron.  Dopamine acts 
principally as a neuromodulator in neostriatum to 
powerfully modulate voltage-gated sodium and 
calcium channels in medium spiny neurons and 
cholinergic interneurons.  This modulation leads 
directly to complex and state-dependent changes in 
neostriatal neuronal excitability (Surmeier, 2006).  
Dopamine also acts to modulate GABA release in 
the substantia nigra presynaptically (Chapter 14). 
For the last 20 years or so, the macrocircuitry of 
the basal ganglia has been considered to be 
dominated by two principal pathways by which 
neocortical information is transmitted to the output 
nuclei of the basal ganglia, the SNr and GPi (Smith 
et al., 1998).  The so-called direct pathway is 
 
 
Figure 1:  Simplified diagram of the macrocircuits of the dorsal 
components of the basal ganglia.  The nuclei of the basal ganglia are 
included in the light blue box and consist of the neostriatum (Striatum), 
the external segment of the globus pallidus (GPe), the subthalamic 
nucleus (STN), the substantia nigra pars reticulata and the internal 
segment of the globus pallidus (SNr/GPi) which together constitute the 
output nuclei of the basal ganglia and the substantia nigra pars 
compacta (SNc).  The two major inputs to the basal ganglia are from 
the neocortex and the thalamus (mainly the intralaminar nuclei).  The 
basal ganglia influence behavior by the output nuclei projecting to the 
thalamus (mainly the ventral) and thence back to the cortex, and 
projections to the superior colliculus (SC), the reticular formation (RF), 
the pedunculopontine nucleus (PPN) and the lateral habenula (HBN).  
Dopamine neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc) provide 
a massive feedback to the neostriatum and also the GPe and STN 
which modulates the flow of cortical and thalamic information through 
the basal ganglia.   
Dark blue indicates structures that are principally GABAergic; red 
indicates structures that are principally glutamatergic, yellow indicates 
structures that are dopaminergic and green indicates structures with 
variable neurochemistry.   
 
 
BASAL GANGLIA MACROCIRCUITS IN: In: GABA and the Basal Ganglia: From Molecules to Systems, Progress in Brain Research, Tepper, J.M., Abercrombie, E.D., & 
Bolam, J.P. (eds.), 2007, Elsevier, Amsterdam                                                  
 
comprised of neostriatal GABAergic neurons that 
project directly to the SNr and GPi where they make 
direct synaptic contact with the GABAergic output 
neurons.  Neurons giving rise to the direct pathway 
also give rise to collaterals to the GPe (Kawaguchi et 
al 1990).  The indirect pathway comprises neostriatal 
GABAergic neurons that project almost exclusively 
to the GABAergic neurons of the GPe.  These 
neurons in turn innervate the GABAergic output 
neurons in the SNr/GPi and also do so indirectly by 
innervating the glutamatergic neurons of the STN 
that then innervate the GABAergic output neurons 
in the SNr/GPi.   
The neostriatal neurons giving rise to the direct 
and indirect pathways have very similar 
electrophysiological and morphological properties, 
but they have distinguishing neurochemical 
features: the direct pathway neurons express the 
dopamine D1 receptor and substance P and 
dynorphin whereas the indirect pathway neurons 
express the dopamine D2 receptor and enkephalin 
(Chapter 16).  There is also a small proportion of 
neurons that expresses both sets of markers 
(Surmeier, 2006).   
The GABAergic neurons of the GPe are in a 
unique position in that their extensive axon 
collaterals enable them to influence activity at every 
level of the basal ganglia (Chapter 7).  Data from 
single-cell labelling studies (Kita and Kitai, 1994; 
Bevan et al., 1998; Sato et al., 2000) have 
demonstrated that all GPe projection neurons give 
rise to local axon collaterals and innervate the STN 
nucleus, the basal ganglia output nuclei and 
probably also the SNc.  In each of these regions they 
make synapses with the cell bodies and proximal 
dendrites of their target neurons.  In addition, about 
one quarter to one third of GPe neuron also 
innervate the neostriatum (Kita and Kitai, 1994; 
Bevan et al., 1998) where they are in a position to 
influence the activity of all neostriatal neurons by 
selectively innervating GABAergic interneurons 
(Bevan et al., 1998) which, in turn, innervate the 
spiny projection neurons (Kita, 1993; Bennett et al., 
1994; Koos and Tepper, 1999).  Thus the role of GPe 
neurons is not to simply to invert and transmit 
neostriatal information to the STN or basal ganglia 
output nuclei but rather, they are in a position to 
provide some sort of spatiotemporal selection of 
neurons at every level of the basal ganglia.   
The second major port of entry of neocortical 
and thalamic information into the basal ganglia is 
the STN.  This nucleus receives dense excitatory 
inputs from the motor and dorsal prefrontal cortices 
and the intralaminar thalamic nuclei.  By virtue of 
the STN projection to the SNr/GPi, the 
corticosubthalamic pathway (and probably the 
thalamosubthalamic pathway) is the fastest route by 
which cortical information (and thalamic) can 
influence activity in the output nuclei, and has been 
referred to as the hyperdirect pathway (Kita, 1994).  
This pathway can be considered as a critical driving 
force in the basal ganglia output nuclei and in the 
GPe. 
The output nuclei of the basal ganglia, the SNr 
and the GPi, are also comprised essentially entirely 
of GABAergic projection neurons.  These neurons 
project principally to the ventral tier of the dorsal 
thalamus and/or to the tectum where they exert 
powerful inhibition on their thalamic and tectal 
targets (Chapter 12). Many or most of the SNr/GPi 
neurons also co-express parvalbumin, calretinin or 
calbindin, but as in the neostriatum these 
neurochemically heterogenous neurons exhibit very 
similar morphological and physiological properties.  
The SNr neurons also emit local axon collaterals that 
innervate the dopaminergic neurons of the SNc, 
thereby providing an important regulatory input to 
the nigrostriatal dopamine system (Tepper et al., 
2002; Chapter 11). 
It is thus evident that although the principal 
driving force of the basal ganglia i.e. that derived 
from the cortex and thalamus, is glutamatergic, the 
majority of principal neurons in each division of the 
basal ganglia are GABAergic.  Furthermore, every 
neuron in the basal ganglia is regulated by 
GABAergic inputs from multiple sources.  The basal 
ganglia can thus be seen as a series or chain of 
GABAergic neurons that is regulated to a large 
extent by GABAergic inputs and that ultimately 
provide a GABAergic output to the basal ganglia 
targets.  
Through these circuits the basal ganglia exert 
powerful control over voluntary movements, and 
disease and/or damage to the basal ganglia result in 
well-defined movement disorders (Chapter 17).  
There is also a growing appreciation for the role of 
the basal ganglia in non-motor, higher order 
cognitive functions such as learning (Graybiel, 2005). 
In a larger sense it has been argued that the basal 
ganglia is part of a loop that supports 
thalamocortical interactions and thus cortical 
function by positive feedback (Wilson, 2004).  
Regardless of how one chooses to describe the basal 
ganglia’s function, it is critical for our understanding 
of the basal ganglia to understand the organization, 
connectivity and properties of GABAergic neurons 
in each component of the system. 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: Supported in part by 
Supported by a grant from the National Institute for 
Neurological Diseases and Stroke (NS-34865), U.S.A. 
(JMT) and the Medical Research Council, U.K (JPB).   
Many thanks to Ben Micklem for the preparation of the 
figure. 
 
BASAL GANGLIA MACROCIRCUITS IN: In: GABA and the Basal Ganglia: From Molecules to Systems, Progress in Brain Research, Tepper, J.M., Abercrombie, E.D., & 
Bolam, J.P. (eds.), 2007, Elsevier, Amsterdam                                                  
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Bennett BD, Bolam JP (1994) Synaptic input and 
output of parvalbumin-immunoreactive neurons 
in the neostriatum of the rat. Neuroscience 
62,3:707-719. 
 
Bevan MD, Booth PAC, Eaton SA, Bolam JP (1998) 
Selective innervation of neostriatal interneurons by 
a subclass of neuron in the globus pallidus of the 
rat. J Neurosci.18:9438-9452. 
 
Bolam JP, Hanley JJ, Booth PA, Bevan MD (2000) 
Synaptic organisation of the basal ganglia. J Anat 
196 (Pt 4):527-542. 
 
Gerfen, CR, Wilson, CJ (1996) The basal ganglia. In: 
Handbook of Chemical Neuroanatomy, Vol. 12: 
Integrated Systems of the CNS, Part III (L.W. 
Swanson, A. Bjorklund, T Hökfelt, eds) Elsevier 
Science BV, Amsterdam, pp 371-468. 
 
Graybiel AM (2005) The basal ganglia: learning new 
tricks and loving it. Curr Opin Neurobiol 15:638-
644. 
 
Kawaguchi Y, Wilson CJ, Emson PC (1990) Projection 
subtypes of rat neostriatal matrix cells revealed by 
intracellular injection of biocytin. Journal of 
Neuroscience 10,10:3421-3438. 
 
Kita H (1993) GABAergic circuits of the striatum. Prog 
Brain Res 99:51-72. 
 
Kita H (1994) Physiology of two disynaptic pathways 
from the sensorimotor cortex to the basal ganglia 
output nuclei. In: The Basal Ganglia IV Adv. 
Behav. Biol. Vol. 41 (Percheron G, Ed), Plenum 
Press, New York, pp 263-276.. 
 
 
 
 
Kita H, Kitai ST (1994) The morphology of globus 
pallidus projection neurons in the rat: an 
intracellular staining study. Brain Research 
636:308-319. 
 
Koos T, Tepper JM (1999) Inhibitory control of 
neostriatal projection neurons by GABAergic 
interneurons. Nat Neurosc 2:467-472. 
 
Oorschot DE (1996) Total number of neurons in the 
neostriatal, pallidal, subthalamic, and substantia 
nigral nuclei of the rat basal ganglia: A 
stereological study using the cavalieri and optical 
disector methods. J Comp Neurol 366:580-599. 
 
Sato F, Lavallee P, Levesque M, Parent A (2000) 
Single-axon tracing study of neurons of the 
external segment of the globus pallidus in primate. 
J Comp Neurol 417:17-31. 
 
Smith Y, Bevan MD, Shink E, Bolam JP (1998) 
Microcircuitry of the direct and indirect pathways 
of the basal ganglia. Neuroscience 86:353-387. 
 
Surmeier, D.J, (2006) Microcircuits in the striatum: 
Cell types, intrinsic properties and 
Neuromodulation, In Microcircuits - The Interface 
Between Neurons and Global Brain Function (S 
Grillner, AM Graybiel, Eds), MIT Press, 
Cambridge, pp 105-12. 
 
Tepper JM, Celada P, Iribe Y, Paladini, CA  (2002) 
Afferent control of nigral dopaminergic neurons - 
The role of GABAergic inputs.  In: The Basal 
Ganglia VI, Adv. Behav. Biol. Vol. 54 (A.M. 
Graybiel,  M.R. DeLong & S.T. Kitai Eds.),  Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, Norwell, pp 641-651. 
 
Wilson, CJ (2004)  The basal ganglia. In: The Synaptic 
Organization of the Brain (GM Shepherd, Ed.), 
Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 361-414. 
 
