Research Papers 
in Management Studies 
The Judge Institute of Management 
University of Cambridge 
Trumpington Street 
Cambridge CB2 1AG, UK 
www.jims.cam.ac.uk 
 
  
 
 
 
 
ICTs and Changing Processes of Knowing  
in a Global Development Agency 
 
 
 
G Walsham & M Barrett 
 
 
 
WP 02/2005 
 
These papers are produced by the Judge Institute of Management, University of Cambridge. 
 
The papers are circulated for discussion purposes only. Their contents should be considered 
preliminary and are not to be quoted without the authors’ permission. 
 
 
 
ICTs and Changing Processes of Knowing 
in a Global Development Agency 
 
G Walsham & M Barrett 
 
 
WP 02/2005 
 
 
Geoff Walsham 
Judge Institute of Management 
University of Cambridge 
Email: g.walsham@jims.cam.ac.uk 
Michael Barrett 
Judge Institute of Management 
University of Cambridge 
Email: m.barrett@jims.cam.ac.uk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please address enquiries about the series to: 
 
Research Support Manager 
Judge Institute of Management  
Trumpington Street 
Cambridge CB2 1AG, UK 
Tel: 01223 760546 Fax: 01223 339701 
E-mail: research-support@jims.cam.ac.uk 
  
 
 
 
 
ICTs and Changing Processes of Knowing  
in a Global Development Agency 
 
Geoff Walsham and Michael Barrett 
 
 
Abstract 
 
This paper is concerned with changing processes of knowing in contemporary organizations, 
supported in part by information and communication technologies (ICTs).  A new conceptual 
framework is developed, drawing and synthesising from previous work in the knowing-in-
practice literature. This conceptual approach is illustrated through a longitudinal, interpretive 
case study of a globally-dispersed organization. Particular emphasis in this paper is placed on 
the context of power relations within which knowledge-based initiatives and actions take 
place.  Insights from the conceptual approach are generated on changing individuals, 
organizational structures and culture.  It is argued that the conceptual framework has value 
for research on ICTs and processes of knowing in any global organization. 
 
 
 
Keywords: knowledge, processes of knowing, knowledge management, ICTs, interpretive 
case study, global organizations, power relations 
 2 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Knowledge and knowledge management have been fashionable topics in contemporary 
organizations for over a decade now, and this has been reflected in the large academic 
literature focused on knowledge, including special issues of journals (Gherardi 2000; 
Grandori and Kogut 2002; Argote et al. 2003). Despite this massive interest, there is no 
agreed way of how to conceptualise knowledge, nor how to ‘manage’ it, with many different 
schools of thought and approaches.  Writers such as Nonaka (1994) have been influential in 
the management literature with concepts such as the knowledge spiral, but others have argued 
that such work oversimplifies the nature of knowledge and misrepresents the philosophical 
ideas from which it is derived (Tsoukas 2003).   
 
Despite the diversity of views, everyone agrees that knowledge is important to the 
organizations and societies of the early 21st Century.  In addition, most people agree that 
information and communication technologies (ICTs) have a role to play in supporting efforts 
to generate and share knowledge; but we know that technology is not sufficient in itself 
(McDermott 1999), and that some combination of behavioural and technological approaches 
is needed (Barrett et al 2004).  Here again, however, the literature offers a very wide range of 
approaches to the design and development of appropriate ‘knowledge management systems’, 
based on different perspectives on the nature of knowledge (Alavi and Leidner 2001).   
 
In this paper, our primary intention is not to immerse ourselves in the debates concerning 
conflicting views of knowledge, important though they may be.  Rather, we will articulate 
our own view of knowledge, and its support through ICTs, falling broadly within the 
knowing-in-practice school (Gherardi 2000, Orlikowski 2002).  We will illustrate and 
develop our conceptual framework through a case study of a global development agency 
working in the health sector.  Desouza and Evaristo (2003) argued that the literature 
addressing the management of knowledge in a global context is ‘best described as sparse’. A 
related point is made by Orlikowski (2002) who noted that ‘little is known about the process 
of knowing in complex organizations that are also geographically distributed’.  Our case 
study will offer empirical evidence addressed to both of these shortfalls in the literature, 
being concerned with the management of knowledge in a complex, globally-distributed 
organization. 
 3 
 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  In the next section, we draw on relevant 
literature to put forward some fundamental positions on knowledge and practice.  We then 
use these ideas as a basis to develop a conceptual framework for the analysis of changing 
processes of knowing. Next, we describe the methodology for our empirical case study.  The 
main case study sections follow this, providing firstly a broad overview of the shifting goals 
and nature of the global development agency, and then a detailed analysis of changing 
processes of knowing in the agency.  Finally, in the discussion and conclusions sections, we 
consider the contribution of our paper, and its broader implications for the study of ICTs and 
knowledge in complex global organizations.   
 
 
KNOWING-IN-PRACTICE 
 
In this section, we put forward some building blocks or fundamental positions on knowledge 
and practice.  Firstly, we start from the view that knowledgeability is individual and based on 
tacit knowledge, which cannot be converted to explicit knowledge.  The philosopher Polanyi 
(1966, 1969) is widely cited in the literature for his development of the concept of ‘tacit 
knowledge’.  However, as noted by careful readers of Polanyi’s work (Tsoukas and 
Vladimirou 2001, Walsham 2001, Tsoukas 2003), tacit knowing on the part of an individual 
cannot be ‘converted’ into explicit knowledge, contradicting the approach of Nonaka, and 
followers in the management literature who claim to draw on Polanyi’s ideas.  Let us look at 
what Polanyi himself had to say on knowing through ‘tacit power’, or how human beings 
perceive the world through an active shaping of experience: 
 
‘I shall reconsider human knowledge by starting from the fact that we can know more 
than we can tell. (p4)  … the outcome of an (individual’s) active shaping of 
experience performed in the pursuit of knowledge.  This shaping or integrating I hold 
to be the great and indisputable tacit power by which all knowledge is discovered and, 
once discovered, is held to be true.’  (p6) 
 
This tacit power produces the deep tacit knowledge that we have about the world in which we 
live, and this power is different for each individual due to our different initial dispositions and 
 4 
experiences.  Polanyi commented in a later work on the nature of ‘explicit knowledge’, such 
as the contents of books for example.  He is clear that there is no objective explicit 
knowledge independent of the individual’s tacit knowing: 
 
‘The ideal of a strictly explicit knowledge is indeed self-contradictory; deprived of 
their tacit coefficients, all spoken words, all formulae, all maps and graphs, are strictly 
meaningless.  An exact mathematical theory means nothing unless we recognise an 
inexact non-mathematical knowledge on which it bears and a person whose 
judgement upholds this bearing.’ (1969, p195). 
 
What have these philosophical reflections to offer on the practical subject of the use of ICTs 
for knowledge management?  They are highly relevant.  All databases, on-line data sources, 
or the contents of e-mails, are ‘explicit knowledge’, which should not be confused with the 
much deeper tacit knowing of individuals which created them in the first place.  And will 
they be meaningful and helpful to others accessing them?  This will depend on whether they 
connect well to the tacit knowing of the user, and offer something new or interesting to this 
person.   
 
We will return to this issue of ‘knowledge sharing’ a little later in this section.  Let us move 
now to our second building block on knowledge, namely that knowledge and practice are 
inseparable.  Polanyi’s work would support this argument, but we can also point to a 
significant body of literature in the organizational field which supports this view.  For 
example, whilst the main focus of Wenger (1998) is on groups through the notion of 
communities of practice, his ideas are based on a theory of individual practice-based 
knowing, learning, and identity-formation.  Similarly, Orlikowski (2002) sees knowledge as 
enacted in people’s practice on an ongoing basis: 
 
‘It leads us to understand knowledge and practice as reciprocally constitutive, so that 
it does not make sense to talk about either knowledge or practice without the other … 
a perspective that focuses on the knowledgeability of action, that is on knowing (a 
verb connoting action, doing, practice) rather than knowledge (a noun connoting 
elements, facts, processes, dispositions). (pp250-1)   
 
 5 
Our third fundamental position is that participation in knowledge communities is a key way in 
which to learn.  This argument has been well-articulated by Lave and Wenger (1991) and 
Wenger (1998) in their work on communities of practice, an approach which has received a 
wide following in the organizational and management literatures.  We use the broader term 
‘knowledge communities’ here for two reasons.  Firstly, there is some ambiguity in the term 
communities of practice, even as articulated by one of the original authors.  Wenger (1998) 
sees them as including salaried work groups such as the medical claims processors who form 
the empirical basis for his book.  In contrast, Wenger and Snyder (2000) see them as self-
selected or voluntary groups.  Apart from this definitional issue, the term community of 
practice often has a connotation of unity of purpose and consensus.  In this paper, we prefer 
the broader term knowledge communities, in order to offer the possibility for dissensus and 
conflict. 
 
Despite the above qualification, we support Wenger’s view that the exercise of individual 
knowledgeability, and related individual learning, often takes place within groups with whom 
individuals interact on an ongoing basis.  This can be linked back to the earlier discussion of 
tacit knowing through the following quote from Tsoukas (2003): 
 
‘Tacit knowing cannot be “captured”, “translated”, or “converted”, but only displayed 
and manifested in what we do.  New knowledge comes about not when the tacit 
becomes explicit, but when our skilled performance is punctuated in new ways 
through social interaction’ (p410). 
 
So, people exercise their own, unique tacit power in interaction, but they learn from others 
through this interaction.  This is not the same as ‘sharing knowledge’ if this is seen in a 
simplistic way as two people having identical views. Polanyi (1969) developed his ideas in 
this area of ‘sharing knowledge’ through the notions of sense-giving and sense-reading.  
Sense-giving attempts on the part of person A, through an e-mail or a contribution to an on-
line discussion database for example, are not the same as the sense-reading by Person B who 
receives the message or reads the contribution.  However, although two people always differ 
in the precise way in which they perceive an event or situation, both can nevertheless learn 
from interaction. 
 
 6 
The final building block in this section is that knowing-in-practice needs to be contextually 
situated, including contexts of power relations.  Lave and Wenger (1991) made this point 
clearly, although they did not develop the implications of their emphasis on the importance of 
power relations as a context for knowing-in-practice and learning.  Contu and Willmott 
(2003) argued that the radical view put forward by Lave and Wenger has, however, been hi-
jacked to a large extent by managerialist interpreters such as Brown and Duguid, who see 
only consensus within communities and implicitly support managerial-control agendas: 
 
‘Brown and Duguid (1991)  … adopt and disseminate the more conservative aspects 
of situated learning theory.  In particular, they embrace the idea of ‘communities of 
practice’ …. (but) Challenging and innovative elements of situated learning theory, 
such as the idea that learning practices are shaped, enabled and constrained within 
relations of power, are dimly recognised or discarded.’  (p284) 
 
Wenger (1998) displays some ambivalence on this issue himself.  He states clearly that 
dissensus can be present in communities: 
 
‘Peace, happiness, and harmony are therefore not necessary properties of a 
community of practice’ (p77). 
 
However, he does not develop this line of analysis in the book, nor in his later contributions 
(e.g. Wenger and Snyder 2000). Yet, the empirical example of the medical claims processors 
in the 1998 book makes clear that they were severely disenchanted with management’s 
control agendas, so much so that this opposition to management was a key focal point in their 
identity as a community. Wenger (1998) therefore provides an excellent example of Contu 
and Willmott’s (2003) argument of the importance of the context of power relations for 
learning in knowledge communities but, ironically, neither piece of work makes any explicit 
theoretical use of this. 
 
 
 7 
A CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 
 
A summary of the positions of the last section is to say that we view knowing-in-practice as 
an individual process, inseparable from practical action, with knowledge communities as key 
learning arenas, and taking place in contexts where power relations matter. We described the 
positions as building blocks and, to pursue the building analogy, a house is more than some 
building blocks.  In this section, we remain consistent with our basic positions, but we 
develop a more detailed conceptual framework which will be used to analyse the case study 
later in the paper.  A summary of the key elements of the framework is given in Table 1. 
 
Table 1  Changing Processes of Knowing in Context 
 
Contextual Elements 
Drawn on in Knowing-
in-Practice 
Level of Planned 
Intervention 
Broad Conditioning Influences 
Embrained – mental 
potential/conceptual 
thinking 
Individual  
Embodied – ways of 
acting  
Individual  
Embedded – 
organizational structures 
and processes 
Group or organization 
Encultured – 
expectations about the 
culture of the group or 
organization 
Group or organization 
Changes in individual’s  knowing-in-
practice will be influenced by encoded 
elements of context – written, symbolic 
forms 
 
ICTs have a major role to play in the 
creation, storage, transmission and use 
of encoded materials, and in facilitating 
faster, more extensive communications 
between people 
 
Organizational politics and power 
relations influence individual’s 
knowing-in-practice 
 
We start with Blackler’s (1995) classification of knowledge types as embrained, embodied, 
embedded, encultured, and encoded.  The first two of these relate directly to the individual, 
being concerned with latent mental potential, and ways of acting based on historically 
 8 
developed filters and routines. Embedded refers to organizational alignments such as 
organizational structures and processes.  Encultured knowledge was defined by Blackler as 
expectations about the likely intentions of others within a ‘culture’ or group.  Finally, 
encoded concerns explicit, symbolic forms.   
 
At first sight, this list seems to move away from our view of knowing-in-practice as an 
individual process, since it contains embedded and encultured elements which clearly affect 
the whole organization.  However, we follow Thompson and Walsham’s (2004) 
reinterpretation of Blackler’s categories as contextual elements that are drawn on by an 
individual in each instant of practice.  So, encultured and embedded knowledge are not 
components which are ‘shared’ by everyone in the same way, but rather are common 
contextual dimensions which are individually interpreted by individuals. These 
interpretations may have some similarities, but are never exactly the same, since the tacit 
power of interpretation of an individual remains unique to himself or herself. There is no such 
thing as ‘shared’ meaning in any absolute sense (Boland 1996). 
 
Similarly, encoded forms of ‘knowledge’ can be shared, in the sense that the same material 
can be looked at by many people, but their individual interpretation of the meaning of the 
symbolic material will be unique.  The encoded forms are ‘explicit knowledge’ in Polanyi’s 
terms and, as discussed in the previous section, are strictly meaningless until interpreted by 
an individual through their tacit power.  In our conceptual scheme, we consider encoded 
elements of written, symbolic forms as being broad conditioning influences on all the other 
contextual elements.  For example, individuals may influence their conceptual thinking or 
action through e-learning systems or reading best practice descriptions.  New workflow 
systems will affect embedded organizational processes, and web sites may affect cultural 
expectations on the perceived nature of the organization.  
 
This brings us directly to the role of ICTs in changing process of knowing, as the above 
examples illustrate.  We regard ICTs as broad conditioning influences also, but in a way that 
differs from many authors in the literature.  Alavi and Leidner (2001) draw extensively on the 
IS literature to describe many specific ICT applications related to the creation, storage, 
transmission and use of ‘knowledge’.  These include data mining, e-learning tools, electronic 
bulletin boards, ‘knowledge’ repositories, databases, discussion forums, and expert systems. 
 9 
(see table 3, p125).  However, in this paper, we view these as tools to deal with encoded 
materials, not knowledge.  How they affect knowledge, namely a person’s knowing-in-
practice, is related to that individual’s deep tacit knowledge.  
 
So, ICTs have a major role in facilitating the more effective creation, storage, transmission, 
and use of encoded materials.  They are also crucial in our contemporary world in facilitating 
faster, more extensive communications between people. However, in both cases, this does not 
necessarily imply better use of encoded materials or better communication.  In order to 
address these latter issues, we need to consider organizational goals and whether they are 
achieved through the use of the ICT-based applications.  We also need to consider different 
views of organizational goals, since what is considered a success by one individual or group 
may be considered a failure by others.  This brings us to the last broad conditioning influence 
of our conceptual framework, namely organizational politics and power relations.  As we 
discussed in the previous section, consideration of these is a crucial and relatively neglected 
area in the literature on knowledge management.  The political context influences all 
individuals’ knowing-in-practice, as we will illustrate later through our case study. 
 
Although a key focus of our framework is on individual knowing, organizations normally 
attempt to intervene in these processes through planned intervention, and these interventions 
need to take place at different levels.  Attempting to change the embrained or embodied 
aspects of an individual implies the taking of action at the level of that individual, for 
example through a new training scheme.  Attempting to change the embedded features of 
context, such as organizational structures and processes, however, implies interventions 
structured at the group or organization level. This will affect all members of the group or 
organization, but in different ways.  Similarly, trying to achieve the subtle attitudinal change 
associated with culture is a group or organization level intervention, with variable affects, 
good or bad, across all members at that level.  We will look at some planned interventions in 
our case study, and trace how they played out in practice. 
 
 
 10 
METHODOLOGY 
 
The work described in this paper formed part of a larger research project concerned with 
‘ICTs and knowledge communities in global organizations’.  The broad objectives of the 
project were to study knowledge practices in organizations with a global spread, to theorise 
these empirical observations, and to draw conclusions for both academic and practitioner 
communities.  We carried out substantial empirical research in three organizations.  In this 
paper, we report on the results from one of these organizations, which we will call the Global 
Development Agency (GDA). 
 
The GDA was structured with a headquarters in a European country, regional offices in the 
main regions of the world such as Africa, Asia and Latin America, and country offices in 
most countries of the world.  Our research was particularly concerned with the work of the 
country offices.  However, although this level was the key focus, the role of the central 
headquarters and regional offices were important to what was happening at country level.  So, 
in this paper, the focal level of analysis is at national level, but other levels will be brought in 
where they had a significant bearing on this focal level.  
 
Our work was broadly interpretive in style (Walsham 1993), with much emphasis being given 
to accessing the interpretations of people in the field situations through in-depth interviews.  
The field research was longitudinal, and took place over a two-year period from 2002 to 
2004.  During this time, we visited the headquarters on three separate occasions, one regional 
office in Asia, and three country offices located in Africa, Asia and the Caribbean.  We 
interviewed people at most levels of the hierarchy, including senior officials at the 
headquarters, region and countries, down to lower level staff officers in all these locations.  In 
total, we conducted 44 formal interviews as summarised in Table 2.  Most of the interviews at 
headquarters were tape-recorded and transcribed; but interviews at the country offices were 
mostly recorded by taking extensive field notes, since it was felt that respondents would be 
more likely to be open in their opinions if the interview were not tape-recorded.  
 
 11 
Table 2  Summary of Formal Interviews Conducted  
 
Level Number of 
Interviews 
Number of 
Different People 
Interviewed 
Interviewees 
Headquarters 18 16  Heads of departments, senior officials, staff 
officers, IT staff 
Region 5 7  Senior IT and library staff, heads of section, 
project managers 
Countries (3) 21 23 Heads of country offices in all cases; heads 
of section, staff officers, IT staff, library 
staff, staff of partner agencies 
Total 44 46  Staff at headquarters, regions, countries and 
partner agencies 
 
In addition to the formal interviews, we had a wide range of additional contacts with staff of 
the GDA.  We started our contact with them through a one-week executive training course on 
knowledge management for GDA staff carried out at our university.  During our visits to the 
headquarters, we had informal contact with a number of staff members, for example at 
mealtimes.  We also had five audioconferences with our primary contact and colleagues at 
headquarters over the course of the research project, focused on discussing our research 
findings to date.  For example, we had such a conference after two of our country visits to 
feed back our impressions from these visits.  Two five-week group projects were carried out 
by MBA students for the GDA, supervised by one of the authors of this paper.   
 
In terms of analysis, this took place in an iterative way throughout the research.  We 
generated sets of themes from each of the major field visits, and discussed these amongst 
members of our research team and, as noted above, sometimes with GDA staff as well.  We 
continued our reading of the literature on knowledge and knowledge management throughout 
the research project, and we discussed the relationship between our field data and conceptual 
ideas on an ongoing basis.  We did not rely on fixed research questions, but rather evolved 
these in a fluid way to respond to what we found throughout the process.  Outputs from our 
 12 
project, including this article, are thus an end product of an iterative process between field 
data and theoretical constructs.   
 
Finally, we would like to note that our research stance embraced both interpretive and critical 
elements.  Schultze and Leidner (2002) classified ten years of papers on knowledge 
management in the IS literature using Deetz’s (1996) classification of normative, interpretive, 
critical and dialogic.  They found that normative studies dominated the literature, and that 
nearly all of the research was based on a consensus view of social organization and social 
order.  They found only one example of a critical study.  In our research project, we adopted 
an interpretive approach, as described in some detail above, but we also looked explicitly at 
power relations, dissensus and conflict.  As such, our study can be classed as atypical in its 
treatment of knowledge and knowledge management, being both interpretive and critical in 
its positioning.   
 
 
CHANGING GOALS AND NATURE OF THE GDA 
 
The purpose of this section is to provide a brief overview of the GDA, and in particular to see 
some of the changing goals and nature of the organization at the time of the field research. As 
with most organizations in the contemporary world, the GDA was in a state of flux, trying 
hard to respond to changing circumstances and pressures.  In particular, with respect to our 
focus on the work of country offices in this paper, a widespread view was that more effort 
needed to be directed to this level.  Similarly, it was felt that interventions were needed in the 
areas of knowledge management, and the role of ICTs was also under scrutiny. We will look 
now at some of these issues in a little more detail. 
 
Broad Role 
 
The GDA had always been a key player in the health sector, but over time the number of 
agencies with major interests in the health area had increased.  Thus, partnerships with other 
agencies became increasingly important for the GDA, particularly at country level.  A senior 
headquarters staff member with responsibilities for country co-operation noted this as 
follows: 
 13 
 
‘Today the GDA is in sixty global health partnerships following an explosion (of  
partnerships) in 1998.  The GDA works with the World Bank, NGOs (non-
governmental organizations) … Country offices and regional offices need guidance as 
to whether they should work with specific partnerships.’ 
 
Related to the increase in partnerships, health was no longer regarded as a stand-alone sector.  
Instead, many agencies had come to view health as one input into more general goals of 
development.  A headquarters staff member illustrated this with respect to linking health to 
economic costs: 
 
‘ The World Bank added the whole question of cost factors, financing health care, the 
cost of health issues … the GDA never thinks of money.  The money doesn’t exist in 
their world (laughs); it is just a given.  God provides it when you need it (laughs)’  
 
So, the GDA was forced by its changing environment to address broader issues of the linkage 
of health to economic goals, and to enter into partnerships with a much wider set of other 
agencies.  Funding came from an increasing number of different sources, and donors wanted 
to see evidence of improvement ‘on the ground’, meaning at the country level.   
 
Organization: centre/region/country 
 
So, the country level became increasingly important to donors and others, but the GDA was 
traditionally a headquarters-centric organization with limited investment and resources at the 
country level.  It was clear to some GDA headquarters staff that this needed to change    
 
‘You still have priorities being set here in headquarters, and there are a few new ones 
with the new head of the GDA, but you have got increasing demand for priorities to 
be set country by country.  And there has to be a healthy mix of the two because the 
GDA should be challenging countries … as well as agreeing some support and 
developing capacities’   
 
 14 
The interviewee was not arguing for a complete change to a bottom-up approach, but rather 
for a more balanced centre/country interaction.   
 
The role of the regions further complicated these organizational issues.  The regions had 
considerable autonomy, and in the case of one region almost complete autonomy, in their 
utilisation of resources supplied by the centre.  Countries needed to bid to regions to obtain 
funds for programmes, giving considerable power to the regions, and further complicating 
efforts at decentralisation. 
 
Culture  
 
The ‘culture’ of the GDA came up in many conversations with respondents, but we will pick 
out just three salient points here.  Firstly, many of the staff of the GDA were health 
professionals, often qualified doctors.   This is a good thing in many ways for an agency with 
a primary focus on health, but some other features resulting from it could be considered less 
desirable.  Some staff felt that the GDA was a male-dominated, rather ‘macho’ culture, with 
little willingness to admit mistakes and learn from them.  A female headquarters staff 
member said the following: 
 
‘Medical culture … is around being independent, being very self-contained, making a 
lot of decisions and whatever.  And then the other theme is that it is very difficult to 
identify that you have a weakness  … when I first came here, I was astounded how 
few women there were in senior management.’ 
 
Two additional points which were raised by a number of interviewees were that the GDA was 
not a culture where management was valued, and it was a hierarchical culture and not 
collaborative.  Again, both of these points can be related to the medical world from which 
many GDA staff came. 
 
Knowledge Management 
 
It should be evident from the above as to why new approaches to knowledge management 
were felt by some GDA staff to offer opportunities for improvement. Better partnerships with 
 15 
other agencies and improved communication between the centre, regions and countries 
implies improved knowledge sharing and communication.  Perhaps even the male-dominated, 
hierarchical, non-collaborative culture of the GDA could be changed in time?  A newly-
recruited headquarters staff member with responsibilities for knowledge management was 
enthusiastic that much could be achieved through starting a self-replicating process: 
 
‘You want the leveraging effect.  You want to train the trainers, that kind of thing, 
where people will take that and start replicating it themselves geometrically so that it 
is not the centre’s role to one by one repeat this process … by gathering the right 
people, by having a clear agenda, by catalyzing the community’ 
 
It is interesting to note that, at the time of the research, the GDA did not have a formal 
knowledge management strategy, as such, although it was in the process of preparing one.  In 
contrast, the World Bank, another global development agency, had put emphasis on 
knowledge management as a key strategic goal from 1998 onwards (LaPorte 2002).  
However, not everyone in the GDA shared the enthusiasm of the person quoted above, 
neither in terms of the importance of knowledge management to the organization, nor in 
terms of the ease with which new approaches could be implemented. 
 
ICTs 
 
Those responsible for new knowledge management initiatives in headquarters, and others 
supporting these, normally saw an increased role for ICTs as an integral part of efforts to 
improve knowledge sharing, communication across levels within the GDA, and partnering 
with other agencies.  However, ICT resources at country level had traditionally been very 
poor, and considerable new investment would have been needed to remedy this. Whilst it was 
easy to state the need for new resources, funding for them competed with other urgent 
priorities.  The head of one of the country offices that we visited illustrated this with an 
example: 
 
‘We were to have an ICT team visit us from the regional headquarters to advise on 
how to develop our country office web site but there were budgetary issues as to who 
would pay’. 
 16 
 
Headquarters had taken some specific ICT-based initiatives aimed at country level, but these 
tended to be ad hoc, and it was not always evident that they were demand-driven.  For 
example, an intranet designed to enable heads of country offices to communicate with one 
another electronically was little used. 
 
 
PROCESSES OF KNOWING 
 
The above section provided material on the changing nature of the GDA at the time of the 
field research. The emphasis was mainly on headquarters’ views of desirable changes in areas 
such as partnerships, organizational structure and culture, with new knowledge management 
initiatives and ICTs seen as ways to influence things in the right direction.  This section will 
examine perceptions from the country level concerning such changes, drawing mainly from 
our field interviews in country and regional offices.  However, it is worth noting that a 
considerable number of staff members in headquarters had experience of working at the 
country or regional level, so that some of our data on countries came also from that source.  
We will draw on the formal conceptual framework developed earlier, and summarised in 
Table 1, to present our analysis. 
 
Supporting Knowledgeability at the Individual Level 
 
We start at the individual level of intervention concerned with changing conceptual thinking 
and ways of acting at the country level, the embrained and embodied components of context 
identified in Table 1.  We will describe espoused organisational goals for improvements, 
specific examples of planned interventions, and approaches which could be taken to achieve 
these, including improved ICT support.  We will also, in line with our theoretical emphasis 
on politics and power relations identify some tensions and dilemmas for each of the examples 
resulting from organizational realities such as self-interest, entrenched positions or 
differences of opinion, leading in some cases to dissensus rather than consensus in the 
organization.  A summary of the material in this section is given in Table 3. 
 
 17 
Table 3  Changing Individuals  
 
Espoused 
Organizational 
Goals  
Examples of 
Planned 
Interventions 
Approaches 
Including ICT 
Support 
Tensions, Dilemmas and 
Dissensus  
Develop improved 
conceptual 
thinking of country 
office staff about 
their role in the 
health arena 
Make staff see the 
‘wider picture’ on 
health as part of 
broader economic 
development 
Recruitment and 
training 
 
Interaction within 
and outside the 
country office, 
using electronic 
forums where 
appropriate 
Help country staff 
towards improved 
ways of acting in 
health contexts  
Better partnering 
with other 
agencies at 
country level  
In-depth 
engagement with 
other agencies, 
using a blend of 
face-to-face and 
electronic modes  
Recruitment was traditionally 
health people, not strategic 
thinkers, managers or 
communicators. Hard to change 
mindsets of older staff. 
 
Country staff saw Ministries of 
Health as their clients – not used 
to partnering with other agencies 
 
ICT infrastructure and knowledge 
of ICTs often poor 
 
Doubts about headquarters’ 
commitment to improved 
communication and ICTs 
 
 
One of the organizational aims that was outlined in the previous section was for the staff of 
the GDA at country level to see the ‘wider picture’ on health as part of broader economic 
development.  A related point in terms of improved ways of acting was for staff to actively 
partner with other agencies.  The need for both these changes was perceived to some extent, 
both inside and outside the GDA.  For example, two health officials in partner agencies, 
interviewed together in the African country we visited said: 
 
‘(Interviewee 1) The GDA could be a buffer zone between the donors and the 
government, but they are not.  … Instead of concentrating on numerous vertical 
projects, the GDA needs to focus on bigger issues such as the link between poverty 
 18 
and health …  (Interviewee 2) The GDA has a lot of technical expertise, but it is as if 
that is its only role.  There are bigger issues such as policy development.  It is staying 
at headquarters level.’ 
 
It is interesting to note that, in our interview with the head of the GDA in the same country, it 
was clear that he was also aware of these issues, and indeed keen to see change: 
 
‘One of the GDA’s goals is to improve communication both internally and externally.  
With respect to external communication, most know that the GDA deals with health 
issues, but I believe that some of them ignore the GDA, and see it as too closely tied 
to the Ministry of Health … There are … problems with the bilaterals (government to 
government agencies) and the NGOs’.   
 
So, if these needs were recognised, why were things not changing more rapidly?  Many of the 
staff at the country office level were recruited as doctors, and had no training as strategic 
thinkers, managers or communicators.  Some training was offered to existing staff, but it is 
difficult to change mindsets dramatically later in life – many of the senior staff at country 
level were in their late 40s or 50s.  In addition, there was some doubt at country level about 
the seriousness of the commitment at headquarters to improved communication.  This was 
expressed, rather trenchantly, by the head of the GDA in the Asian country office visited by 
us: 
 
‘We at the country office have done nothing proactive on improved communications.  
We are trying to co-ordinate with the regional office.  There is no emphasis on 
communication in the GDA.  We have prima donna doctors  … The World Bank 
opened things up, changed structure, under Wolfensohn.  Under the current head of 
the GDA, initiatives are medical (rather than communication focused).’ 
 
A key point here is that, if there is ambiguity at the country level, and indeed throughout the 
organization, about the seriousness of senior management’s view of the need for improved 
communication, this negatively affects the political context within which individual learning 
takes place.  Individual learners will take account of this, and may well direct their efforts 
elsewhere.   
 19 
 
So, what of the role of ICTs for improved communication and partnering?  It is obvious that 
electronic forums could have, in principle, been used to support interaction both inside and 
outside the GDA, and this occurred to some extent through the extensive use of e-mail.  
However, other IT-enabled communication at the country level, for example through 
electronic discussion forums or web sites, was underdeveloped.  Knowledge of ICTs was 
generally low amongst staff and, again, there was some doubt of headquarters’ commitment 
to this area.  Let us return to the head of the Asian country office: 
 
‘Headquarters must be involved (in improved ICT provision) and interested in 
funding it.  They should allocate money.  We try to improve it by spending from our 
own budget.  We need seed money and a co-sharing approach.  How come the 
country office has to pay?’ 
 
Re-Structuring the Organization 
 
The specific financial issue of who pays for ICTs leads us by example to the second level of 
intervention, referring back to Table 1, namely changing organizational structures and 
processes, including the allocation of resources.  We follow a similar format in this sub-
section to that above, namely identifying specific examples of espoused organizational goals 
and planned interventions, approaches to tackle them including the use of ICTs, and 
problematic tensions and dilemmas.  These are summarised in Table 4. 
 
 20 
Table 4  Changing Structures and Processes 
 
Espoused 
Organizational 
Goals 
Examples of 
Planned 
Interventions 
Approaches 
Including ICT 
Support 
Tensions, Dilemmas and 
Dissensus  
More resources to be 
allocated to the 
country level 
Money, staff, 
infrastructure 
More focus on local 
specificities of 
countries and local 
knowledgeability 
Re-organize 
structures and 
processes to 
place more 
emphasis on  
knowledge and 
communication at 
the country level Improved knowledge 
exchange between 
organizational levels 
Integrated library 
facilities 
 
Document sharing, 
web sites 
Political tensions between 
levels on resource 
allocation 
 
Traditional medical view 
of knowledge as top-
down 
 
No clear central policies 
on knowledge sharing 
approaches or how to 
customise them to 
particular countries 
 
The view that more resources should be made available at the country level was widely 
supported as an espoused organizational goal but, as we have seen already, there was a gap 
between the rhetoric and the reality of resource allocation on the ground.  A further 
illustration of this is that the Asian regional office that we visited had more than 20 staff 
working on IT/IS, whereas the country office we visited in the same region had one person 
only, and he had other non-IT responsibilities.  He said the following: 
 
‘Technology has changed so much in the last decade.  But we are not able to use these 
services from here (the country office). I don’t have the resources and I look to the 
regional office.  IT is not even explicitly mentioned in my job description’. 
 
Resources are, of course, of major importance, but a subtler issue at country level was the 
need to focus more on local specificities and local knowledge.  The GDA operated in most 
countries of the world and it was self-evident that they needed to tailor their approaches to 
 21 
different countries.  Differences in culture, language, religion and other aspects of social 
organization affect the way in which approaches to health issues can and should be handled.  
For example, HIV/AIDS as a disease is similar everywhere, but specific approaches to 
educating the public and treating patients effectively need to be country-specific.   
 
Most staff in the GDA would no doubt have agreed with the above statement, but 
organizational structures did not adequately reflect this.  For example, library facilities 
provide an obvious way in which to collect locally-relevant documents and other forms of 
local ‘codified knowledge’.  The African country office which we visited did have a library 
but, to the surprise of the field researcher, had no reader-oriented catalogue, manual or 
electronic.  In addition, the local language of this country is not English, so that such a 
catalogue would have needed to be bilingual at least.  When asked how many people visited 
the library to access the materials, the library staff member replied ‘very few’.   
 
There was a very large library and document centre at headquarters, but it did not have access 
to some of the materials at the country offices.  So, what we saw in the GDA as a whole was 
a top-down approach to documentation, reflecting the traditional medical culture of 
knowledge being held centrally and passed down through the hierarchy.  The Caribbean 
country office that we visited was further advanced in terms of its library facilities than the  
offices we visited in Africa and Asia.  However, even here, there were serious issues of time, 
staff and resource, as summarised by the librarian: 
 
‘A new thrust of the organization has been on knowledge management: getting people 
to share information more, developing systems to share intellectual capital  … 
however, a key problem is that it is a very busy office and there is no time to write.  
So, they want the librarian to write it (a summary of local work carried out).  
However, this is not feasible.’ 
 
This librarian was also involved with a web site, specific to the country office.  Again, we 
were surprised to find that no such web site existed for the African or Asian country visited.  
Such a web site could have, in principle, been used in a whole variety of ways to aid 
knowledgeable interaction.  It could have contained contact names, documents, details of 
projects, and access to discussion forums, to name but a few.  This could have been used to 
 22 
support interactions at country level with agency partners, medical practitioners and even 
members of the general public who had internet access.  In addition, country web sites could 
have, in principle, aided communication between different levels of the GDA hierarchy, with 
some flow from country to region and headquarters, rather than the other way round.  The 
head of the African country office, when challenged by the field researcher on the issue of a 
web site, said: 
 
‘I would like to have a web site as I thought 11 months ago when I joined this country 
office.  There is a willing web developer in the regional office but this is a funding 
issue.  There is a need also for a web co-ordinator.’   
 
Improved library facilities and web sites at the country offices we visited could have been 
potentially valuable in aiding local knowledgeability and improved communication within 
and between levels in the GDA and outside.  However, in addition to ad hoc improvements, 
there was a clear need for central policies from headquarters on how the GDA at country 
level should adopt knowledge sharing approaches, for example through documents, servers, 
web sites, or libraries. We discussed this lack of central policy with headquarters staff at one 
of our audioconferences.  There was no disagreement with the view that no clear policy 
existed, although it was noted that ‘we are working on it’.   
 
Influencing Attitudes and Expectations 
 
We noted in the brief overview section on the GDA that some staff viewed the culture of the 
agency as being rather male-dominated with strong hierarchy and low on collaboration.  In 
this final analytical sub-section, in line with our conceptual framework in Table 1, we look at 
some of the GDA’s efforts to influence such attitudes and expectations.  A summary of key 
points is given in Table 5. 
 
 23 
Table 5  Changing Culture  
 
Espoused 
Organizational 
Goals 
Examples of 
Planned 
Interventions 
Approaches 
Including ICT 
Support 
Tensions, Dilemmas and 
Dissensus  
Influence the 
culture of the 
GDA at country 
level and above 
– attitudes and 
expectations 
Be less hierarchical 
 
Be more open and 
transparent, 
internally and 
externally 
 
More lateral 
communications and 
knowledge sharing 
Messages from 
senior management 
 
e-mails, local 
library facilities, 
shared databases, 
local web sites  
Top-management rhetoric 
not always matched by shift 
in resources 
 
Many senior staff at country 
level comfortable with 
hierarchies 
 
Established bureaucratic 
ways of doing things – hard 
to change 
 
Senior management rhetoric was invariably in favour of a cultural change towards more 
openness, knowledge sharing and reductions in hierarchy.  However, this was not always 
taken seriously, since the rhetoric was not normally matched with a visible shift in resource 
allocation.  This was succinctly summarised by the head of the country office visited by us in 
Africa: 
 
‘(New) heads of country offices are given a briefing in headquarters as part of their 
training, with quite a bit on knowledge sharing.  Resources for implementing those 
ideas are rather less.’ 
 
Senior staff in the GDA as a whole had grown up with strong hierarchies, both in their 
medical training and practice, and during their time at the GDA.  It can be argued that many 
were comfortable with hierarchies.  One of the staff officers at the Asian regional office, 
when talking about reduced hierarchies and improved knowledge sharing, believed that the 
heads of country offices were themselves a major hurdle: 
 
 24 
‘We need to facilitate change, not at the technical level (medical officers in the 
country office) but at the head of country level’. 
 
As with all strongly hierarchical organizations, fixed bureaucratic ways of doing things were 
common and hard to change.  In particular, the GDA at country level had devoted its primary 
collaborative effort over the years to working with local ministries of health.  Such contact 
was invariably conducted in a cumbersome and rigid way, as described by one of the staff in 
the Caribbean country office: 
 
‘… there are too many requests and all of them come with deadlines and you have to 
follow many procedures.  The formal procedure in which you have to prepare a cover 
letter for whatever, and then go through the Ministry of Health which normally, even 
though you copy to the person you are interested in, sometimes they have to wait until 
the higher level decides that they can answer’ 
 
This bureaucratic approach in the ministries was mirrored to some extent in the local GDA 
offices themselves.  A young staff member in the Asian country office, who had moved to the 
GDA from a private consultancy company made this comparison: 
 
‘It was a cultural shock from the private sector company to the GDA.  I thought that it 
was an international organization, but most of the rules and regulations are from 50 
years back.’ 
 
Newer communications technologies could have, in principle, changed some of this.  E-mail 
communication can bridge hierarchical levels, electronic documentation centres can aid 
lateral knowledge sharing, and web sites can be a vehicle for openness, both internally and 
externally to an organization.  However, bureaucratic and hierarchical approaches often 
persist through the minds and attitudes of people. This was nicely summarised by a young 
staff member in the African country office: 
 
‘There are issues of hierarchy – everything has to go through the country head.  It is 
an old-style culture based on memos and faxes.  People respond to requests from the 
country head rather than exercising individual agency.’  
 25 
 
It would be inaccurate to suggest that all young staff supported change, while older staff were 
comfortable with established hierarchies and ways of doing things.  Indeed, some senior staff 
were quite keen to change in a variety of ways.  For example, in terms of trying to move 
towards more openness and transparency, not least with respect to partner agencies, a senior 
staff member in the African office said: 
 
‘We do a lot in the GDA but we don’t know how to ‘sell’ what we are doing.  
Sometimes, we are not included in reports, because people don’t know what we are 
doing.  We are not talking a lot of ourselves.  We don’t have that culture.  We don’t 
think we should advertise.  There is also a lack of time.  We have lots of meetings.’ 
 
The seeds of individual and organizational change are there in this statement, as in the views 
of a significant number the people with whom we interacted during our research project.  But 
cultural change in a long-established bureaucratic, hierarchical organization is hard to 
achieve. 
 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
We believe that important insights can be derived from our theoretical approach backed by 
detailed empirical data, and we have offered a number of these with respect to the GDA 
throughout the analytical sections.  However, we would like to go a little further here to some 
more general comments on changing processes of knowing. With respect to changing 
individuals, we have shown that it is not only a matter of recruitment and training practices, 
although these are both very important. The political context is also vital, for example in 
signalling whether the senior management of the organization are sufficiently serious about 
espoused organizational changes to allocate new resources to them.  If this is not the case, or 
there is ambiguity in the organizational messages, then individuals may decide to largely 
ignore the change rhetoric and reproduce their existing practices. 
 
With respect to changing structures and processes, it is relatively easy for organizations to 
espouse the need for locally-relevant approaches, as illustrated in the case of the GDA by the 
 26 
rhetoric of an increased country-level focus.  What is much harder is to change existing 
power structures within the organization in order to make this rhetoric have some counterpart 
in reality.  For example, in the case of the GDA, were headquarters and regions willing to 
give more autonomy to country level staff, with a concomitant increase in resources?  This 
does not imply an abdication of the centre’s role, but rather a shift in its nature.  Rather than 
directing from the centre, such a shift could involve the centre in formulating general policies 
for knowledge sharing approaches at the local level, but leaving scope for considerable 
customisation in their implementation.  Web sites are an obvious example from the GDA 
case study.   
 
Moving now to changing culture, a major issue is that hierarchies and established 
bureaucratic ways of doing things are notoriously difficult to change in any organization.  In 
the case of the GDA at country level, this could be considered to be compounded by its 
traditional client  being the local health ministry.  Such ministries themselves are often a 
bureaucratic nightmare of archaic procedures, rigid hierarchies and outdated information 
technologies and systems.  Nevertheless, change is possible, for example in ways of dealing 
with partner agencies at country level, and the GDA was widely perceived as being slower 
than some other development agencies in improving its partnering practices. Is changing 
culture more complex than changing individuals and organizational structures?  We would 
argue instead, following our analysis of the GDA, that the three ‘levels’ are inextricably 
interlinked.  Whilst it is useful to separate aspects of them for analytical purposes, change 
processes need to happen at all levels simultaneously.  For example, it is not possible to 
change hierarchies and partnering approaches without changing the attitude of individuals 
and the allocation of resources to enable them to act differently.   
 
So what about ICTs in all this?  It is clear from the case study that technology, or lack of it, 
was important to all the processes of knowing, implicated in how individuals acted and 
communicated, in forms of interaction between hierarchical levels, and in cultural ways of 
doing things.  New technologies offer new opportunities, but whether they are taken up and 
used to change processes of knowing depends on human agency.  E-mail does not deliver 
better lateral communication if the authority is not there to legitimise this form of interaction.  
Web sites can be valuable ways of supporting external interaction for example, but only if the 
power structures and related resources of the organization enable appropriate content to be 
 27 
created and updated.  ICTs are important for globally-dispersed organizations such as the 
GDA, but they are not solutions in themselves to inflexible bureaucracies, inappropriate 
resource allocation, or poor attitudes to knowledge sharing.  ICTs can, however, be a crucial 
part of a balanced approach to change in all of these areas. 
 
The key thrust of our paper is conceptual and theoretical, but we wish to make a brief 
comment on practice in the GDA in particular.  Our analysis of the GDA should not be taken 
as a simple criticism of attitudes, practices and structures within the agency.  Much good 
work had taken place over the years up to and including our research project.  Many staff in 
the agency, at all levels, were trying hard to tackle contemporary issues and problems, for 
example as evidenced by their willingness to engage with ourselves as researchers.   
However, there is little doubt that the agency needs to change further in the coming years, not 
least in its approach to knowledge and its use of ICTs.  In terms of the direct practical 
contribution of our research project to this, we put considerable emphasis during the project 
on feeding back and discussing our findings with GDA staff at various levels, and we also 
made specific suggestions for change where we felt these were appropriate.  Our continued 
full access to the agency over the two years of the project offers some evidence that our input 
was valued.  We are, however, aware of the limitations of any practical advice on changing a 
large global organization based on a limited set of field interviews carried out by a small team 
of researchers. 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
The title of this paper includes the phrase ‘changing processes of knowing’ and the meaning 
of ‘changing’ is deliberately two-sided.  In the GDA case study, we were interested, on the 
one hand, in the deliberate efforts being made, particularly by more senior GDA 
management, to change the nature of the agency.  Examples of these were the espoused 
organizational goals and planned interventions described in the analytical sections. On the 
other hand, we were also interested in describing how processes of knowing were actually 
changing in the GDA, and this did not always match well with the espoused goals in our 
view.  Much of our analysis has been concerned with the reasons for such mismatches, 
echoing a long-standing theme in the literature distinguishing plans from situated actions 
 28 
(Suchman 1987), or anticipated changes from emergent or opportunistic changes (Orlikowski 
1996).   
 
Our particular approach, based on a detailed theoretical framework, had four distinctive 
features to it.  Firstly, we were concerned with knowledge management and we generated a 
particular version of the knowing-in-practice approach.  Other authors have adopted such an 
approach, although it remains a minority stream in the knowledge management literature, but 
the particular synthetic framework in this paper is our own.  Secondly, we have placed 
considerable emphasis on the political context within which knowledge management 
initiatives take place.  Again, this has been called for in the literature, going right back to 
Lave and Wenger’s (1991) seminal work on learning in communities, but empirical studies of 
this aspect have remained very rare.   
 
A third distinctive feature of our approach is that we have explicitly considered the role of 
ICTs in our conceptual framework, in the analysis of the empirical case study, and in our 
discussion of broad insights in the previous section. There is a significant quantity of 
literature on ICTs and knowledge management but, as noted by Schultze and Leidner (2002), 
the vast majority of it adopts a normative and consensual approach.  Our approach has been 
interpretive, but with strong critical elements related to our emphasis on power relations.  We 
have illustrated these latter elements in the empirical case study through our discussion of the 
tensions, dilemmas and dissensus which arose sometimes in the GDA due to conflicting 
views, competing bids for resources and vested interests.   
 
Fourthly, our paper has used an empirical example of knowledge management in a 
geographically-dispersed organization, which has been noted as an under-represented area of 
study (Desouza and Evaristo 2003, Orlikowski 2002).  We have aimed to show some of the 
complexity of such organizations in our short paper here, and thus the difficulty of changing 
individuals, organizational structures and cultures within them. We believe, from both a 
research and practice standpoint, that globally-dispersed organizations are very important in 
this era of increasing globalization (Beck 2000).  They are hard to manage or research, 
involving much time and resources in both cases, but of great relevance. We have aimed to 
make a contribution to the sparse literature in this area. 
 
 29 
In this paper, we have adopted a knowing-in-practice approach, emphasizing in particular the 
importance of the political context of knowing.  We have explicitly considered the role of 
ICTs as inextricably interlinked with planned interventions and actual results from 
knowledge management initiatives.  Although our case study dealt with a specific 
organization, the GDA, we believe that our conceptual framework is more generic, and could 
therefore be applied with value to any global organization.  We would like to encourage other 
researchers to draw from and extend the conceptual approach that we have developed here. 
 
 30 
REFERENCES 
 
Alavi, M., and Leidner, D.E. “Review: Knowledge Management and Knowledge 
Management Systems: Conceptual Foundations and Research Issues,” MIS Quarterly (25:1), 
2001, pp. 107-136. 
 
Argote, L., McEvily, B., and Reagans, R. “Introduction to the Special Issue on Managing 
Knowledge in Organizations: Creating, Retaining and Transferring Knowledge,” 
Management Science (49:4), 2003, pp. v-viii.  
 
Barrett, M, Cappleman, S., Shoib, G., and Walsham, G. “Learning in Knowledge 
Communities: Managing Technology and Context,” European Management Journal (22:1), 
2004, pp. 1-11. 
 
Beck, U. What is Globalization?, Polity Press, Cambridge, 2000. 
 
Blackler, F. “Knowledge, Knowledge Work and Organizations: An Overview and 
Interpretation,” Organization Studies (16:6), 1995, pp.1021-1046. 
 
Boland, R.J. “Why Shared Meanings Have No Place in Structuration Theory: A Reply to 
Scapens and Macintosh”, Accounting, Organizations and Society (21:7/8), 1996, pp. 691-697.  
 
Brown, J.S., and Duguid, P. “Organizational Learning and Communities-of-Practice: 
Towards a Unified View of Working, Learning and Innovation,” Organization Science (2:1), 
1991, pp. 40-57. 
 
Contu, A., and Willmott, H. “Re-embedding Situatedness: The Importance of Power 
Relations in Learning Theory,” Organization Science (14:3), 2003, pp. 283-295. 
 
Deetz, S. “Describing Differences in Approaches to Organization Science: Rethinking Burrell 
and Morgan and their Legacy,” Organization Science (7:2), 1996, pp. 191-207. 
 
 31 
DeSouza, K., and Evaristo, R. “Global Knowledge Management Strategies,” European 
Management Journal (21:1), 2003, pp. 62-67. 
 
Gherardi, S. “Practice-based Theorizing on Learning and Knowing in Organizations,” 
Organization (7:2), 2000, pp. 211-223. 
 
Grandori, A., and Kogut, B. “Dialogue on Organization and Knowledge,” Organization 
Science (13:3), 2002, pp. 224-231. 
 
LaPorte, B. “Knowledge is Currency at the World Bank,” Knowledge Management Review 
(5:5), 2002, pp. 10-13. 
 
Lave, I, and Wenger, E. Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation, Cambridge, 
Cambridge University Press, 1991. 
 
McDermott, R. “Why Information Technology Inspired but Cannot Deliver Knowledge 
Management,” California Management Review (41:4), 1999, pp.103-117. 
 
Nonaka, I. “A Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation,” Organization 
Science (5:1), 1994, pp.14-37. 
 
Orlikowski, W.J. “Improvising Organizational Transformation over Time: A Situated Change 
Perspective,” Information Systems Research (7:1), 1996, pp.63-92. 
 
Orlikowski, W.J. “Knowing in Practice: Enacting a Collective Capability in Distributed 
Organizing,” Organization Science (13:3), 2002, pp. 249-273.  
 
Polanyi, M. The Tacit Dimension, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1966. 
 
Polanyi, M. Knowing and Being, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1969. 
 
 32 
Schultze, U., and Leidner, D.E. “Studying Knowledge Management in Information Systems 
Research: Discourses and Theoretical Assumptions,” MIS Quarterly (26:3), 2002, pp. 213-
242. 
 
Suchman, L.A. Plans and Situated Actions: The Problem of Human-Machine 
Communication, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987. 
 
Thompson, M., and Walsham, G. “Placing Knowledge Management in Context,” Journal of 
Management Studies (41:5), 2004, pp. 725-747. 
 
Tsoukas, H. “Do We Really Understand Tacit Knowledge?,” in The Blackwell Handbook of 
Organizational Learning and Knowledge Management, M. Easterby-Smith and M.A. Lyles 
(eds.), Blackwell Publishing, Oxford, 2003, pp. 410-427. 
 
Tsoukas, H., and Vladimirou, E. “What is Organizational Knowledge?,” Journal of 
Management Studies (38:7), 2001, pp. 973-993. 
 
Walsham, G. Interpreting Information Systems in Organizations, Wiley, Chichester, 1993.  
 
Walsham, G. “Knowledge Management: The Benefits and Limitations of Computer 
Systems,” European Management Journal (19:6), 2001, pp. 599-608. 
 
Wenger, E. Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning and Identity, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, 1998. 
 
Wenger, E., and Snyder, W.M. “Communities of Practice: The Organizational Frontier,” 
Harvard Business Review, January-February 2000, pp.139-145. 
 
