ProtoNet 4.0: A hierarchical classification of one
million protein sequences
Noam Kaplan*, Ori Sasson1, Uri Inbar1, Moriah Friedlich1, Menachem Fromer1,
Hillel Fleischer1, Elon Portugaly1, Nathan Linial1 and Michal Linial
Department of Biological Chemistry, Institute of Life Sciences and 1School of Computer Science and Engineering,
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel
Received September 10, 2004; Accepted September 14, 2004
ABSTRACT
ProtoNet is an automatic hierarchical classification
of the protein sequence space. In 2004, the ProtoNet
(version 4.0) presents the analysis of over onemillion
proteins merged from SwissProt and TrEMBL
databases. In addition to rich visualization and analy-
sis tools to navigate the clustering hierarchy, we
incorporated several improvements that allow a
simplified view of the scaffold of the proteins. An
unsupervised, biologically valid method that was
developed resulted in a condensation of the ProtoNet
hierarchy to only 12% of the clusters. A large portion
of these clusters was automatically assigned
high confidence biological names according to
their correspondence with functional annotations.
ProtoNet is available at: http://www.protonet.cs.
huji.ac.il.
INTRODUCTION
ProtoNet (1) (launched in 2002) is an automatic hierarchical
clustering of the SwissProt and TrEMBL (2) protein data-
bases. The clustering process is based on an all-against-all
BLAST (3) similarity search. The similarities’ E-score is
used to perform a continuous bottom-up clustering process
by joining the two most similar protein clusters at each step,
resulting in a hierarchy of protein clusters at various degrees
of biological granularity. This hierarchy is structured as a
collection of trees, in which the root clusters contain all the
proteins of the tree and the rest of the clusters represent
subdivisions of the proteins into smaller groups. Several
interesting biological insights about protein families and
the evolution of structural and functional relations between
proteins are obtained by browsing this global hierarchical
organization of the protein world (4). Furthermore, ProtoNet
can be used to assess the function of novel protein sequences,
by finding the best matching cluster for the new sequence.
In this paper, we describe several new developments in
ProtoNet 4.0 including the increase of the sequences
analyzed from 114 033 proteins in SwissProt (version 2.1)
to 1 072 911 sequences (SwissProt and TrEMBL, version 4.0)
and the improved methodology for simplification of the
scaffold of the protein hierarchy. ProtoNet is available at:
http://www.protonet.cs.huji.ac.il.
HIERARCHY CONDENSATION
Due to the immense size of the ProtoNet hierarchy and the
number of protein clusters, it would be very difficult to nav-
igate in such a large hierarchy. Furthermore, it is obvious that
many of the clusters are biologically irrelevant and uninter-
esting (e.g. huge root clusters that contain hundreds of thou-
sands non-related proteins). In order to get a condensed yet
biologically relevant view of the hierarchy, we searched for
some process-intrinsic parameter that would indicate the type
of clusters that are biologically relevant. The parameter found
measures the stability of the cluster in the process, assuming
that a stable cluster would be also more relevant biologically.
We found this assumption to be correct, and that if we select a
small subset of the clusters that show high stability, they would
retain the biological validity of ProtoNet (N. Kaplan et al.,
manuscript in preparation).
The default condensation of the ProtoNet hierarchy leaves
12% of the clusters. However, the ProtoNet website now offers
an ‘advanced mode’, in which advanced users can control
the level of condensation and the method by which it is
done, which results in a larger or smaller set of clusters as
required. It is to be noted that the condensation causes the
trees to change from binary trees to non-binary trees, and
some browsing options have been developed accordingly
(see ‘Web Enhancements’).
*To whom correspondence should be addressed at The Hebrew University, Department of Biological Chemistry, Givat Ram Campus, Jerusalem, Israel, 91904.
Tel: +972 2 6585433; Fax: +972 2 6586448; Email: kaplann@cc.huji.ac.il
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use permissions, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org.
ª 2005, the authors
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 33, Database issue ª Oxford University Press 2005; all rights reserved
D216–D218 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gki007
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 25, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
DATABASE UPDATES
ProtoNet has gone through a major update of all database
sources. Primarily, the protein database from which the
ProtoNet tree is constructed has been updated and extended
to include the TrEMBL protein database as well as SwissProt.
This results in a leap from 114 033 to 1 072 911 protein
sequences. Although TrEMBL is not manually validated by
experts, it provides a much more extensive view of the protein
world including whole genomes and thorough representation
of several key organisms (see Table 1).
CLUSTER NAMES
A major objective in bioinformatics is to assign a biological
function to proteins. We have developed an automatic high-
confidence method that assigns a functional annotation to
ProtoNet protein clusters. The method finds a functional
annotation from either InterPro (5), GO (6), SwissProt or
ENZYME (7) databases that best fits the proteins of the
cluster and assigns it a score relative to how well it fits
the cluster. If this score is above a certain threshold, the
annotation is assigned as the cluster’s name. Understandably,
not all protein clusters would have an existing annotation
that fits them well. Clusters whose best fitting annotation
does not pass the threshold remain nameless, which possibly
suggests a novel functional group or clusters that are asso-
ciated with mixed functions. By applying this method, we
were able to assign biological names to 78% of the clusters
that contain 20 proteins or more. The annotation can be
assigned with high confidence to the cluster because a
high threshold is used.
WEBSITE ENHANCEMENTS
Several enhancements have been made to the ProtoNet
website in order to allow easier and more in-depth analysis
of the ProtoNet trees.
Browsing cluster names
Cluster names are extremely useful for quickly browsing the
ProtoNet trees, which eliminates the need to check the proteins
of each cluster in order to get an impression of the hierarchy.
Furthermore, the assignment of a biological function to clus-
ters suggests an easy scheme of assigning a function to pro-
teins with unknown function: a protein can be assigned the
function of all clusters to which it belongs. This scheme can
be used not only on each of the 1 072 911 proteins from which
the ProtoNet hierarchy is constructed, but also for new protein
sequences given by the user (using the ‘Classify your protein’
option in the website, which finds the most suitable cluster for
a new protein sequence given by the user).
Browsing the tree
Subtree view. In order to cope with the change to a non-binary
tree, we have introduced the ProtoBrowser (Figure 1), which
shows the tree in the vicinity of the cluster that is being dis-
played. Instead of presenting only the branch of the tree to
which the cluster belonged to, the new display allows an easy
navigation to neighboring clusters and an enhanced global
overview of biological protein families.
Functionality view. PANDORA (8) is a web-based tool that
allows an in-depth biological analysis of large protein sets. It is
a natural choice when trying to biologically interpret large
protein clusters that contain hundreds of proteins. ProtoNet
now offers a direct link from its cluster page to PANDORA,
providing the ability to easily understand what biological
groups the cluster is built from and analyze them from several
different biological aspects.
Similarity view. When viewing a protein cluster, it is some-
times helpful to obtain an in-depth look into the sequence
similarity between the proteins of the cluster. This could
allow the user to identify if there is a natural partitioning
into subgroups or if the inner similarity of the cluster is uni-
form. In order to address this, the website offers a cluster
similarity matrix (Figure 2), which shows an all-against-all
color-coded matrix of all protein pairs in the cluster, colored
according to the BLAST E-score between the two proteins.
This also facilitates access to the BLAST result, which
Table 1. Representation of selected species in ProtoNet
Species Proteins in
ProtoNet 2.1
Proteins in
ProtoNet 4.0
Homo sapiens 8,507 47 641
Mus musculus 5,678 41 813
Drosophila melanogaster 2,049 22 603
Arabidopsis thaliana 1,680 39 367
Plasmodium falciparum 153 8,434
Figure 1. The ProtoBrowser allows viewing the near vicinity of a cluster in
the ProtoNet hierarchy. Blue triangle-shaped icons represent protein clusters.
The cluster currently being viewed is the cluster A268586, which appears in the
center in red. Clusters that include proteins with 3D solved structures are
marked PDB.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D217
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 25, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
can be obtained simply by clicking on the appropriate cell in
the matrix.
Maintenance and updating
The ProtoNet source databases are generally updated twice
a year. The next ProtoNet release is planned to include the
UniProt Ref 100 protein database. Other future plans include
allowing the users to select a subset of proteins from ProtoNet
according to their needs (e.g. selecting for study only the
proteins from the SwissProt database or only the proteins of
a specific species) and expanding links to further biological
databases such as OMIM (9) and DIP (10).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank the entire current and previous ProtoNet teams for
their endless support. Special thanks to Alex Savenok for the
web design as well as for the development of the visualization
tools. We thank the fellowship support by the Sudarsky Center
for Computational Biology (SCCB) to N.K., U.I., M.F. and
M.F.. This study is partially supported by the EU NoE
BioSapiens consortium and the CESG consortium supported
by the NIH.
REFERENCES
1. Sasson,O., Vaaknin,A., Fleischer,H., Portugaly,E., Bilu,Y., Linial,N.
and Linial,M. (2003) ProtoNet: hierarchical classification of the
protein space. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 348–352.
2. Boeckmann,B., Bairoch,A., Apweiler,R., Blatter,M.C., Estreicher,A.,
Gasteiger,E., Martin,M.J., Michoud,K., O‘Donovan,C., Phan,I. et al.
(2003) The SWISS-PROT protein knowledgebase and its supplement
TrEMBL in 2003. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 365–370.
3. Altschul,S.F., Madden,T.L., Schaffer,A.A., Zhang,J., Zhang,Z.,
Miller,W. and Lipman,D.J. (1997) Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST:
a new generation of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids
Res., 25, 3389–3402.
4. Shachar,O. and Linial,M. (2004) A robust method to detect structural and
functional remote homologues. Proteins, in press.
5. Camon,E., Magrane,M., Barrell,D., Lee V., Dimmer,E., Maslen,J.,
Binns,D., Harte,N., Lopez,R. and Apweiler R. (2004) The Gene Ontology
Annotation (GOA) Database: sharing knowledge in Uniprot with Gene
Ontology. Nucleic Acids Res., 32 (Database issue), D262–266.
6. Mulder,N.J., Apweiler,R., Attwood,T.K., Bairoch,A., Barrell,D.,
Bateman,A., Binns,D., Biswas,M., Bradley,P., Bork,P. et al. (2003) The
InterPro Database, 2003 brings increased coverage and new features.
Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 315–318.
7. Bairoch,A. (2000) The ENZYME database in 2000. Nucleic Acids Res.,
28, 304–305.
8. Kaplan,N., Vaaknin,A. and Linial,M. (2003) PANDORA:
keyword-based analysis of proteins sets by integration of annotation
sources. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 5617–5626.
9. McKusick,V.A. (1998) Mendelian Inheritance in Man.
Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.
10. Salwinski,L., Miller,C.S., Smith,A.J., Pettit,F.K., Bowie,J.U. and
Eisenberg D. (2004) The database of interacting proteins: 2004 update.
Nucleic Acids Res., 32 (Database issue), D449–451.
Figure 2. Example of a cluster similarity matrix. Colored cells represent
different degrees of similarity, ranging from white (no similarity: BLAST
E-score higher than 100) to dark blue (high similarity, BLAST E-score
close to 0). It is evident that the cluster A222801 is roughly divided into
3 subsets: in the upper left of the diagonal there are proteins that show no
similarity to each other or to any protein in the cluster; in the center of the
diagonal there is a subset of proteins that are similar to each other but to no
other proteins; and at the bottom right of the diagonal there is another subset
of proteins that are similar to each other but not to other proteins.
D218 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
 at Pennsylvania State U
niversity on February 25, 2014
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
