The Database of Macromolecular Motions:
new features added at the decade mark
Samuel Flores1,3, Nathaniel Echols2, Duncan Milburn3, Brandon Hespenheide6,
Kevin Keating4, Jason Lu3, Stephen Wells6, Eric Z. Yu3, Michael Thorpe6,7
5 and Mark Gerstein3,4,5,*
1Department of Physics, Yale University, P.O. Box 208120, New Haven, CT 06520-8120, USA, 2Department of
Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA, 3Molecular Biophysics and
Biochemistry Department and 4Computational Biology and Bioinformatics Program and 5Department of Computer
Science, Bass 432A, 266 Whitney Avenue, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA, 6Center for Biological
10 Physics, Department of Physics and Astronomy and 7Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Arizona State
University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA
Received August 15, 2005; Revised and Accepted October 4, 2005
ABSTRACT
The database of molecular motions, MolMovDB
15 (http://molmovdb.org), has been in existence for the
past decade. It classifies macromolecular motions
and provides tools to interpolate between two con-
formations (the Morph Server) and predict possible
motions in a single structure. In 2005, we expanded
20 the services offered on MolMovDB. In particular, we
further developed the Morph Server to produce
improved interpolations between two submitted
structures. We added support for multiple chains to
the original adiabatic mapping interpolation, allowing
25 the analysis of subunit motions. We also added the
option of using FRODA interpolation,which allows for
more complex pathways, potentially overcoming
steric barriers. We added an interface to a hinge pre-
diction service, which acts on single structures and
30 predicts likely residue points for flexibility. We
developed tools to relate such points of flexibility in
a structure to particular key residue positions, i.e.
active sites or highly conserved positions. Lastly,
we began relating our motion classification scheme
35 to function using descriptions from the Gene
Ontology Consortium.
INTRODUCTION
The study of macromolecular motions is important for
the understanding of function. Motion is crucial for the
40mechanism of catalysis, signaling and for the formation of
complexes. Also, knowledge of the accessible conformations
can be used to improve the performance of docking codes.
For these reasons a server which receives pairs of structures
and generates putative motion trajectories plays a unique role in
45structural biology. The Database of Molecular Motions (1–5) is
not only a repository of such motions but also aims to charac-
terize them systematically and provide tools for their analysis.
MolMovDB is a resource for studying conformational
changes in protein and other macromolecules, primarily
50through analysis of crystal structures. It has been used to
design and test a wide variety of structural analysis algorithms.
The Morph Server in particular has been used by many sci-
entists to analyze pairs of conformations and produce realistic
animations.
55MolMovDB sits within a constellation of databases focus-
ing on protein structure. These include the Structural Classi-
fication of Proteins (6), the Protein Data Bank (PDB) (7),
CATH (8) and many others. Most of these databases are
designed as repositories of information or systems of classi-
60fication for single protein structures. MolMovDB differs from
most in that it focuses on motions.
Early studies of domain movements based on comparison of
two structures (9,10) led to the idea of creating a database of
pairs of structures. Initially a simple collection of web pages
65(10), MolMovDB soon developed into a proper database with
a classification scheme (1,2,11). An automatic pipeline for
finding and morphing related proteins in the PDB followed
(3). Updates in recent years have included a normal mode
analysis server to try to predict probable motions from a single
70structure (3), and automated graphs showing distribution of
flexibility statistics (4).
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 203 432 6105; Fax: +1 360 838 7861; Email: Mark.Gerstein@yale.edu.
Correspondence may also be addressed to Samuel Flores. Tel: +1 203 747 2682; Email: Samuel.Flores@yale.edu
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D1–D6
doi:10.1093/nar/gkj046
In the present work we describe recent improvements to
MolMovDB. We have begun relating our motion classification
scheme to function classification using definitions provided by
GO (12). New tools have been added to relate motions to
5 particular sites, namely active sites and highly conserved resi-
dues. We have further developed the morph server to produce
more realistic interpolations between two structures and han-
dle larger motions. Specifically, an option has been added to
use FRODA (13) to find a sterically allowed trajectory, and a
10 multiple chain option has been made available to obtain the
trajectory of a complex using adiabatic mapping. We have also
added an interface to our flexibility prediction program,
FlexOracle (S. Flores et al., submitted).
IMPROVEMENTS TO THE MORPH SERVER
15 The original morph server uses an adiabatic mapping approach
to generate morphs for single chains. Under this scheme, the
distance between each atom on one structure and the corres-
ponding atom on a second structure is evenly reduced. After
each reduction, the thus interpolated structure is subjected to an
20 energy minimization step. The usefulness of the trajectories
generated has been limited by two factors. First, previous ver-
sions of the server could not handle complexes. This limitation
stood in the way of large scale studies of interior voids in pro-
teins, helix–helix packing, flexibility prediction and many other
25 large-scale structural analyses. Second, we found that when the
trajectory of conformational change strayed far from a linear
interpolation, the morph server often gave unphysical results.
To address these limitations, we added two new morph
methods. First, a new multiple chain option enables the morph-
30 ing of complexes using adiabatic mapping (11). Second, a
new FRODA option gives our morph server the ability to
circumvent the steric clashes that sometimes occur in adiabatic
mapping.
Multiple chain morphing using adiabatic
35 mapping approach
The new multiple chain option of the Morph Server was
developed to aid in studies of conformational changes of
large complexes, including mixed protein–nucleic acid
structures.
40 Although interpolations of complexes were possible with
previous versions of the server, they were limited by the
requirement for precisely matching sequences and limited
gaps. Proteins with very distant homology could be morphed,
but only single chains at a time. Our new server can determine
45 consensus sequences and coordinates for an arbitrarily large
number of chains, and has successfully been used with struc-
tures related by 55% sequence identity. Compared with either
of the previous versions, the output is more faithful to the
original crystallographic data, preserving most atomic posi-
50 tions, residue numbering and gaps. Currently the processing of
homologous structures results in alanine mutations for residue
mismatches, but the design is sufficiently flexible to allow
addition of other methods for obtaining a consensus sequence.
New FRODA option for the morph server
55 To address the potential clashes inherent in non-linear traject-
ories, we used the newly developed FRODA (13) module that
is part of the FIRST5 software suite. Our submissions page
now offers a ‘FRODA lite’ (14) option, which invokes a ‘dir-
ected dynamics’ FRODA run with a set of default parameters.
60In this ‘lite’ mode, only covalent bond lengths and angles are
maintained, along with appropriate van der Waals radii on all
atoms to avoid collisions (13). Since no hydrogen-bond
constraints are considered in the ‘lite’ mode, there is no
need for the input structure to have hydrogens added. A
65full-feature version of FIRST5 with FRODA is available
for download and online usage at http://flexweb.asu.edu,
which also includes added hydrogen atoms, as well as hydro-
gen bond constraints and hydrophobic tethers (13).
The central concept behind FRODA is the use of geometric
70simulation to explore conformational space. The simulation
begins by mapping a set of ghost templates onto the protein
such that every atom belongs to at least one template. These
templates overlap each other only at rotatable dihedral angles.
Figure 1a and b, respectively, shows the atoms and the two
75ghost templates, colored yellow and blue, FRODA assigns to
an ethane molecule. The two carbon atoms belong to both
ghost templates because the carbon–carbon bond is rotatable
(flexible). Initially, these templates map onto the structure
perfectly, with each edge of a template mapping to a covalent
80bond in protein. Noncovalent interactions are not included in
the morphing procedure of FRODA lite.
Once the ghost templates have been mapped to the protein
atoms, the simulation proceeds through a series of displace-
ment and matching steps. The result of each step is a new
85conformation. One of these simulation steps is depicted for an
ethane molecule, shown with green carbon spheres and white
hydrogen spheres in Figure 1a. Figure 1b shows two ghost
templates, yellow and blue, mapped onto the ethane molecule
such that each hydrogen atom is associated with a single vertex
90while each carbon atom is associated with two vertices, one in
each ghost template. Each step begins with random displace-
ment of every atomic position (Figure 1c), essentially breaking
all of the bonds. Now begins an iterative procedure to realign
the atoms and their associated template(s). First, the ghost
95templates are fit as best as possible to the new positions of
the atoms (Figure 1d). The position and orientation of each
ghost template is computed by a least-squares fit to the new
positions of the atoms. The displaced atoms are then fit onto
the new position of the ghost templates (Figure 1e). The hydro-
100gen atoms fit exactly onto their respective ghost template
positions because they each belong to only one template.
The carbon atoms, however, each belong to two templates,
and are thus positioned equidistant from each of their associ-
ated ghost template points. This concludes one iteration of
105atom-ghost template fitting. A predefined fitting tolerance
determines whether the templates have been adequately
realigned, thus concluding one step in FRODA. The templates
in Figure 1e are outside of the fitting tolerance, and so iteration
of the ghost template-atom fitting continues. Figure 1f and g,
110respectively, shows refitting of the templates to the atoms, and
the atoms back onto the templates. It can be seen that the
second iteration, Figure 1g, results in templates that are
much better aligned compared with the result of the first itera-
tion in Figure 1e. The procedure continues until the atoms and
115the ghost templates are aligned within tolerance. Alignment is
measured by the distance between atoms and vertices. The
tolerance in FRODA lite is <0.125 s. One complete step
D2 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
of FRODA produces a new conformation of the ethane
molecule (Figure 1h).
The morphing procedure used by FRODA lite is directed
from an initial structure to a target and so differs slightly from
5 the example given in Figure 1. During morphing, the initial
random displacement of the atoms at the beginning of each
step is now biased to move the atoms toward their respective
position in the target structure. The result is a gradual trans-
ition from the initial structure to the target structure. It is
10 important to note that steric overlaps are computed during
each iteration so that the atoms move during fitting both to
match the ghost templates and to obey excluded-volume con-
straints.
If the structure finds itself in a jammed position, such that
15 the tolerances cannot be satisfied, it will revert to a previous
conformer and continue the morph. The random element in the
atomic displacements provides for a degree of simulated
annealing so that the structure can find its way around
small obstacles. The paths produced by FRODA therefore
20 avoid sterically impossible trajectories.
INTERFACE TO FLEXIBILITY ANALYSIS TOOL
Ultimately, most studies of flexibility are oriented towards the
goal of predicting specific conformational changes. To this end
we built an interface to our FlexOracle flexibility analysis tool,
25 accessible from the front page of MolMovDB. The goal of this
server is to provide hinge predictions for structures submitted
by the public. FlexOracle and the Normal Mode Analysis
server (3) differ from the morph server in that the first two
operate on a single structure submitted by the user, and the
30 third operates on a pair of structures.
The hinge-prediction server submission form is linked to
from the front page of MolMovDB. Users are invited to submit
a single PDB (7) file containing a single chain. Upon sub-
mission, FlexOracle is run on the structure. The user is sent an
35email with the URL at which the results may be viewed.
In the FlexOracle hinge prediction algorithm (S. Flores
et al., submitted for publication), a cut is introduced into
the structure after a residue i. The resulting N-terminal frag-
ment with residues 1 to i  1 is separated from the C-terminal
40fragment with residues i to N. The intra-molecular potential
energy of each fragment is calculated using CHARMm (15).
The implicit solvent model is used to account for the protein–
solvent interactions. The energies corresponding to the two
fragments are summed. The process is repeated for i = 2 to N.
45The procedure is similar to that used by Janin and Wodak (9) in
their solvent exposed area calculations. Continuing that com-
parison, values of i that result in lower energy correspond to
residues more likely to be in hinges. As implemented on our
server, the predictor only works when the submitted chain
50represents the biological molecule (i.e. does not occur in com-
plex), and is soluble. For these cases the predictions compare
well with known hinges.
For proteins that have had FlexOracle run on a submitted
structure, we link to a graph of energy versus i (Figure 2f). In
55order to compare the predicted with actual hinges, we have
prepared a small set of morphs that had FlexOracle run on the
first of the two submitted structures. These can be viewed at
molmovdb.org/sets/curatedFlexOracle.
IMPROVEMENTS TO THE UNDERLYING
60CLASSIFICATION
In addition to improving the two-structure and single-structure
servers, we also made improvements to the underlying clas-
sification in MolMovDB. These improvements have been
Figure 1. The motion of an ethane molecule as determined by geometric simulation in FRODA. (a) Initial atomic positions; (b) ghost templates; (c) random atomic
displacement; (d) fitting of ghost templates to atoms; (e) refitting of atoms to ghost templates; (f and g) further iterations of (d and e); (h) until a new conformer is
found13.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D3
oriented towards relating structure to function and allowing us
to group related morphs together with their homologs.
GO annotation
We have integrated a subset of the dataset from the EBI Gene
5 Ontology Annotation (GOA) project (12), into the server. In
particular, we have implemented the lookup and display of GO
terms for PDB identifiers that feature in a given motion or
morph. Terms from each of the three GO organizing
principles—molecular function, cellular component and bio-
10 logical process—are displayed when available (at the time of
writing, there were 191 040 references to 24 703 PDB struc-
tures), and links are provided to reveal the definition of
individual terms. For example, for the motion in DNA
polymerase I from Thermus aquaticus (database motion ‘taq-
15 pol’, PDB codes 2ktq and 3ktq), the motion report can be
annotated with six GO terms: DNA binding, nuclease activity,
50–30 exonuclease activity, DNA-directed DNA polymerase
activity (all molecular function), intracellular (cellular com-
ponent) and DNA replication (biological process)—all appro-
20 priate terms for this enzyme.
The addition of the GOA dataset for the annotation of the
motion and morph reports is not only useful in itself, as the
addition of the GO terms also facilitates searching the database
in a broader fashion than was possible previously. Further-
25 more, we have added some interesting new subsets for use
with the automatic plotter3 derived from searches with GO
terms. Figure 3 shows the distribution of one particular stat-
istic, maximum Ca displacement of the second (moving) core
of the structure for two subsets derived in this manner, and a
30third included for comparative purposes, showing the distri-
bution for the same statistic across all canonical morphs in the
database. These plots are a first step in addressing the question
of whether particular types of motion are associated with a
particular function or role in a biological system.
35PDB ID VERSUS MORPH ID BLAST FEATURES
The front page of MolMovDB has long provided a feature to
search by PDB ID. This feature was limited by the fact that
many users uploaded structure files directly rather than pro-
viding PDB identifier. Also, the submitted structures were
40often unpublished and therefore absent from the PDB alto-
gether. For these morphs, no PDB ID was assigned, therefore it
was impossible to find them with this search method.
In order to overcome these shortcomings, it was necessary
to assign a PDB ID to such morphs. To do so, we searched the
45PDB for structures with >99% sequence identity to the morphs
in our database. This information was then used to provide an
additional search option on our front page. It is also possible to
use this feature to connect to our database by providing a PDB
ID, as has been done on LinkHub (A. Smith et al., manuscript
50in preparation). Conversely, it is possible to search for
PDB ID’s with high sequence identity to a given morph
Figure 2. The new morph page. The previous page, now called morph-classic.cgi, can still be accessed by a link. Features: (a) a page with links to PDB entries with
>99% sequence homology; (b) highlight active sites from the CSA database, if entries exist in any close homologs; (c) Torsion angle plots can be useful in guiding
your hinge selection efforts; (d) if you wish to contribute to our hinge research, use the arrow buttons to manually select up to three hinges by visual inspection;
(e) Submit your hinge selection, plus any comments. Comments appear in our public bulletin board; (f) if our FlexOracle hinge prediction program has been run on the
first frame of the morph, the energy versus residue number plot can be viewed here; (g) the 10 best (lowest energy, in ascending order of energy) hinges can be
highlighted in the viewer.
D4 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
(Figure 2, a). As an additional benefit, it is possible to transfer
annotation from closely related PDB structures to the corres-
ponding morph. We took advantage of this capability to assign
active site annotation to our morphs from the Catalytic Site
5Atlas (CSA) (19).
TOOLS RELATING MOTION TO SITES
ON STRUCTURE
Users often want to relate the motion of particular residues in a
structure to particular structural sites and features, e.g. the
10position of active sites or highly conserved residues. We
built tools that now allow us to do both of these things.
Catalytic site highlighting
We related our morphs to active sites identified in the CSA
(19). The CSA is manually curated, thus avoiding the various
15pitfalls of using the PDB’s SITE records.
We obtained the active site residue numbers and corres-
ponding PDB ID’s from a table provided by the Thornton
group. We annotated all the morphs that were linked by our
homology table to an entry in the CSA. When annotation is
20available, a button appears on the morph page to highlight the
active site residues. This can serve as a visual aid to under-
standing the link between catalysis and motion.
For easier browsing of this feature we’ve added a new
gallery (2) named ‘Catalytic Site Atlas’. Every morph in
25this gallery has active site information available for viewing.
CONSERVATION SCORE VIEWER
Since highly conserved residues are more probable to play an
important role in the function of a protein, we implemented a
tool to calculate the conservation score for each residue of a
30submitted sequence. The server highlights the top 5% of the
most conserved residues (i.e. the residues with the highest
conservation scores).
To calculate these conservation scores we first performed a
BLAST search of the input sequence against nrdb90, a non-
35redundant sequence database in which protein sequences have
no >90% sequence identity with each other (20). Next we
extracted up to 50 top-aligned sequences to a given morph
to generate an multiple sequence alignment using Clustal W
(21). For each position in the multiple sequence alignment, we
40used information content to evaluate the consensus of each of
the 20 types of amino acids at this position (22). Then we
ranked each position according to the magnitude of the
information content.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
45The work at Arizona State University was supported by the
NSF, NIH and the Arizona State University Foundation.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Gerstein,M. and Krebs,W. (1998) A database of macromolecular motions.
50Nucleic Acids Res., 26, 4280–4290.
0.
0
1.
5
3.
0
4.
5
6.
0
7.
5
9.
0
10
.5
12
.0
13
.5
15
.0
16
.5
18
.0
19
.5
21
.0
22
.5
24
.5
25
.5
27
.0
28
.5
30
.5
.
.
.
Distribution of "Max C-alpha displacement in 2nd Core"
5
4
3
2
1
0
4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48 52 56 60 64 68 72 76 80 ...
Distribution of "Max C-alpha displacement in 2nd Core"
3.
0
2.
5
2.
0
1.
5
1.
0
0.
5
Distribution of "Max C-alpha displacement in 2nd Core"
3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42 45 48 51 54 57 60 ..
.
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Figure 3. Example plots of the distribution of maximum Ca displacement of
the mobile component (second core) in structures annotated with GO terms
(‘DNA binding’, 17 morphs—top; ‘metabolism’,17 morphs—centre), com-
pared with the reference morph dataset (200 canonical morphs—bottom). Dark
bars indicate morphs whose second core max. Ca displacement falls below the
median, while light bars indicate those above.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D5
2. Krebs,W.G. and Gerstein,M. (2000) The morph server: a standardized
system for analyzing and visualizing macromolecular motions in a
database framework. Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 1665–1675.
3. Krebs,W.G., Alexandrov,V., Wilson,C.A., Echols,N., Yu,H. and
5 Gerstein,M. (2002) Normal mode analysis of macromolecular motions in
a database framework: developing mode concentration as a useful
classifying statistic. Proteins, 48, 682–695.
4. Krebs,W.G., Tsai,J., Alexandrov,V., Junker,J., Jansen,R. and Gerstein,M.
(2003) Tools and databases to analyze protein flexibility; approaches to
10 mapping implied features onto sequences. Methods Enzymol., 374,
544–584.
5. Qian,J., Stenger,B., Wilson,C.A., Lin,J., Jansen,R., Teichmann,S.A.,
Park,J., Krebs,W.G., Yu,H., Alexandrov,V. et al. (2001) PartsList: a
web-based system for dynamically ranking protein folds based on
15 disparate attributes, including whole-genome expression and interaction
information. Nucleic Acids Res., 29, 1750–1764.
6. Murzin,A.G., Brenner,S.E., Hubbard,T. and Chothia,C. (1995) SCOP: a
structural classification of proteins database for the investigation of
sequences and structures. J. Mol. Biol., 247, 536–540.
20 7. Berman,H.M., Westbrook,J., Feng,Z., Gilliland,G., Bhat,T.N.,
Weissig,H., Shindyalov,I.N. and Bourne,P.E. (2000) The Protein Data
Bank. Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 235–242.
8. Pearl,F., Todd,A., Sillitoe,I., Dibley,M., Redfern,O., Lewis,T.,
Bennett,C., Marsden,R., Grant,A., Lee,D. et al. (2005) The CATH
25 Domain Structure Database and related resources Gene3D and DHS
provide comprehensive domain family information for genome analysis.
Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D247–D251.
9. Janin,J. and Wodak,S.J. (1983) Structural domains in proteins and their
role in the dynamics of protein function. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol.,
30 42, 21–78.
10. Gerstein,M., Lesk,A.M. and Chothia,C. (1994) Structural mechanisms for
domain movements in proteins. Biochemistry, 33, 6739–6749.
11. M Gerstein,R.J., Johnson,T., Tsai,J. and Krebs,W. (1999) Studying
macromolecular motions in a database framework: from structure to
35 sequence. Rigidity Theory Appl., 401–442.
12. Camon,E., Magrane,M., Barrell,D., Lee,V., Dimmer,E., Maslen,J.,
Binns,D., Harte,N., Lopez,R. and Apweiler,R. (2004) The Gene Ontology
Annotation (GOA) Database: sharing knowledge in Uniprot with Gene
Ontology. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D262–D266.
4013. Wells,S., Menor,S., Hespenheide,B.M. and Thorpe,M.F. (2005) Phys.
Biol. (in press).
14. Jacobs,D.J., Rader,A.J., Kuhn,L.A. and Thorpe,M.F. (2001)
Protein flexibility predictions using graph theory. Proteins, 44,
150–165.
4515. Brooks,B.R., Bruccoleri,R.E., Olafson,B.D., States,D.J., Swaminathan,S.
and Karplus,M. (1983) CHARMM: a program for macromolecular
energy, minimization, and dynamics calculations. J. Comput. Chem.,
4, 187–217.
16. Lindahl,E., Hess,B. and van der Spoel,D. (2001) GROMACS: a package
50for molecular simulation and trajectory analysis. J. Mol. Mod., 7,
306–317.
17. Rader,A.J., Hespenheide,B.M., Kuhn,L.A. and Thorpe,M.F. (2002)
Protein unfolding: rigidity lost. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 99,
3540–3545.
5518. Thorpe,M.F., Lei,M., Rader,A.J., Jacobs,D.J. and Kuhn,L.A. (2001)
Protein flexibility and dynamics using constraint theory. J. Mol. Graph.
Model., 19, 60–69.
19. Porter,C.T., Bartlett,G.J. and Thornton,J.M. (2004) The Catalytic Site
Atlas: a resource of catalytic sites and residues identified in enzymes using
60structural data. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D129–D133.
20. Holm,L. and Sander,C. (1998) Removing near-neighbour redundancy
from large protein sequence collections. Bioinformatics, 14,
423–429.
21. Thompson,J.D., Higgins,D.G. and Gibson,T.J. (1994) CLUSTAL W:
65improving the sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment
through sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight
matrix choice. Nucleic Acids Res., 22, 4673–4680.
22. Schneider,T.D., Stormo,G.D., Gold,L. and Ehrenfeucht,A. (1986)
Information content of binding sites on nucleotide sequences. J. Mol.
70Biol., 188, 415–431.
D6 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
