The tRNAscan-SE, snoscan and snoGPS web servers
for the detection of tRNAs and snoRNAs
Peter Schattner, Angela N. Brooks1 and Todd M. Lowe*
Department of Biomolecular Engineering and the UCSC RNA Center, University of California, Santa Cruz,
1156 High Street, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA and 1Division of Biological Sciences, Cell and Developmental Biology
Section and Center for Molecular Genetics, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
Received January 12, 2005; Revised and Accepted February 28, 2005
ABSTRACT
Transfer RNAs (tRNAs) and small nucleolar RNAs
(snoRNAs) are two of the largest classes of non-
protein-coding RNAs. Conventional gene finders
that detect protein-coding genes do not find tRNA
and snoRNA genes because they lack the codon
structure and statistical signatures of protein-
coding genes. Previously, we developed tRNAscan-
SE, snoscan and snoGPS for the detection of tRNAs,
methylation-guide snoRNAs and pseudouridylation-
guide snoRNAs, respectively. tRNAscan-SE is
routinely applied to completed genomes, resulting
in the identification of thousands of tRNA genes.
Snoscan has successfully detected methylation-
guide snoRNAs in a variety of eukaryotes
and archaea, and snoGPS has identified novel
pseudouridylation-guide snoRNAs in yeast and
mammals. Although these programs have been
quite successful at RNA gene detection, their use
has been limited by the need to install and configure
the software packages on UNIX workstations.
Here, we describe online implementations of these
RNA detection tools that make these programs
accessible to a wider range of research biologists.
The tRNAscan-SE, snoscan and snoGPS servers
are available at http://lowelab.ucsc.edu/tRNAscan-
SE/, http://lowelab.ucsc.edu/snoscan/ and http://
lowelab.ucsc.edu/snoGPS/, respectively.
INTRODUCTION
Transfer RNA (tRNA) genes make up the single largest gene
family. A typical eukaryotic genome contains hundreds of
tRNA genes; the human genome contains an estimated 600
tRNA loci (1). Knowing the tRNA repertoire of an organism
is important because it affects the codon bias seen in highly
expressed protein-coding genes. The small nucleolar RNAs
(snoRNAs) are involved at various stages of eukaryotic rRNA
and small nuclear RNA (snRNA) biogenesis (2). In archaea,
homologous classes of snoRNA-like small RNAs are involved
in the biogenesis of rRNAs (3) and tRNAs (4,5). The twomajor
families of snoRNAs are involved in guiding the two most
common types of RNA modification: Box H/ACA snoRNAs
are required for RNA pseudouridylation, while most of the C/
D box snoRNAs guide RNA ribose methylation (2).
In a time when complete genomes are being rapidly
sequenced, it is important to have an accurate means of tRNA
and snoRNA gene identification. However, conventional gene
finders that detect protein-coding genes do not detect genes for
tRNAs and snoRNAs because RNA genes lack the sequence
signals used by these programs (6). As a result, custom-
designed gene finders have been required for the computa-
tional identification of non-protein-coding RNAs, such as
tRNAs and snoRNAs (6).
Previously, we developed tRNAscan-SE (7), snoscan (8)
and snoGPS (9) for the detection of tRNAs, methylation-
guide snoRNAs and pseudouridylation-guide snoRNAs,
respectively. tRNAscan-SE has been applied to all completed
genomes, including the human genome (T. M. Lowe, manu-
script in preparation; see http://lowelab.ucsc.edu/GtRNAdb/).
Snoscan has detected scores of methylation-guide snoRNAs
in eukaryotic (8,10,11) and archaeal genomes (12) and snoGPS
has identified novel, experimentally verified pseudouridylation-
guide snoRNAs in yeast (9) and mammals (P. Schattner,
S. Barberan and T. M. Lowe, manuscript in preparation).
However, applying these programs to search for tRNAs and
snoRNAs is not always straightforward. The programs need to
be downloaded and installed on the user’s UNIX-compatible
computer system, and various options and data files must be
configured or specified. Consequently, these programs have
not been applied as widely or effectively as possible. In order
to facilitate the application of these programs to a wider range
of genomic searches, we have implemented a web server
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: þ1 831 459 1511; Fax: þ1 831 459 3139; Email: lowe@soe.ucsc.edu
Correspondence may also be addressed to Peter Schattner. Email: schattner@soe.ucsc.edu
ª The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
W686–W689 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gki366
interface for them. With these servers, research biologists will
be able to apply tRNAscan-SE, snoscan and snoGPS to stand-
ard tRNA and snoRNA searches without having to install the
programs on their local systems.
DESCRIPTION
The tRNAscan-SE, snoscan and snoGPS servers are accessed
via the Lowe Lab Web server Interface at http://lowelab.
ucsc.edu/tRNAscan-SE/, http://lowelab.ucsc.edu/snoscan/ and
http://lowelab.ucsc.edu/snoGPS/, respectively. All three serv-
ers have similar user interfaces with differences limited to
search-specific configuration options.
Each user interface consists of four major components:
(i) Search mode selection.
(ii) Query sequence selection.
(iii) Target sequence selection (not applicable for tRNA-
scan-SE).
(iv) Configuration of search-mode and options for displaying
results.
The searchmode determines which probabilistic model to be
used in searches—each model is based on tRNA or snoRNA
training data from selected species or phylogenetic groups (i.e.
mammals, yeasts and archaea). If no explicit model for the
species of interest is available in the user interface, specifying
either a general model or a model from a related species
generally yields good results. Different search modes can
offer varying speed and sensitivity.
Query sequence selection is used to specify the sequences
to be searched for tRNAs or snoRNAs. Raw or formatted
sequence data can be pasted directly into the query sequence
box or can be uploaded from a local file. Each server also has
a set of program-specific search and output-display options.
Examples include choice of genetic code for determining
tRNA isotype for tRNAscan-SE, limits on the distances
between some of the sequence motifs (e.g. C and D boxes)
in snoscan and limits on the minimum number of base pairings
in the guide region for snoGPS. In addition, each program
has adjustable cutoff scores enabling tradeoffs between scan
sensitivity and specificity. In most cases, the default parameter
choices will be satisfactory and should be selected, especially
by new users. However, more experienced users are able to
exert some control over the program’s results by manipulating
these parameters.
The default output for tRNAscan-SE includes the location
of each identified tRNA, the predicted anticodon, introns (if
present) and the tRNA covariance model score. Also included
are the overall statistics for the various component programs
[trnascan (13), eufindtrna (14) and cove (15)] as well as sum-
mary data for the entire search. The summary data include
counts of the total number of tRNAs found, the number of
tRNA pseudogenes found, number of tRNAs with introns and
the anticodons that were detected.
The snoscan and snoGPS outputs consist of a summary
information line for each predicted snoRNA sequence,
followed by the candidate in FASTA format. The summary
listing for each hit includes:
(i) Query sequence name and snoRNA start and end positions
within the query sequence.
(ii) Overall bit score.
(iii) Target sequence name and target position.
(iv) Total number of base pairings andmismatches in the guide
region.
(v) The length of the candidate subsequence.
Also included in the display are graphical representations of
the base pairing in the target-guide region and the secondary
structure of the stem motif(s). Snoscan and snoGPS scores for
known snoRNA sequences for various species are available on
the website for comparison. Sample abbreviated output records
from each of the three servers are shown in Figure 1. Further
details on the use of the servers and the interpretation of their
results are available in README files accessible from each of
the servers.
DISCUSSION
Ideally, genome centers would annotate newly sequenced
genomes with our software (in downloaded form), and
individual users might not need to use our programs. However,
to date, genome centers generally have not used snoscan
or snoGPS. As a result, snoRNAs are missing from many
annotated genomes. Other uses of the server implementations
of our software include screening for tRNAs and snoRNAs
in ’Rnomics’ (16) experiments of genomes that are not
completely sequenced, and checking potential target sites of
known or putative snoRNAs. With the introduction of the
tRNAscan-SE, snoscan and snoGPS servers, such computa-
tional detection and analysis of tRNA and snoRNA sequences
become available to a much larger class of researchers.
Although the web server produces identical results to those
generated by the original standalone programs, the web server
implementation is less powerful for the scanning of large
genomes and in terms of flexibility. The probabilistic
algorithms used by the snoRNA programs can be relatively
slow. Depending on the program, the search parameters used
and the query and target sequence lengths, execution times can
take a long time: hours or even days. Since the web server is
intended as a shared resource, limitations on query and target
sequence lengths are incorporated. Whole-genome snoRNA
searches on the server are not currently possible; whole gen-
ome tRNA searches are limited to queries of five million base
pairs or less.
The web server implementation is also limited in its ability
to modify the underlying search model and training para-
meters. Generally, this is not an issue since the models and
parameters have been optimized for their specific applications.
In some cases, such as scanning genomes with unusual back-
ground base compositions, retraining the scan parameters can
improve performance. In practice, we have found that search
performance is only minimally impacted by inaccurate back-
ground base compositions. However, for optimal performance,
creating a new model with correct background base composi-
tions (i.e. using the downloaded software) is preferable.
Notwithstanding these limitations, in most cases the web
server implementations of tRNAscan-SE, snoscan and snoGPS
have essentially all of the capabilities of the standalone soft-
ware with much easier user interfaces and gentler learning
curves. We expect that access to these tools will enable more
researchers to search for additional examples of these
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W687
Figure 1. Sample web server output. Typical (A) tRNAscan-SE, (B) snoscan and (C) snoGPS outputs generated by the web server. For all three sample outputs,
the result data have been abbreviated for clarity.
W688 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
important RNA families in the ever-increasing number of
sequenced genomes.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this
article was provided by a lab start up fund.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Lander,E.S., Linton,L.M., Birren,B., Nusbaum,C., Zody,M.C.,
Baldwin,J., Devon,K., Dewar,K., Doyle,M., FitzHugh,W. et al. (2001)
Initial sequencing and analysis of the human genome. Nature, 409,
860–921.
2. Decatur,W.A. and Fournier,M.J. (2003) RNA-guided nucleotide
modification of ribosomal and other RNAs. J. Biol. Chem., 278,
695–698.
3. Dennis,P.P., Omer,A. and Lowe,T. (2001) A guided tour: small RNA
function in Archaea. Mol. Microbiol., 40, 509–519.
4. Clouet d’Orval,B., Bortolin,M.L., Gaspin,C. and Bachellerie,J.P. (2001)
Box C/D RNA guides for the ribose methylation of archaeal tRNAs.
The tRNATrp intron guides the formation of two ribose-methylated
nucleosides in the mature tRNATrp. Nucleic Acids Res., 29,
4518–4529.
5. Ziesche,S.M., Omer,A.D. and Dennis,P.P. (2004) RNA-guided
nucleotide modification of ribosomal and non-ribosomal RNAs in
Archaea. Mol. Microbiol., 54, 980–993.
6. Schattner,P. (2003) Computational gene-finding for noncoding RNAs.
In Barciszewski,J. (ed.), NonCoding RNAs: Molecular Biology and
Molecular Medicine. Landes Bioscience, Georgetown, TX, pp. 33–49.
7. Lowe,T.M.andEddy,S.R. (1997) tRNAscan-SE: a program for improved
detection of transfer RNA genes in genomic sequence. Nucleic Acids
Res., 25, 955–964.
8. Lowe,T.M. and Eddy,S.R. (1999) A computational screen for
methylation guide snoRNAs in yeast. Science, 283, 1168–1171.
9. Schattner,P., Decatur,W.A., Davis,C.A., Ares,M.,Jr, Fournier,M.J. and
Lowe,T.M. (2004) Genome-wide searching for pseudouridylation guide
snoRNAs: analysis of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae genome.
Nucleic Acids Res., 32, 4281–4296.
10. Brown,J.W., Echeverria,M., Qu,L.H., Lowe,T.M., Bachellerie,J.P.,
Huttenhofer,A., Kastenmayer,J.P., Green,P.J., Shaw,P. and
Marshall,D.F. (2003) Plant snoRNA database. Nucleic Acids Res.,
31, 432–435.
11. Accardo,M.C., Giordano,E., Riccardo,S., Digilio,F.A., Iazzetti,G.,
Calogero,R.A. and Furia,M. (2004) A computational search for box C/D
snoRNA genes in the D.melanogaster genome. Bioinformatics,
3293–3301.
12. Omer,A.D., Lowe,T.M., Russell,A.G., Ebhardt,H., Eddy,S.R. and
Dennis,P.P. (2000) Homologs of small nucleolar RNAs in Archaea.
Science, 288, 517–522.
13. Fichant,G.A. and Burks,C. (1991) Identifying potential tRNA genes in
genomic DNA sequences. J. Mol. Biol., 220, 659–671.
14. Pavesi,A., Conterio,F., Bolchi,A., Dieci,G. and Ottonello,S. (1994)
Identification of new eukaryotic tRNA genes in genomicDNA databases
by a multistep weight matrix analysis of transcriptional control regions.
Nucleic Acids Res., 22, 1247–1256.
15. Eddy,S.R. and Durbin,R. (1994) RNA sequence analysis using
covariance models. Nucleic Acids Res., 22, 2079–2088.
16. Huttenhofer,A., Kiefmann,M., Meier-Ewert,S., O’Brien,J., Lehrach,H.,
Bachellerie,J.P. and Brosius,J. (2001) RNomics: an experimental
approach that identifies 201 candidates for novel, small, non-messenger
RNAs in mouse. EMBO J., 20, 2943–2953.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W689
