Pathguide: a Pathway Resource List
Gary D. Bader, Michael P. Cary and Chris Sander*
Computational Biology Center, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue,
Box 460, New York, NY 10021, USA
Received October 20, 2005; Accepted October 21, 2005
ABSTRACT
Pathguide: the Pathway Resource List (http://
pathguide.org) is a meta-database that provides an
overview of more than 190 web-accessible biological
pathway and network databases. These include data-
bases on metabolic pathways, signaling pathways,
transcription factor targets, gene regulatory net-
works, genetic interactions, protein–compound inter-
actions, and protein–protein interactions. The listed
databases aremaintained by diverse groups in differ-
ent locations and the information in them is derived
either from the scientific literature or from syste-
matic experiments. Pathguide is useful as a starting
point for biological pathway analysis and for content
aggregation in integrated biological information
systems.
MOTIVATION
Databases and methods for computational analysis and data
mining are an increasingly integral part of biological research
because they provide easy access to a wealth of biological
information, which biologists require to support analyses
and effectively answer research questions. While individual
databases cover important information in certain areas of bio-
logical knowledge, integrated and reasonably comprehensive
use of biological pathway and network datasets is severely
hampered by the large number and fragmentation of available
databases (1).
CREATING THE PATHWAY RESOURCE LIST
As a step toward effective navigation and selective pathway
data integration, we have collected information on over 190
published online cellular pathway and network databases in
Pathguide. By providing this community resource we aim to
promote the development of an integrated view of the cell
(the ‘cell map’) (1). While much cell map data are only
found in the literature, the databases in the list already repre-
sent a significant amount of relatively well-organized pathway
data at varying levels of accessibility that can eventually be
integrated and comprehensively accessed.
TYPES OF DATA AND DATABASE CATEGORIES
Databases in the list are grouped into eight major categories
based on the type of data made available, the data format
and the biological focus (Table 1). The categories are approxi-
mate and a database can be in multiple categories if it contains
multiple data types. Protein–protein interaction databases
mainly store pairwise interactions or complexes between
proteins and sometimes other molecular interaction types.
Metabolic pathway databases generally store a series of bio-
chemical reactions in pathways involved in metabolite con-
versions. Signaling pathway databases generally collect sets of
molecular interactions and chemical modifications (such as
post-translational protein modifications) as regulatory path-
ways. Gene regulation network databases capture transcription
factors and the genes they regulate. Genetic pathway databases
are composed of genetic interactions, such as epistasis and
synthetic lethality, which occur when two mutations have a
combined phenotypic effect that is not simply the sum of the
effects caused by either mutation alone. Pathway diagram
databases generally store hyperlinked pathway images;
while it is difficult to extract computable information from
these images, they are very useful for biologists as educational
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 646 735 8079; Fax: +1 646 735 0021; Email: pathguide@cbio.mskcc.org
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
Table 1. Pathguide statistics
Category Number of databases
Protein–protein interactions 79
Metabolic pathways 43
Signaling pathways 41
Pathway diagrams 22
Transcription factors/gene regulatory networks 20
Protein–compound interactions 14
Genetic interaction networks 5
Protein sequence focused 12
Other 11
Unique total 196
one category, so the unique total number of databases is shown.
The number of pathway databases in each Path-guide database category is listed.
Uncategorized databases are listed in ‘‘Other’’. Databases can be in more than
D504–D506 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gkj126
and quick reference tools. Essentially all databases listed
focus on interactions or pathways/networks. However, we
also include a number of protein-sequence databases that
store pathway information as secondary information, e.g.
the REBASE database of restriction enzymes contains
information about catalytic events involving DNA.
COVERAGE
As one might expect, the categories of information captured in
databases, so far, are biased by community biological interests
and do not evenly cover the space of available pathway and
interaction data (Figure 1). For instance, there are many
protein–protein and protein–compound databases, plausibly
because of technical developments in proteomics and interest
in drug discovery, but there appear to be only two protein–
RNA databases and none for RNA–compound interactions,
although these categories are clearly of biological interest.
Interactions and pathways define biological function at the
molecular level. Therefore, pathway databases must grow to
support the evolution of biological knowledge. There is still
significant room for pathway database growth in underrepre-
sented categories and areas of new biological discoveries, such
as microRNA targets.
META-DATA AND LINKS
Database names in Pathguide are linked to the database home-
page and clicking on ’more’ next to each database leads to a
structured description of the database listing short name, full
name, homepage Uniform Resource Locator (URL), last
observed date, text description, sample data URL, availability
(e.g. free to all users, license purchase required), PubMed
links, Pathguide category, types of tools available, database
statistics, organisms covered and a popularity measure. The
popularity measure used is the number of web pages, as
indexed by the Google Internet search engine, that mention
a given pathway database homepage URL. A user can rank all
databases by this measure by clicking ’Order list by web
popularity’ at the top of the Pathguide homepage. The measure
is rough because not all websites mentioning a pathway data-
base are relevant. Thus the exact ranking is likely not sound,
but it is useful as an overview of the most popular set of
databases in each category.
STANDARDS
Many computational pathway analysis methods gain power
given a larger biological network. A single new link can
lead to a significant new biological discovery. Collecting
Figure 1. The 40 largest databases in Pathguide. Pathway databases are diverse, both in volume of data (Database size, vertical) and in the attention they appear to
generate (Popularity Estimate, horizontal). Database size is the sum of interaction and pathway records (where available; some database statistics may be
incomplete). Popularity Estimate is taken to be the number of web pages in Google that mention the database homepage URL. Five main database categories
(see symbol legend) out of eight are represented in the top 40. Databases in multiple categories are only represented in one (arbitrarily chosen) category. See the
Pathguide website for expanded database names.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue D505
as many high-quality links as possible for network analysis
requires well organized and convenient pathway database
access. Databases that are freely accessible (open-access)
and support standard languages facilitate their distribution
and use. To encourage this, databases are highlighted if
they are ‘Free to all users’ and can be downloaded in a standard
format, such as the Proteomics Standards Initiative Molecular
Interaction (2) and BioPAX (www.biopax.org) pathway
data exchange standards and the Systems Biology Markup
Language (SBML) (3) and CellML (4) pathway simulation
model exchange standards. Biologists looking for data that can
be analyzed in tools supporting these standards and compu-
tational biologists wishing to integrate available pathway data
for global analyses may find this helpful.
IMPLEMENTATION
Pathguide is curated by the authors and regularly updated.
Generation of web pages (HTML) is implemented using the
scripting language PHP with a relational database (MySQL)
backend, which stores all information in a structured manner.
The Google ranking for a particular database is updated using
a Perl script to query the Google SOAP Application Program-
ming Interface for pages anywhere on the Internet that link to
the database homepage address (URL), not counting links
from the database site itself. We have designed Pathguide
to facilitate research on biological pathways and to be com-
plementary to existing database link resources, such as
Michael Galperin’s Molecular Biology Database Collection
(5) and the UBiC Bioinformatics Links Directory (http://
bioinformatics.ubc.ca/ resources/links_directory).
FUTURE DEVELOPMENT
Future plans include adding search features (e.g. show me
all databases with human protein–protein interaction
information), automatically updated database content statistics
(where available), graphical Pathguide content summaries,
improved links to PubMed, differentiating primary (original
content) and secondary (derived or predicted content) data-
bases, automatic URL validation, homepage uptime statistics,
an RSS feed to track updates and to include a section on
pathway tools, a commonly requested feature. Comments,
questions and information about missing pathway resources
are most welcome.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Thanks to Robert Hoffmann for input on the Google ranking,
Emek Demir for manuscript comments, users who have sub-
mitted new pathway resources and the editors of Nucleic Acids
Research for supporting open-access publications. Funding to
pay the Open Access publication charges for this article was
provided by Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Cary,M.P., Bader,G.D. and Sander,C. (2005) Pathway information for
systems biology. FEBS Lett., 579, 1815–1820.
2. Hermjakob,H., Montecchi-Palazzi,L., Bader,G., Wojcik,J., Salwinski,L.,
Ceol,A., Moore,S.,Orchard,S., Sarkans,U., von Mering,C.et al. (2004) The
HUPO PSI’s molecular interaction format—a community standard for the
representation of protein interaction data. Nat. Biotechnol., 22, 177–183.
3. Hucka,M., Finney,A., Sauro,H.M., Bolouri,H., Doyle,J.C., Kitano,H.,
Arkin,A.P., Bornstein,B.J., Bray,D., Cornish-Bowden,A. et al. (2003) The
systems biology markup language (SBML): a medium for representation
and exchange of biochemical network models. Bioinformatics, 19,
524–531.
4. Lloyd,C.M., Halstead,M.D. and Nielsen,P.F. (2004) CellML: its future,
present and past. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol., 85, 433–450.
5. Galperin,M.Y. (2005) The Molecular Biology Database Collection: 2005
update. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D5–D24.
D506 Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, Database issue
