The KEGG resource for deciphering the genome
Minoru Kanehisa*, Susumu Goto, Shuichi Kawashima, Yasushi Okuno and
Masahiro Hattori
Bioinformatics Center, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Uji, Kyoto 611-0011, Japan
Received September 15, 2003; Revised and Accepted September 25, 2003
ABSTRACT
A grand challenge in the post-genomic era is a com-
plete computer representation of the cell and the
organism, which will enable computational predic-
tion of higher-level complexity of cellular processes
and organism behavior from genomic information.
Toward this end we have been developing a
knowledge-based approach for network prediction,
which is to predict, given a complete set of genes in
the genome, the protein interaction networks that
are responsible for various cellular processes.
KEGG at http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/ is the
reference knowledge base that integrates current
knowledge on molecular interaction networks such
as pathways and complexes (PATHWAY database),
information about genes and proteins generated by
genome projects (GENES/SSDB/KO databases) and
information about biochemical compounds and
reactions (COMPOUND/GLYCAN/REACTION data-
bases). These three types of database actually
represent three graph objects, called the protein
network, the gene universe and the chemical uni-
verse. New efforts are being made to abstract
knowledge, both computationally and manually,
about ortholog clusters in the KO (KEGG Orthology)
database, and to collect and analyze carbohydrate
structures in the GLYCAN database.
INTRODUCTION
KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) is a
bioinformatics resource for understanding higher-order func-
tional meanings and utilities of the cell or the organism from
its genome information. It is an integrated resource consisting
of three types of database for genomic, chemical and network
information, and associated software, which are all developed
by the Kanehisa Laboratory (now part of the Bioinformatics
Center) in the Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto
University. While KEGG has cross-references to numerous
outside databases, it is intended to be a self-suf®cient system
for linking genomes to life at the cellular level, containing a
complete set of building blocks (genes and molecules) and
wiring diagrams (interaction networks) for cellular functions.
Eventually, this self-suf®cient system will become a computer
representation of the cell and the organism, and perhaps the
biosphere as well, which will enable in silico analysis of
biological systems (1). Even at the current primitive stage,
KEGG is widely used for analysis of various types of
molecular biological data in order to obtain clues to
higher-order functions.
During the past 2 years we have worked to make the KEGG
resource (2,3) more accessible to automated analysis. For
example, the XML representation of KEGG pathway dia-
grams is useful for automatic drawing of potential networks
identi®ed by two-hybrid experiments as an extension to
known networks. Access to KEGG can now be made through
the KEGG API (SOAP interface to KEGG), which means that
the user can write a program to analyze microarray gene
expression data or to annotate a newly sequenced genome by
automating KEGG queries. In addition, we have released two
new database components: KO for ortholog grouping and
hierarchical classi®cation of genes and GLYCAN for carbo-
hydrate structures. Here we describe the current status and
future plans of the KEGG resource.
THE KEGG DATABASES
Graph representation
To understand the overall architecture, it is useful to know that
KEGG consists of three graph objects for representation and
manipulation of genomic, chemical and network data.
Mathematically, a graph is a set of nodes (building blocks)
and edges (interactions or relations). As shown in Table 1 the
three graph objects are called the gene universe (GENES,
SSDB and KO databases), the chemical universe
(COMPOUND, GLYCAN and REACTION databases), and
the protein network (PATHWAY database). The gene
universe is a conceptual graph object representing ortholog/
paralog relations, operon information and other relationships
between genes in all the completely sequenced genomes. The
chemical universe is another conceptual graph object repre-
senting chemical reactions and structural/functional relations
among metabolites and other biochemical compounds. In
contrast, the protein network is based on biological phe-
nomena, representing known molecular interaction networks
in various cellular processes (2).
Network hierarchy
Another important aspect in the overall architecture of KEGG
is network hierarchy. The protein network, which is the most
unique data object in KEGG, is stored as a collection of
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +81 774 38 3270; Fax: +81 774 38 3269; Email: kanehisa@kuicr.kyoto-u.ac.jp
Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue D277±D280
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkh063
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 32, Database issue ã Oxford University Press 2004; all rights reserved
pathway maps in the PATHWAY database, representing
wiring diagrams of proteins and other gene products respon-
sible for various cellular functions. Re¯ecting the map
resolution and functional modules at different levels, these
pathway maps are hierarchically classi®ed. There are ®ve
categories in the top level (metabolism, genetic information
processing, environmental information processing, cellular
processes and human diseases) and 24 subcategories in the
second level. The third level in the hierarchy corresponds to
individual pathway maps. When the protein network is linked
to the gene universe, the fourth level corresponds to KO
(KEGG Orthology) entries. Thus the hierarchy of gene
functions in KEGG is based on the hierarchy of the protein
network as shown in Table 2.
GENE UNIVERSE
GENES database
The information about individual genes is stored in the
GENES database. As of September 12, 2003 the GENES
database contains 572 881 genes in 155 organisms. The
GENES entries are generated semi-automatically by selecting
and combining various sources including authors' submissions
to GenBank (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genbank/genomes/), the
NCBI RefSeq database (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/),
the EMBL database (ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/embl/
genomes/) and publicly available organism-speci®c databases.
They are then subjected to internal re-annotation, in which we
just assign K numbers for the KO grouping of genes without
updating the description of the genes. Our KO assignment
appears in the ORTHOLOG line of the GENES entry.
SSDB database
SSDB was originally a sequence similarity database contain-
ing precomputed similarity scores by the SSEARCH program
with additional information about best hits and best-best hits
in pairwise genome comparisons (2). We have recently
implemented an automatic procedure, based on a graph
analytical method, to computationally generate ortholog
clusters (OCs) and paralog clusters (PCs) from the huge
Table 1. The three graph objects in KEGG
Graph Node Edge Main databases
Gene universe Gene Any association of genes (ortholog/paralog
relation, sequence/structural similarity,
adjacency on chromosome, expression
similarity)
GENES, SSDB, KO
Chemical universe Chemical compound (including carbohydrate) Any association of compounds (chemical
reactivity, structural similarity, etc.)
COMPOUND, GLYCAN,
REACTION
Protein network Protein (including other gene products) Known interaction/relation of proteins
(direct protein±protein interaction, gene
expression relation, enzyme±enzyme
relation)
PATHWAY
Table 2. The hierarchy of KEGG orthology (KO)
01100 Metabolism
01110 Carbohydrate metabolism
01120 Energy metabolism
01130 Lipid metabolism
01140 Nucleotide metabolism
01150 Amino acid metabolism
00251 Glutamate metabolism
..........
00300 Lysine biosynthesis
K00003 E1.1.1.3, thrA; homoserine dehydrogenase
K00928 E2.7.2.4, lysC; aspartate kinase
K00133 E1.2.1.11, asd; aspartate-semialdehyde dehydrogenase
K01714 E4.2.1.52, dapA; dihydrodipicolinate synthase
K00215 E1.3.1.26, dapB; dihydrodipicolinate reductase
K00674 E2.3.1.117, dapD; 2,3,4,5-tetrahydropyridine-2-carboxylate N-succinyltransferase
K00821 E2.6.1.17; N-succinyldiaminopimelate aminotransferase
K01439 E3.5.1.18, dapE; succinyl-diaminopimelate desuccinylase
K01778 E5.1.1.7, dapF; diaminopimelate epimerase
K01586 E4.1.1.20, lysA; diaminopimelate decarboxylase
..........
00310 Lysine degradation
..........
01160 Metabolism of other amino acids
.........
01200 Genetic information processing
01300 Environmental information processing
01400 Cellular processes
01500 Human disease
D278 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue
SSDB graph, currently containing 200 million edges. The
resulting ortholog clusters can be examined by clicking on the
ORTHOLOG link in the GENES entry.
KO database
When the KEGG project was initiated in 1995, the integration
of genomic information and network information was
achieved via the EC numbers. The EC numbers were common
identi®ers for matching genes in the genome and gene
products (enzymes) in the metabolic pathway. Then, a new
scheme using ortholog identi®ers was introduced (3) to extend
the matching procedure to regulatory pathways and to
overcome various problems inherent in the enzyme nomen-
clature. KO is a further extension of this scheme based on
computational analysis, as well as manual curation, of SSDB
ortholog clusters in order to classify all gene functions and
explore unknown pathways. Each KO entry is identi®ed by the
K number (accession number) with the previous ortholog
identi®er as an alternative name. In future releases of KEGG,
the KO hierarchy (Table 2) will become more complete, and
the current ortholog group tables will be part of the KO
database.
CHEMICAL UNIVERSE
COMPOUND database
The COMPOUND database contains chemical structures of
most known metabolic compounds and some pharmaceutical
and environmental compounds. All chemical structures are
manually entered, computationally veri®ed and continuously
updated. Currently the database contains 10 739 entries, each
of which is identi®ed by the C number (accession number). A
new feature implemented in the COMPOUND database is the
KCF (KEGG Chemical Function) representation of chemical
structures shown in Figure 1 and the resulting graph-
based chemical structure comparison method (4). The
COMPOUND/REACTION databases are being moved from
the ISIS system (5) to the in-house-developed relational
database system, in order to integrate with the GLYCAN
database. Once this is done the substructure search against the
database will be performed more rigorously by our graph
comparison algorithm rather than the bit string comparison in
the ISIS system.
GLYCAN database
GLYCAN is a new addition to the KEGG suite of databases.
We have initiated efforts to collect carbohydrate structures
because of the lack of a publicly available database after the
termination of the CarbBank project (6). The pathway
diagrams for metabolism of complex carbohydrates and
metabolism of complex lipids are now linked to individual
entries of carbohydrate structures in the GLYCAN database.
The reactions catalyzed by glycosyltransferases and other
sugar-related enzymes are represented in the REACTION
database in a simpler form of carbohydrate structures (Fig. 1)
rather than the all-atom representation. Each GLYCAN entry
is identi®ed by the G number (accession number) and the
current total is 10 445 entries, among which only a few
hundred were manually entered and linked to KEGG
pathways. The rest represents unique structures derived from
CarbBank. The GLYCAN database is maintained in a
relational database with the structure drawing tool in Java. A
database search is also made available based on newly
developed algorithms for tree structure comparisons.
REACTION database
The REACTION database contains reaction formulas for
enzymic reactions, currently totaling 5799 entries. Each entry
is identi®ed by the R number (accession number) representing
a unique reaction corresponding to sets of reactants and
products represented by the C number in the COMPOUND
database or the G number in the GLYCAN database. This
should be compared with the EC number, which may
correspond to multiple reaction formulas. The EC number
hierarchy is supposed to represent aspects of enzymatic
reactions, but in reality it often contains aspects of enzyme
molecules. Within the KEGG resource, these two aspects of
EC numbers are clearly distinguished: R numbers for reactions
and K numbers for molecules. We are working to develop a
new hierarchy, tentatively called RC (Reaction Classi®cation),
for understanding chemistry of enzymic reactions.
ENZYME database
The ENZYME database contains enzyme nomenclature with
numerous links to KEGG databases. It is generated semi-
automatically from the enzyme nomenclature website (http://
www.chem.qmul.ac.uk/iubmb/enzyme/). The role of this
database within KEGG has diminished, but the EC number
is still the simplest way to link to KEGG from outside
resources.
PROTEIN NETWORK
PATHWAY database
The protein network in KEGG is an abstract network of gene
products, representing not only the pathway or the complex
Figure 1. Chemical compound structures in the COMPOUND database and
carbohydrate structures in the GLYCAN database are graph objects, where
the nodes are either atoms or monosaccharides and the edges are covalent
bonds. For the purpose of chemical structure comparison, the chemical struc-
ture is converted to the KCF (KEGG Chemical Function) representation
where the same atoms are distinguished by their environments.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue D279
resulting from direct protein±protein interactions, but also the
metabolic network viewed as a network of enzymes, and the
gene regulatory network viewed as a network of transcription
factors and target products (2,3). The PATHWAY database is
a collection of manually drawn diagrams called the KEGG
reference pathway diagrams (maps), each corresponding to a
known network of functional signi®cance. The PATHWAY
database also contains organism-speci®c pathways, which are
automatically generated by superimposing (coloring) genes in
given organisms. The database currently contains 13 457
entries including 235 reference pathway diagrams.
In the past, the pathway diagrams were available only in
GIF (or PNG) image ®les. Although the coordinates of nodes
(boxes) could be obtained from the HTML ®le, it was not
possible to reconstruct the pathway because the edge infor-
mation was not readily available. We have released the KEGG
Markup Language (KGML) as a speci®cation of graph objects
in KEGG. All metabolic pathways and some regulatory
pathways are now available in KGML, enabling computa-
tional reconstruction and manipulation of KEGG pathways.
ACCESS METHODS
The primary mode of access to KEGG is through the
GenomeNet website at http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/.
Different components of the KEGG resource can most
conveniently be accessed from the KEGG table of contents
page at http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/kegg2.html. The four
databases for the chemical universe, COMPOUND,
GLYCAN, REACTION and ENZYME are collectively called
the LIGAND database with a separate home page at http://
www.genome.ad.jp/ligand/. Table 3 summarizes these and
other useful URLs including additional databases not covered
in the present article.
For computerized access to KEGG, the SOAP server is open
to academic users at http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/soap/. All
the KEGG databases, except SSDB, are also available to
academic users by anonymous FTP at http://www.genome.
ad.jp/anonftp/.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The computational resource was provided by the
Bioinformatics Center, Institute for Chemical Research,
Kyoto University. This work was supported by grants from
the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and
Technology of Japan, the Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science and the Japan Science and Technology Agency.
REFERENCES
1. Kanehisa,M. and Bork,P. (2003) Bioinformatics in the post-sequence era.
Nature Genet., 33, 305±310.
2. Kanehisa,M., Goto,S., Kawashima,S. and Nakaya,A. (2002) The KEGG
databases at GenomeNet. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 42±46.
3. Kanehisa,M. and Goto,S. (2000) KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes
and Genomes. Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 27±30.
4. Hattori,M., Okuno,Y., Goto,S. and Kanehisa,M. (2003) Development of
a chemical structure comparison method for integrated analysis of
chemical and genomic information in the metabolic pathways. J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 125, 11853±11865.
5. Goto,S., Okuno,Y., Hattori,M., Nishioka,T. and Kanehisa,M. (2001)
LIGAND: database of chemical compounds and reactions in biological
pathways. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 402±404.
6. Doubet,S., Bock,K., Smith,D., Darvill,A. and Albersheim,P. (1989) The
complex carbohydrate structure database. Trends Biochem. Sci., 14,
475±477.
Table 3. URLs for the KEGG resource
Database/content URL
KEGG table of contents (PATHWAY, GENES, GENOME, KO, etc.) http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/kegg2.html
SSDB http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/ssdb/
LIGAND (COMPOUND, GLYCAN, REACTION, ENZYME) http://www.genome.ad.jp/ligand/
EXPRESSION http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/expression/
BRITE http://www.genome.ad.jp/brite/
KGML http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/xml/
KEGG API http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/soap/
Anonymous FTP http://www.genome.ad.jp/anonftp/
KEGG home page http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/
DBGET home page http://www.genome.ad.jp/dbget/
GenomeNet home page http://www.genome.ad.jp/
D280 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, Database issue
