The FoldX web server: an online force field
Joost Schymkowitz*, Jesper Borg2, Francois Stricher1, Robby Nys1,
Frederic Rousseau and Luis Serrano1
Switch Laboratory, Flanders Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology (VIB), Vrije Universiteit Brussel,
Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussel, Belgium, 1European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Meyerhofstrasse 1,
62117 Heidelberg, Germany and 2Niels Bohr Institute, Blegdamsvej 17, DK2100 Copenhagen, Denmark
Received February 14, 2005; Accepted March 10, 2005
ABSTRACT
FoldX is an empirical force field that was developed
for the rapid evaluation of the effect of mutations on
the stability, folding and dynamics of proteins and
nucleic acids. The core functionality of FoldX, namely
the calculation of the free energy of a macromolecule
based on its high-resolution 3D structure, is now
publicly available through a web server at http://
foldx.embl.de/. The current release allows the cal-
culation of the stability of a protein, calculation of
the positions of the protons and the prediction of
water bridges, prediction of metal binding sites and
the analysis of the free energy of complex formation.
Alanine scanning, the systematic truncation of side
chains to alanine, is also included. In addition, some
reporting functions have been added, and it is now
possible to print both the atomic interaction networks
that constitute the protein, print the structural and
energetic details of the interactions per atom or per
residue, as well as generate a general quality report
of the pdb structure. This core functionality will be
further extended as more FoldX applications are
developed.
INTRODUCTION
A wide range of strategies for estimating protein energetics
exists, ranging from methods based on the statistical analysis
of known protein structures at one extreme, to more physically
based methods, at the other. These are designated by Lazaridis
and Karplus (1) as statistical (SEEF) and physical (PEEF)
effective energy functions, respectively. A third class of meth-
ods, basedmainly on empirical data derived from experimental
work on proteins, called EEEF, for empirical effective energy
functions, are also widely used (2). The FoldX force field
(FOLDEF) belongs to this group and was developed for the
fast and accurate estimation of mutational free energy changes
on the stability of a protein, or a protein complex (3). It was
also successfully applied to the prediction of protein folding
pathways in a Go-like approach (4–6). FoldX aims to describe
the energetic contributions to protein stability in simple empir-
ical terms that allow easy interpretation by non-specialists. It is
thus geared at high-throughput structural biocomputing tasks,
such as screening the effect of SNPs on protein stability (7)
or in silico drug lead screening. Here we present the FoldX
web server, which provides free access to a selection of FoldX-
based structural analysis tools.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The FoldX web server is hosted on IBM X35 server, with
2 Xeon 2.4 GHz processors and 2 GB RAM. The operating
system is Redhat Linux 9.0, the web server is Tomcat 5.0.25
and the database engine is postgreSQL 7.4.1.
The ScienceHost framework for hosting scientific predic-
tion algorithms on the World Wide Web is a database driven
application composed of three layers. (i) The prediction algo-
rithm is installed on the same machine as the web server or on
a more powerful calculation cluster. (ii) On the same computer
as the first layer, a calculation server application is installed
that can accept commands from the web server and control
the algorithm accordingly. The only requirement is that the
scientific software needs to be command line controllable.
(iii) On the web server a Java-servlet based application is
installed that reads information about commands, options
and users from an SQL database and displays them in HTML
to the user. In this way, a general framework is created that can
rapidly be configured to host different applications.
THE FoldX FORCE FIELD
The details of the FoldX calculation fall outside the scope of
this manuscript. However, we present a brief overview that
should allow the user to interpret the results obtained from the
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +32 2 629 1425; Fax: +32 2 629 2963; Email: joost.schymkowitz@skynet.be
ª The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
W382–W388 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
doi:10.1093/nar/gki387
web server. The following linear combination of empirical
terms is used to calculate free energy (in kcal mol1) by
FoldX.
DG ¼ a  DGvdw þ b  DGsolvH þ c  DGsolvP þ d  DGwb
þ e  DGhbond þ f  DGel þ g  DGkon þ h  TDSmc
þ k  TDSsc þ l  DGclash:
In this expression (a . . . l) are relative weights of the differ-
ent energy terms used for the free energy calculation. The
interaction with the solvent is treated in two steps: first, the
bulk solvent is treated as a desolvation term that is continu-
ously scaled with the burial of an atom and separated into
contributions from hydrophobic (DGsolvH) and polar (DGsolvP)
groups. These solvation parameters have been derived from
experiments in which amino acids are transferred from water
to an organic solvent, this is assumed to mimic the transition
that is experienced by an amino acid during folding from
solvent exposure in the unfolded state to burial in a hydro-
phobic environment in the native state. In addition, those water
molecules that have a persistent interaction with groups of the
protein, i.e. make more than two hydrogen bonds with the
protein, are calculated explicitly in the DGwb term (8,9).
The combination of a continuous solvation scale with an
explicit consideration of the essential water molecules allows
fast calculations while providing essential details. The Van der
Waals terms, DGvdw, is calculated in a similar fashion to the
desolvation, but now taking into account experimental transfer
energies from water to vapour. Hydrogen bonds are calculated
on the basis of simple geometric considerations and their
energy, DGhbond, is inferred from protein engineering double
mutant cycles. The electrostatic contribution to the free
energy, DGel, is calculated from a simple implementation of
Coulomb’s law, in which the dielectric constant is scaled with
the burial of the bond under consideration. Hypothetical atoms
are included in the calculations of the Coulombic interactions
in order to capture some specific aspects of protein stability:
(i) charged atoms are placed at the N- and C-terminal of each
a-helix, to obtain some measure of the helix dipole interaction
and (ii) aromatic rings carry positive charges on the edges and
negative charges above the centre of the ring. For protein
complexes, an additional electrostatic contribution is calcu-
lated between atoms of different polypeptide chains, DGkon,
based on the empirical equation of Schreiber et al. (10), which
was shown to give a good estimation of the association rate
(kon) of complex formation. An important difference between
FoldX and other force fields is the crude entropy estimation
that is used to obtain a measure of the free energy. Entropy
calculations usually involve large simulations of the con-
formational freedom of the side chains and the backbone of
the protein. In FoldX the entropic penalty for fixing the back-
bone in a given conformation, DSmc, is derived from a stat-
istical analysis of the phi–psi distribution of a given amino
acid as observed in a set of non-redundant high-resolution
crystal structures. This entropy is scaled by (i) the accessibility
of the main chain atoms and (ii) energetics of hydrogen bond
interactions made by the corresponding residue or its direct
neighbours. The entropy cost of fixing a side chain in a par-
ticular conformation, DSsc, is obtained by scaling a set entropy
parameters calculated by Abagayan and co-workers (11) to the
burial of the side chain. Finally, the DGclash term provides a
measure of the steric overlaps between atoms in the structure.
There are two methods of incorporating the resulting repulsive
energy into the FoldX calculation: (i) when analysing point
mutations it is recommended to use a soft penalization of the
Van der Waals clashes; however, (ii) when doing protein
design full penalizations should be applied.
STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS
The highest accuracy in the FoldX predictions is achieved
when the energy difference can be calculated between two
well-defined structures, such as between the wild type and
a mutant, or between the bound and unbound forms of a pro-
tein complex (to determine the binding free energy). The
difference in the calculated free energies (DDG) between the
final state (the mutant) and the reference state (the wild-type
protein) correlates well with the experimentally observed
change in stability. On the other hand, the free energy of
folding is calculated from the difference in Gibbs free energy
between the detailed 3D structure found in the PDB file and a
hypothetical unfolded reference state of which no structural
detail is available. The main assumption in this approach is the
absence of persistent structure in the denatured state, which in
a range of proteins was experimentally shown to be only partly
correct. Therefore, although the free energy for folding pre-
dicted by the FoldX force field for most small protein domains
yields a number between5.0 and 15 kcal mol1, this value
should not be considered as absolute since it could have
large error. Nevertheless, positive energies are normally indic-
ative of problems with the structure under scrutiny and as such,
one should bear in mind when using FoldX that the best results
are obtained when comparing known structures. Indeed,
FoldX was calibrated using experimental mutational free
energy changes from a collection of more than 1000 point
mutants, covering XX proteins (9), and in its current release
yields a correlation of 0.81 with a SD of 0.46 kcal mol1
between calculated and experimental DDGs.
THE FoldX WEB SERVER
The FoldX web server is located at http://foldx.embl.de/ and
requires a password and a login to connect, either as a guest
or as a registered user (registration is free). The web
engine behind FoldX web server is a general framework for
hosting scientific software on the World Wide Web called
ScienceHostª (see Materials and Methods) that also drives
the TANGO (12) website (http://TANGO.embl.de/). Besides
the web interface, it is also possible to download the executa-
ble, allowing analysis on a large scale locally (Figure 1), as
well as the manual and the related publications.
Initiation of a calculation job on the FoldX web server starts
with uploading a maximum of five protein structures (pdb
files) for simultaneous analysis (Figure 1), either by uploading
the pdb files directly from a local computer or by retrieving
them from the Brookhaven Protein Data Bank (13) using the
four-letter pdb identifier. Protein structures that are selected
simultaneously are analysed using identical settings. To apply
different settings or analyses, the user needs to initiate several
calculations. The different FoldX calculations and analyses
to be applied to the uploaded structures can be selected
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W383
through tick-boxes. The user is then directed to the ‘Options’
tab, where parameters can be set to provide extra control over
the calculations (see below and Figure 1). Upon finishing the
requested job the FoldX server sends an email notification to
the address specified by the user. The email contains a direct
link to the results tab, where the user can pick up the output
bundled in a single zip-compressed archive (Figure 1). This file
will always include at least three text files: error.txt, logfile.txt
Figure 1.How to set up a calculation in the FoldXweb server.After selecting the pdb files by browsing the local pc or by entering the pdb identifier for download from
the database, the user selects the calculations through tick boxes. After setting some optional parameters, the web server displays the results for download.
W384 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
and a file named yourloginyouremailjobnumber
runlog.txt. The file error.txt will encompass any error that
occurred during the analysis and logfile.txt will contain
information about obvious problems in the structure such as
Van der Waals clashes and unfavourable dihedral and torsion
angles.
OPTIONS
Temperature. The default temperature setting in FoldX is
298 K. Although the parameter can be changed, it should
be kept in mind that deviation of >10 K from the default
value will not generate relevant results since many of the
parameters in FoldX were derived from experiments carried
out around this temperature; these include the transfer energies
from water to vapour and organic solvents among others.
Although some scaling is possible mathematically, one should
repeat the basic experiments under different conditions to
extend the predictive range of FoldX.
Water. As discussed above, FoldX uses explicit representa-
tion of those water molecules that specifically interact with the
protein through two or more hydrogen bonds. These water
molecules are essential to correctly predict mutational free
energy changes near the surface of the protein or in protein–
protein or protein–DNA complexes. As the prediction of water
bridges slows down the FoldX calculation and the water
bridges are not essential to the analysis of amino acid residues
in the core of the protein, the Water option allows three
settings. (i) With the PREDICT setting, FoldX will predict
the water bridges (J.W.H. Schymkowitz, F. Rousseau,
I.C. Martins, J. Ferkinghoff-Borg, F. Stricher and L. Serrano,
manuscript in preparation). (ii) With the CRYSTAL setting,
FoldX reads the positions of the water molecules that are
present in the pdb file that make at least two hydrogen
bonds with the protein. (iii) With the IGNORE setting,
FoldX is instructed not to include explicit consideration of
water molecules.
Ionic strength. The ionic strength of the ‘buffer’ surrounding
the protein, by default set to 0.05 M, is used in the calculation
of the electrostatic interactions. A higher ionic strength will
tend to lower the electrostatics on the surface of the protein
owing to shielding effects.
VdW design. The steric overlaps between atoms are called
Van der Waals clashes. The VdW design option allows two
methods for handling these overlaps. (i) When set to false,
FoldX will ascribe small overlaps to experimental uncertain-
ties and hence ignore them. For most structures this setting
yields reasonable energies. (ii) When set to true, FoldX assigns
strong repulsive energies to the overlaps. Although the latter
setting is a more accurate representation of the quality of a
structure, it should only be applied to structures of the highest
quality or for the evaluation of protein design models.
PDB FILES
When selecting pdb files to be used in FoldX calculations,
a few considerations should be made: (i) FoldX reads the
old style pdb format and currently cannot process files in
the mmCIF format. (ii) In general FoldX assigns better free
energies and detects less problems in high-resolution crystal
structures (resolutions of 2.6 s or better) compared with
lower resolution cyrstal structures and most nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) structures. Although the discrepancy with
NMR structures could arguably be due to the overtraining
of FoldX parameters on crystallographic structures, our data
suggest otherwise as NMR structures that are refined using
additional experimental data, such as dipolar couplings,
approximate the free energy observed for their crystallo-
graphic counterparts (data not shown). (iii) The pdb format is
not as standardized as could be expected and FoldX does not
correctly read all files due to the variety of deviations that are
present in a relatively large amount of structures. Although the
pdb-reader in FoldX is continually extended to handle more
exceptions, standardizing the format of anomalous files most
often solves the problem—this can easily be achieved by
opening and saving the file using Swiss PDB viewer (14) or
WHATIF (15).
CALCULATIONS AND ANALYSES
Stability. The most basic analysis performs a free energy
calculation and outputs the Gibbs free energy of folding
(in kcal mol1) decomposed in the different energy terms
used by FoldX. Apart from the components discussed in Intro-
duction, the following energy terms can be found in the output:
Backbone Hbond represents the contribution of hydrogen-
bond formation between backbone atoms, all other hydrogen
bonds involving at least one side chain atom are summed up in
Sidechain Hbond. Van der Waals clashes represent the pen-
alties applied to the overall energy when atoms interpenetrate,
i.e. when the distance between two atoms is less than the sum
of their Van der Waals radii, resulting in a strong repulsive
interaction. These clashes are divided in torsional clash, which
arises when a side chain adopts a conformation that causes an
overlap between its own atoms or its backbone and Van der
Waals clashes, which are the clashes between atoms from
different residues. Helix dipole is the electrostatic contribution
due to the inclusion of the helix dipole (see above). Disulfide
represents the stabilizing energy given by the formation of
disulfide bridges, calculated as entropy restrictions in the
unfolded state by the logN rule of Creighton (16,17). Partial
covalent represents specific bonds between a metal ion and
polar or charged atoms in the protein are calculated separately
as partial covalent interactions. Entropy complex is a specific
entropy cost that arises when the rotational and translational
freedom of two protein molecules is restricted in respect to
each other due to their binding. The additional entropy cost of
complex formation caused by the conformational restriction of
backbone or side chains is included in the standard entropy
components of FoldX (see above) (Figure 2).
PrintNetworks. In order to achieve a free energy calculation,
FoldX computes per energy component discussed in Intro-
duction an interaction network between all the atoms in the
protein. The PrintNetworks command generates seven files, in
which all the pairwise interactions in the different networks are
listed, grouped by residue and by atom. charge_bonds.txt con-
tains the network of electrostatic interactions, including the
energy (in kcal mol1) assigned to each pairwise electrostatic
interaction. contact_bonds.txt describes all the Van der Waals
clashes. The penalty applied for each clash is given, either as
torsion or as sc_clash, depending if the clash is between atoms
of the same residue or between atoms of different residues,
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W385
respectively. disulfide_bonds.txt is the list of the cysteines
involved in disulfide bridges. H_bonds.txt contains the list
of hydrogen bonds that are stabilizing the protein; for each
bond the acceptor or donor atoms are specified. partcov_
bonds.txt contains the list of interactions between metal
ions and protein atoms. volumetric_bonds.txt in FoldX, inter-
action energies are scaled with the solvent accessibility of the
atoms involved in the interaction. The solvent accessibility is
estimated using the atomic occupancy method (Occ) (18–20)
which sums the volumes of the atoms j surrounding a given
atom i. The occupancy of an atom i, Occ(i), is calculated using
an envelope function (21) with a distance cut-off of 6 s (9).
The numbers produced by this equation approximate closely
the results of a surface accessible area calculation, which is
traditionally performed by rolling a water molecule over the
surface of the protein, but its execution is significantly faster.
The list of volumetric bonds contains for each pair of atoms
the volume of atom i that is occupied by atom j and vice
versa (the occupancy function is not symmetric). In case
the PREDICT water options is selected, the list of all existing
water bridges is output in water_bonds.txt; this specifies the
position of the water molecules as well as the protein atoms by
which they are coordinated.
PDBfile. This command prints a pdb-style file with the
coordinates of each atom of the protein. FoldX computes
the position of all protons associated with the atoms of the
protein using a set of canonical coordinates for each type of
amino acid. The protons of methyl groups are not included in
this computation, since FoldX does not represent them expli-
citly. As described in Guerois et al. (9) and Schymkowitz et al.
(manuscript in preparation), FoldX represents the essential
waters in a protein, i.e. the waters making at least two hydro-
gen bonds with the protein. These so-called water-bridges are
computed using a collection of canonical waters for each polar
atom of each residue, extracted from positional clustering of
water molecules in high resolution crystal structures. If the
appropriate options are selected, PDB file also prints the
calculated protons and/or the predicted waters.
AnalyseComplex. The interaction between two molecules is
driven by the free energy of binding, (DGbinding), that is dir-
ectly related to the thermodynamic dissociation constant (Kd)
by the following equation: DGbinding = RT ln(Kd), where R is
the gas constant (1.9859 cal mol1 K1) and T is the temper-
ature in kelvin. In order to calculate the free energy of binding
of a complex AB, FoldX computes the Gibbs energies of the
complex (DGAB) and of the two molecules A and B alone.
The interaction energy is then given by: DGbinding = DGAB 
(DGA + DGB). The output contains the DGbinding for each pair
of polypeptide chains in the pdb file, decomposed into the
different energy terms used by FoldX (see above) plus an
additional term that reflects the intrachain clashes of residues
forming part of the interface. This term needs to be considered
since a residue that makes a good interaction with another
polypeptide chain could go unnoticed in the analysis above
when it adopts a strained conformation: the large clash penalty
assigned to the unfavourable conformation would more than
compensate for the beneficial interaction energy between the
polypeptide chains.
SequenceDetail. For each residue this command generates a
detailed list of features, such as contribution to the total free
energy computed by FoldX, decomposed in the different
Figure 2.A typical result of the FoldXweb server: a stability analysis of an SH3
domain (1shg). (A) The free energy of folding (the stability) of the protein
broken down into the energy components used by FoldX is shown. (B) The
contribution of each residue to the stability of the protein and (C) a pdb file
colour coded according to the data in (B)—blue indicates highly stable regions
and red indicates instable regions.
W386 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
energy terms. Furthermore, the burial of the residue is given,
divided in main chain and side chain burial. FoldX also out-
puts the occupancy of the residue, i.e. the volume occupied by
protein atoms around the atoms of the side chain or the main
chain. Finally, the backbone dihedral angles are given as well
as the secondary structure assignment, this is done according
to the dssp algorithm (22) that is based on the hydrogen bond
pattern, extended with consideration of the dihedral angles.
The different secondary structure elements indicated are: E for
extended, b for parallel beta-strand, B for anti-parallel beta-
strand, a for a-helix, 3 for 3–10 helix and T for turn. In
addition, helix capping elements are indicated with c for C-
cap and n for N-cap.
AtomDetail. For each atom this command details a list
of different characteristics. Among them, the occupancy
(ContRat) and the burial (Facc) of each atom are given,
as well as some energy terms: the electrostatic interaction
(Electro), the clashes this atom have with atoms belonging
to the same (torsion) or another residue (VdWClash), the
hydrogen bonding energy assigned to this atom if engaged
in one (or more) H-bond (Hbond), the energy assigned if
the atom is involved in a disulfide bridge (disulfide) and if
the atom is at the interface of a complex, the electrostatic
contribution of complex formation (energy_kon). Finally,
should the atom coordinate a metal ion, the energy assigned
to the partially covalent bond ( partcov) and the number of
such bonds (partcovbonds) are output.
QualityAssessment. A report is generated that lists the most
obvious problems detected in the structure, including residues
with impossible omega dihedral angles or highly unfavour-
able backbone dihedral angles or improbable side chain dihed-
ral angles for prolines (c1 and c2), presence of strong overlaps
(Van der Waals clashes) between atoms, as well as missing
atoms and gaps in the backbone.
Alascan. The command performs a virtual alanine scanning
of the protein and evaluates the direct effect each single point
mutation has on the overall stability of the protein. Each
position (except glycine and alanine) of the given protein is
truncated to Alanine and the position of the neighboring side
chains is optimized. The result given is the difference in
energy (DDG, in kcal mol1) between the ‘mutant’ and the
‘wild-type’ structure, decomposed into the FoldX energy
terms.
Complex_alascan. This command performs a virtual ala-
nine scanning of the binding surface between two proteins or
peptides. The side chains in the interface between the poly-
peptide chains are systematically mutated to alanine, the rest
of the structure is relaxed and the effect of the truncation on the
binding energy between the chains is calculated, decomposed
into the FoldX energy terms.
FoldX AND OTHER ONLINE RESOURCES
TANGO (11). FoldX is developed for free energy calculations
of biological macromolecules based on the full structural
detail of their all atom crystal structures. For protein aggrega-
tion no such detail is available, although recently the first
ever crystal structure of an amyloid fibre was released (23).
The crystal structure confirms the widespread observation in
the field that protein aggregates are generally rich in cross-
beta structure (24), which allows a low-resolution structural
approach to predict protein aggregation. The statistical
mechanics algorithm TANGO, publicly available at http://
TANGO.embl.de/, provides such a predictive model. When
calculating the tendency of an amino acid sequence to form
b-sheet aggregates, TANGO considers a phase space that
encompasses several local structural motifs, as well as the
native state. The latter state needs to be included since
aggregation may be increased quite dramatically by a mutation
that does not alter intrinsic aggregation parameters, such as
hydrophobicity or charge, but that alternatively destabilizes
the native state of protein. Hence, as one of the input para-
meters to TANGO, the stability of the native state can be
specified. We obtained good results using the changes in pro-
tein stability predicted by FoldX as an input for the TANGO
algorithm in order to obtain a prediction of aggregation with
increased accuracy. In this fashion, TANGO predicts correctly
both the disease causing and protective mutations in a wide
range of proteins including Alzheimers’ Ab peptide, lysozyme
and transthyretin (12).
SNPEffect (7). The base unit of the variability of a genome
is the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), the change of
1 bp. SNPs hold promise to better our understanding of
the differences between individuals in a population, such as
responses to medical therapy or allergic reactions. A subset of
SNPs cause a non-synonymous codon change in a protein-
coding region. A mutation engine has been developed for
FoldX, but it is not currently released to the public domain
and is awaiting publication. However, the SNPEffect server,
located at http://snpeffect.vib.be/, contains the FoldX analysis
of the structural effect of human SNPs and disease related
point mutations available in the Ensembl database for
which a wild-type crystal structure could be retrieved. The
repertoire of mutations is continually being extended.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this
article was provided by European Commission LSHG-CT-
2003-505520.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Lazaridis,T. and Karplus,M. (2000) Effective energy functions for
protein structure prediction. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., 10, 139–145.
2. Mendes,J., Guerois,R. and Serrano,L. (2002) Energy estimation in
protein design. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., 12, 441–446.
3. Kiel,C., Serrano,L. and Herrmann,C. (2004) A detailed thermodynamic
analysis of ras/effector complex interfaces. J. Mol. Biol., 340,
1039–1058.
4. Guerois,R. andSerrano,L. (2001)Proteindesignbasedon foldingmodels.
Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., 11, 101–106.
5. Guerois,R. and Serrano,L. (2000) The SH3-fold family: experimental
evidence and prediction of variations in the folding pathways.
J. Mol. Biol., 304, 967–982.
6. Lindorff-Larsen,K., Paci,E., Serrano,L., Dobson,C.M. and
Vendruscolo,M. (2003) Calculation ofmutational free energy changes in
transition states for protein folding. Biophys. J., 85, 1207–1214.
7. Reumers,J., Schymkowitz,J., Ferkinghoff-Borg,J., Stricher,F.,
Serrano,L. and Rousseau,F. (2005) SNPeffect: a database mapping
molecular phenotypic effects of human non-synonymous coding SNPs.
Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D527–D532.
8. Petukhov,M., Cregut,D., Soares,C.M. and Serrano,L. (1999) Local
water bridges and protein conformational stability. Protein Sci.,
8, 1982–1989.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W387
9. Guerois,R., Nielsen,J.E. and Serrano,L. (2002) Predicting changes in
the stability of proteins and protein complexes: a study of more than
1000 mutations. J. Mol. Biol., 320, 369–387.
10. Selzer,T., Albeck,S. and Schreiber,G. (2000) Rational design of faster
associating and tighter binding protein complexes. Nature Struct. Biol.,
7, 537–541.
11. Abagyan,R.A. and Totrov,M.M. (1994) Biased probability Monte Carlo
conformational searches and electrostatic calculations for peptides and
proteins. J. Mol. Biol., 235, 983–1002.
12. Fernandez-Escamilla,A.M., Rousseau,F., Schymkowitz,J. and
Serrano,L. (2004) Prediction of sequence-dependent and mutational
effects on the aggregation of peptides and proteins. Nat. Biotechnol.,
22, 1302–1306.
13. Bourne,P.E., Westbrook,J.D., Berman,H.M., Gilliland,G.L.,
Flippen-Anderson,J.L. and Team,P. (2003) The protein data bank (PDB)
as a research tool. Abstr. Pap. Am. Chem. S, 226, U302–U302.
14. Guex,N. and Peitsch,M.C. (1997) SWISS-MODEL and the
Swiss-PdbViewer: an environment for comparative protein modeling.
Electrophoresis, 18, 2714–2723.
15. Vriend,G. (1990) WHAT IF: a molecular modeling and drug design
program. J. Mol. Graph, 8, 52–56.
16. Zhang,R.M. and Snyder,G.H. (1989) Dependence of formation of
small disulfide loops in two-cysteine peptides on the number and
types of intervening amino acids. J. Biol. Chem., 264,
18472–18479.
17. Darby,N. and Creighton,T.E. (1995) Disulfide bonds in protein folding
and stability. Methods Mol. Biol., 40, 219–252.
18. Colonna-Cesari,F. and Sander,C. (1990) Excluded volume
approximation to protein-solvent interaction. The solvent contact model.
Biophys. J., 57, 1103–1107.
19. Holm,L. and Sander,C. (1992) Evaluation of protein models by atomic
solvation preference. J. Mol. Biol., 225, 93–105.
20. Stouten,P.F.W., Froemmel,C., Nakamura,H. and Sander,C. (1993)
An effective solvation term based on atomic occupancies for use in
protein simulations. Mol. Simul., 10, 97–120.
21. Lee,B. andRichards,F.M. (1971) The interpretation of protein structures:
estimation of static accessibility. J. Mol. Biol., 55, 379–400.
22. Hooft,R.W., Sander,C., Scharf,M. and Vriend,G. (1996)
The PDBFINDER database: a summary of PDB, DSSP and
HSSP information with added value. Comput. Appl. Biosci., 12,
525–529.
23. Makin,O.S., Atkins,E., Sikorski,P., Johansson,J. and Serpell,L.C. (2005)
Molecular basis for amyloid fibril formation and stability. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA, 102, 315–320.
24. Dobson,C.M. (2002) Protein-misfolding diseases: getting out of shape.
Nature, 418, 729–730.
W388 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
