PDB_TM: selection and membrane localization of
transmembrane proteins in the protein data bank
Ga´bor E. Tusna´dy, Zsuzsanna Doszta´nyi and Istva´n Simon*
Institute of Enzymology, BRC, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, H-1518 Budapest, P.O. Box 7, Hungary
Received July 16, 2004; Revised and Accepted September 6, 2004
ABSTRACT
PDB_TM is a database for transmembrane proteins
with known structures. It aims to collect all trans-
membrane proteins that are deposited in the protein
structure database (PDB) and to determine their
membrane-spanning regions. These assignments
are based on the TMDET algorithm, which uses only
structural information to locate the most likely posi-
tion of the lipid bilayer and to distinguish between
transmembraneandglobular proteins. This algorithm
was applied to all PDB entries and the results were
collected in the PDB_TM database. By using TMDET
algorithm, thePDB_TMdatabasecanbeautomatically
updated every week, keeping it synchronized with
the latest PDB updates. The PDB_TM database is
available at http://www.enzim.hu/PDB_TM.
INTRODUCTION
Integral membrane proteins represent about 20–30% of the
total proteins of various organisms (1–3). Despite their import-
ant physiological roles, they are highly underrepresented in the
protein structure database (PDB) (4), due to the difficulties in
crystallizing them in an aqueous environment. Among the
>25 000 structures that are deposited in the PDB so far, the
number of membrane protein structures hardly exceeds 400,
which represents around 30–40 different folds only. A com-
plete list of transmembrane proteins (TMPs) is difficult to
extract from the PDB that is dominated by water-soluble pro-
teins, mainly because the annotation of PDB files is not reli-
able in terms of the transmembrane character of the deposited
protein structures. For example, on entering the keyword
‘transmembrane’ into the search field on the PDB home
page, the search resulted in 1508 hits (in July, 2004). There
are only 310 of these proteins, which are really TMPs, whereas
many others contain only the water-soluble domain of TMPs.
At the same time, 114 actual TMPs were missed by the key-
word search. Therefore, to determine the type of a protein in
the PDB, the actual coordinates of the proteins have to be
analyzed.
A separate issue that is specific to TMP structures is the
identification of membrane-spanning regions. This informa-
tion is not included in the PDB files, as the lipid molecules
are removed before the process of structure determination.
Therefore, no direct experimental data is available about
how the protein spans the membrane (5). Although the trans-
membrane character and the likely position of the membrane
can be guessed by inspecting individual cases to ensure com-
pleteness and consistency, an automated approach is required
to identify membrane-spanning regions. The structures of
these proteins are often of low resolution, or correspond to
only very small fragments, in which cases automatic assign-
ment can be quite challenging.
We have recently developed an algorithm (6), called
TMDET, to find the most likely position of the membrane,
and to distinguish between transmembrane and non-
transmembrane proteins or protein segments by using their
coordinates only. The TMDET algorithm allows the appro-
priate classification of low-resolution structures, as well as
cases when only a fragment or a partial structure of a multi-
chain protein complex is available. The discrimination power
of TMDET algorithm is >98%; therefore, it can be used to
create and maintain a database that contains the TMPs of
known 3D structures, as well as to calculate the possible
membrane localization of these proteins.
Here we present the details of the resulting database,
PDB_TM, and its usage on the world wide web. The aim
of this database is 2-fold. First, it assigns a transmembrane
character for each entry in the PDB, which allows the con-
struction of a comprehensive and up-to-date list of all mem-
brane proteins and segments with known structures. Second, it
identifies the location of the lipid bilayer that is relative to the
coordinates system of the molecule. This database would be
useful to anyone who seeks to study any particular TMP. For
example, it can help to assign whether a binding site is located
in the lipid or in the aqueous phase, which can be important to
design a drug that binds to a certain part of a receptor. Bio-
informatists who compile statistical analysis on TMPs are also
potential users. What is more, since PDB_TM identifies all
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +36 1 466 9276; Fax: +36 1 466 5465; Email: simon@enzim.hu
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use permissions, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org.
ª 2005, the authors
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 33, Database issue ª Oxford University Press 2005; all rights reserved
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D275–D278
doi:10.1093/nar/gki002
TMPs in the PDB, the rest of the PDB is a pure database
of non-transmembrane proteins, therefore such information
might be useful for scientists who work on databases of
water-soluble proteins.
DATABASE CREATION AND MAINTENANCE
The technical details of the TMDET algorithm, as well as the
initial version of PDB_TM database can be found in our recent
article (6). Here we briefly summarize the creation of the data-
base: TMDET algorithm was applied to all files in the PDB. For
the sake of simplicity, virus and pilus proteins as well as entries
that contained nucleotides (RNA or DNA sequences) and
peptides <15 residues in length were omitted. The TMDET
algorithm is based on an empirical measure, the Q-value (6),
which describes the manner in which a given slice of a protein
fits into a membranous environment. For each protein, an
exhaustive search is carried out by varying the position
and orientation of the slice, in order to find the maximum of
the Q-values with the corresponding most likely location of the
membrane. If the TMDET algorithm resulted in a maximum
Q-value below a predefined threshold, the PDB entry was
classified as a globular protein. If the value was above an
upper selection limit, the PDB entry was classified as a
TMP. In a small number of cases, for which the Q-values
fell between the lower and upper selection limit, the transmem-
brane character could not be assigned confidently. In theses
cases, the decision was made manually based on the annotation
of the PDB file, the annotation of the corresponding swiss-prot
entries (7), and when in doubt by checking the literature. For all
identified TMPs, our algorithm also determined the number
and type of transmembrane segments, localization of mem-
brane that is relative to the protein coordinates and localization
of each sequence part that is relative to the membrane.
The number of transmembrane segments does not include
non-canonical elements within the membrane region. Some
alpha helical proteins contain segments that do not cross the
membrane, but turn back at the middle of the membrane [e.g.
aquaporin, 1fqy, (8)], whereas the inside of the pore that is
formed by beta-barrel proteins are basically shielded from the
membrane, and can accommodate alpha helical segments as
well [e.g. the translocator domain of a bacterial autotransporter,
1uyo, (9)]. The algorithm is able to identify the correct topology
even when these elements are present in the structure.
The database is updated every week when the new PDB
entries are released, by running the TMDET algorithm on each
new PDB file. A typical run on an average PDB file takes a few
seconds on a Pentium 4, 2.4 GHz personal computer, thus the
update of the database is around one or two hours for the
computer plus some minutes for checking the results by a
human expert.
DATABASE ORGANIZATION, FILE FORMATS
AND ANNOTATIONS
The PDB_TM database can be regarded as an extension of the
PDB database, because it contains additional information for
each PDB entry. Therefore, the database is organized similarly
to the PDB, the entries are identified by their PDB code and are
grouped in subdirectories according to the middle two char-
acters of their codes. The properties of proteins determined by
the TMDET algorithm are described in xml format, and the
corresponding Document Type Definition can be found on the
PDB_TM homepage.
For non-transmembrane proteins, the xml files contain only
the information that the protein is not of the transmembrane
type, whereas for transmembrane proteins, the xml files con-
tain all the information that were gathered and calculated by
the TMDET algorithm. These are the Q-value on which the
selection was made; the type of the protein according to the
secondary structure of its membrane-spanning residues that
were determined by the DSSP algorithm (alpha-helical,
beta-barrel or unstructured) (10); and some additional infor-
mation on keyword search in the corresponding swiss-prot and
PDB files. The next part of the files contains the membrane
plane definition. It is given by the transformation matrix,
which rotates the molecule such that the normal of the mem-
brane plane is parallel with the z-axis and translates it, placing
the new origin along this axis at the membrane half-width. The
start and end position of the normal vector of the membrane
plane is also specified. The length of the normal vector is equal
to the half-width of the membrane. The last part of the files
contains the localization of each sequence parts that is relative
to the membrane for each chain that builds the biological
active molecule. Because the inside and outside orientation
of proteins cannot be determined from its coordinates, we use
side-one and side-two notation to distinguish between the two
sides of the membrane. The file contains information for all
protein chains included in the biological oligomer structure;
therefore, the number of chains can be different in a PDB_TM
entry and in the corresponding PDB file. The definition and the
calculation of biological active molecule are described in our
previous article.
DATA ACCESS AND VISUALIZATION
The PDB_TM database is available at http://www.enzim.hu/
PDB_TM. There are various ways to find information on a
protein in the PDB_TM database: the user can find it by
entering the protein PDB code, by searching with keywords
in the PDB or by entering some properties of the TMP, such as
its type or the number of transmembrane segments. If the
search resulted in multiple hits, the list of hits is displayed,
and the wanted molecule can be easily selected from the list.
Figure 1 shows the explore window of the aquaporin molecule
(PDB code: 1fqy), which is a graphical representation of the
corresponding xml file. The database is downloadable, either
the full database in one big file, or its subsets containing the
alpha helical or the beta-barrel TMPs. There is a possibility to
browse all the files as well.
For each TMP, two typical pictures can be viewed on the
visualization window, which is made by the Pymol molecular
graphics software (11). The molecule in this picture is colored
according to the identified localization of the segments, which
discriminates between transmembrane regions, membrane
loops, inner membrane segments as well as the two sides of
the water-soluble regions.
FUTURE DIRECTION
Currently the PDB_TM database is updated semi-automatically
every week right after the weekly update of the PDB. There
D276 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
is a family classification on the home page representing
the situation as of early 2004. Work is in progress that
will allow the automated update of the family classification
as well. We also plan to include the biological complex
definition in the xml files. While currently TMPs can be
viewed on pictures made by the Pymol molecular graphic
software, we plan to extend the range of visualization tools
to provide rasmol script, pymol script or VRML, similar to
the PDB site. Naturally, we are open to any user’s advice
as well.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was sponsored by grants BIO-0005/2001, OTKA
T34131, D42207 and F043609. Z.D. and G.E.T. were sup-
ported by the Bolyai Janos Scholarship.
REFERENCES
1. Jones,D.T. (1998) Do transmembrane protein superfolds exist? FEBS
Lett., 423, 281–285.
Figure 1. The explore window of PDB_TM database containing part of the results for aquaporin protein (1fqy).
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D277
2. Krogh,A., Larsson,B., von Heijne,G. and Sonnhammer,E.L. (2001)
Predicting transmembrane protein topology with a hidden Markov
model: application to complete genomes. J. Mol. Biol., 305, 567–580.
3. Wallin,E. and von Heijne,G. (1998) Genome-wide analysis of integral
membrane proteins from eubacterial, archaean, and eukaryotic
organisms. Protein Sci., 7, 1029–1038.
4. Berman,H.M., Westbrook,J., Feng,Z., Gilliland,G., Bhat,T.N.,
Weissig,H., Shindyalov,I.N. and Bourne,P.E. (2000) The Protein Data
Bank. Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 235–242.
5. Tusnady,G.E. and Simon,I. (2001) Topology of membrane proteins.
J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci., 41, 364–368.
6. Tusnady,G.E., Dosztanyi,Z. and Simon,I. (2004) Transmembrane
proteins in protein data bank: identification and classification.
Bioinformatics, in press; doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bth340.
7. Boeckmann,B., Bairoch,A., Apweiler,R., Blatter,M.C.,
Estreicher,A., Gasteiger,E., Martin,M.J., Michoud,K., O’Donovan,C.,
Phan,I. et al. (2003) The SWISS-PROT protein knowledgebase
and its supplement TrEMBL in 2003. Nucleic Acids Res., 31,
365–370.
8. Murata,K., Mitsuoka,K., Hirai,T., Walz,T., Agre,P.,
Heymann,J.B., Engel,A. and Fujiyoshi,Y. (2000) Structural
determinants of water permeation through aquaporin-1. Nature,
407, 599–605.
9. Oomen,C.J., Van Ulsen,P., Van Gelder,P., Feijen,M., Tommassen,J. and
Gros,P. (2004) Structure of the translocator domain of a bacterial
autotransporter. EMBO J, 23, 1257–1266.
10. Kabsch,W. and Sander,C. (1983) Dictionary of protein secondary
structure: pattern recognition of hydrogen-bonded and geometrical
features. Biopolymers, 22, 2577–2637.
11. DeLano,W.L. (1998–2003) The PyMOL Molecular Graphics
System. DeLano Scientific LLC. San Carlos, CA, USA.
http://pymol.sourceforge.net.
D278 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
