Locked nucleic acid (LNA) mediated improvements
in siRNA stability and functionality
Joacim Elmen*, Ha˚kan Thonberg, Karl Ljungberg1, Miriam Frieden2,
Majken Westergaard2, Yunhe Xu, Britta Wahren1, Zicai Liang,
Henrik Ørum2, Troels Koch2 and Claes Wahlestedt
Center for Genomics and Bioinformatics, Karolinska Institutet 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden, 1Department of
Virology, Swedish Institute for Infectious Disease Control 171 82 Solna, Sweden and 2Santaris
Pharma A/S, Bøge alle 3, DK-2970 Hørsholm, Denmark
Received October 6, 2004; Revised and Accepted December 23, 2004
ABSTRACT
Therapeutic application of the recently discovered
small interfering RNA (siRNA) gene silencing
phenomenon will be dependent on improvements in
molecule bio-stability, specificity and delivery. To
address these issues, we have systematically modi-
fied siRNA with the synthetic RNA-like high affinity
nucleotide analogue, Locked Nucleic Acid (LNA).
Here, we show that incorporation of LNA substantially
enhances serum half-life of siRNA’s, which is a key
requirement for therapeutic use. Moreover, we
provide evidence that LNA is compatible with the
intracellular siRNA machinery and can be used to
reduce undesired, sequence-related off-target
effects. LNA-modified siRNAs targeting the emerging
disease SARS, show improved efficiency over
unmodified siRNA on certain RNA motifs. The results
from this study emphasize LNA’s promise in convert-
ing siRNA from a functional genomics technology to a
therapeutic platform.
INTRODUCTION
Double-stranded small interfering RNA (siRNA) molecules
have drawn much attention since it was unambiguously
shown that they mediate potent gene knock-down in a variety
of mammalian cells (1). This work followed the discovery of
the phenomenon of RNA interference (RNAi) in Caenorhab-
ditis elegans (2) and the demonstration of siRNAs as possible
mediators of gene regulation in other eukaryotes (3–5).
SiRNA works through Watson–Crick base-pairing of an
RNA guide sequence to the target RNA followed by specific
degradation or translational block of the target [reviewed in
(6,7)]. As such, siRNA technology offers the means to ratio-
nally design gene-specific inhibitors and in recent years such
molecules have found widespread use as tools in functional
genomic studies in mammalian cells in vitro.
However, application of siRNAs in vivo and their possible
use as therapeutics still face several critical hurdles that have
not yet been comprehensively addressed. For instance, siRNA
delivery, bio-stability, pharmacokinetics and specificity,
including off-target effects, will be major topics of further
investigation.
Many of these issues are not new to oligonucleotide-based
technologies being developed as drug platforms, such as anti-
sense, aptamers and ribozymes. Here, critical advances have
come from the development of nucleotide analogues with
improved properties over natural nucleotides and recently sev-
eral of these such as phosphorothioates (8,9), 20-O-Me (10,11),
20-O-allyl (10) and 20-deoxy-fluorouridine (8,9) have been
examined as a means to improve the prospect for siRNA
therapy. Briefly, these studies have demonstrated that siRNAs
can accommodate quite a number of modifications at both
base-paired and non-base-paired positions without significant
loss of activity. Moreover, some of the modified siRNAs were
found to exhibit enhanced serum stability (11) and longer
duration of action (10). Modification of the 50 end of the
antisense strand with 20-O-allyl (10) or chemical blocking
of the 50-hydroxyl group (11) resulted in a dramatic loss in
activity consistent with the proposed in vivo requirement for 50
end phosphorylation. Also, more substantial modifications,
such as total modification by 20-O-Me (8) or PS modifications
of every second or all internucleoside linkages (8,9) increased
cytotoxic effects and resulted in a significant decrease or com-
plete loss of activity.
Locked nucleic acid (LNA) is a family of conformation-
ally locked nucleotide analogues which, amongst other
benefits, imposes truly unprecedented affinity and very
high nuclease resistance to DNA and RNA oligonucleotides
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +46 8 524 86697; Fax: +46 8 32 39 50; Email: joacim.elmen@cgb.ki.se
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use permissions, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org.
ª 2005, the authors
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 33 No. 1 ª Oxford University Press 2005; all rights reserved
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1 439–447
doi:10.1093/nar/gki193
 Published online January 14, 2005
(12–16). When used in antisense constructs, LNA has
been reported to combine substantially increased potency
in vitro and in vivo with minimal toxicity (12–17). Also,
the commonly used LNA contains a methylene bridge con-
necting the 20-oxygen with the 40-carbon of the ribose ring.
This bridge locks the ribose ring in the 30-endo conformation
characteristic of RNA (18–21). As such, LNA is a prime
candidate for introducing critical new features into siRNAs
without perturbing the overall A-form helical structure they
require for activity (22).
Recently, Braasch et al. (8) provided the first evidence that
LNA can be used to increase the thermal stability of siRNA
molecules without affecting their function. In this report, we
expand on these early findings by systematically pursuing the
construction and biological testing of LNA-modified siRNA
molecules, hereafter termed siLNA, aiming at in vivo appli-
cations. We show that LNA is substantially compatible with
the siRNA machinery, and that siLNAs exhibit greatly
improved bio-stability and shows enhanced inhibition at cer-
tain RNA targets. We further show that LNA can be used to
reduce sequence-related off-target effects by either lowering
incorporation of the siRNA sense-strand and/or by reducing
the ability of inappropriately loaded sense-strands to cleave
the target RNA.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Oligonucleotides and plasmids
All siRNA and siLNA oligonucleotides used in this study are
listed in Table 1. LNA containing oligonucleotides were syn-
thesized by Santaris A/S (Hørsholm, Denmark), siRNA was
ordered from MedProbe (Lund, Sweden) and DNA oligonu-
cleotides from Invitrogen (Paisely, UK). Target sequences
have been described elsewhere [firefly luciferase (1), Renilla
(23), NPY (24), SARS 1–3 (25)]. The different siRNA seq-
uences were used as unrelated controls in non-overlapping
systems.
The plasmids used were pGL3-Control coding for firefly
luciferase and pRL-TK coding for Renilla luciferase
(Promega, Madison WI, USA). pS3Xs and pS3Xas with
SARS 3 target in the sense or antisense direction, respectively,
were constructed by ligation of a double-stranded DNA
oligonucleotide corresponding to the SARS 3 target site
with Xba I overhangs into the Xba I site in the 30UTR of
the firefly luciferase in the pGL3-plasmid. The sense or anti-
sense direction of the insert was confirmed after ligation by
PCR and sequencing.
TM measurements
Melting curves were recorded with a Perkin Elmer UV/Vis
spectrophotometer lambda 40 attached to a PTP-6 Peltier Sys-
tem. The siRNA/siLNA were dissolved in an RNase-free buf-
fer (10 mM phosphate buffer, 100 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM EDTA
pH 7) to a final concentration of 1.5 mM and measured in 1 cm
path-length cells. Samples were denatured at 95C for 3 min
and slowly cooled to 20C prior to measurements. Melting
curves were recorded at 260 nm using a heating rate of 1C/
min, a slit of 2 nm and a response of 0.2 s. Tm values were
obtained from the maxima of the first derivatives of the melt-
ing curves.
Cell cultures and virus
Cell lines used were human HEK 293, rat PC12 and monkey
Vero. HEK 293 cells were maintained in DMEM supple-
mented with 10% foetal bovine serum, penicillin, strepto-
mycin and glutamine. PC12 were maintained in DMEM
supplemented with 10% horse serum, 5% foetal bovine
serum, penicillin, streptomycin and glutamine. Vero cells
were maintained in Eagle’s MEM supplemented with 5% foe-
tal bovine serum, penicillin, streptomycin and glutamine
(Invitrogen). SARS-CoV, Frankfurt 1 isolate (GenBank
AY291315) was amplified as previously described (25).
Transfection and inhibition experiments
Inhibition of firefly luciferase was performed in HEK293 cells
by co-transfection of the target plasmid. HEK 293 cells were
seeded in 500 ml antibiotic-free medium in 24-well plates the
day before transfection to allow adherence and reach con-
fluence of 70–90% at the time of transfection. The standard
co-transfection mix was prepared for triplicate samples by
adding 510 ng pGL3-Control, 51 ng pRL-TK and 340 ng
siRNA to 150 ml Opti-MEM I (Invitrogen) and 3 ml Lipofec-
tAMINE 2000 (Invitrogen) to another 150 ml Opti-MEM I. The
two solutions were mixed and incubated at room temperature
for 20–30 min before 100 ml of the mix was added to each of
three wells. The final volume of medium plus transfection mix
was 600 ml and the final siRNA concentration was 13 nM. The
cells were incubated with the transfection mix for 4 h and the
medium was then replaced with new fully supplemented
culturing medium. The cells were harvested 24 h later and
luciferase activity was measured. The opposite amounts of
plasmids were used in the Renilla luciferase assays.
The dose–response studies were performed analogously
using a final siRNA concentration of 13 nM. The effective
firefly luciferase siRNA was serially diluted with the unrelated
siRNA targeting neuropeptide Y (NPY), reducing the effective
amount of siRNA while keeping the total siRNA concentration
constant. The plasmids pS3Xs and pS3Xas were used instead
of pGL3-Control when assaying for the effects of the sense and
antisense strand of SARS 3 siRNA and siLNA.
SiRNA and siLNA inhibition experiments with the endo-
genous target NPY were performed in PC12 cells as described
above but without adding a target plasmid. The final siRNA
concentration was 100 nM. mRNA was extracted 24 h post-
transfection.
Inhibition of SARS-CoV-induced cytotoxicity followed a
similar procedure. SARS-CoV infections and siRNA transfec-
tions of Vero cells were performed as described previously
(25). Vero cells were seeded in 96-well plates, transfected with
85 nM siRNA using Lipofectamine 2000 and thereafter
infected with 6000 TCID50 of SARS-CoV. The cytotoxicity
was quantified with an LDH Cytotoxicity Detection Kit
(Roche, Penzberg, Germany) 50 h later.
Luciferase activity
Luciferase activity was assessed according to the Dual-
Luciferase Reporter Assay protocol (Promega) using a Novo-
STAR 96-well format luminometer with substrate dispenser
(BMG Labtechnologies, Offenburg, Germany). A 10 ml sam-
ple were placed in each well of a 96-well plate subsequent to
which 50 ml Luciferace Assay Reagent II (substrate for firefly
440 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1
luciferase) was added to each well by the luminometer and the
firefly activity was measured. Then 50 ml Stop and Glow (stop
solution for firefly luciferase and substrate for Renilla
luciferase) were added and Renilla luciferase activity mea-
sured. The mean of the luciferase activities measured for
10 s (100 readings) each were used to calculate ratios between
firefly and Renilla luciferase.
Quantitative real-time PCR
Total RNA was isolated with RNeasy Mini and treated with
RNase-Free DNase according to the manufacturer’s protocol
(Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). An amount of 400–800 ng of
DNase-treated total RNA was used as template for first strand
DNA synthesis according to the manufacturer’s protocol
(Applied Biosystems, Stockholm, Sweden). An aliquot
(one-twentieth) of the cDNA reaction were analyzed by quan-
titative Real-Time PCR on an ABI PRISM 7000 (Applied
Biosystems). Gene-specific primers and probes for the target
genes NPY and cyclophilin A (24,26) were mixed separately
with TaqMan Universal Mastermix (Applied Biosystems) and
added to the cDNA to be analyzed. Samples were run in
triplicate and the data obtained were analyzed with ABI
Prism SDS Software (Applied Biosystems).
Serum stability
Duplexes of siRNA and siLNA (7 mM) were incubated at 37C
in 10% fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen) diluted in phosphate-
buffered saline, 100% human or 100% mouse serum. Aliquots
of 5 ml were withdrawn at different time points and immedi-
ately frozen in 15 ml 1.5· TBE-loading buffer. Samples were
Table 1. Sequences of siRNA and siLNA used in the study
Top strand depicts the sense strand in the 50–30 direction (same as the target sequence). Bottom strand depicts the antisense strand in the 30–50 direction (complementary
to the target). LNA, uppercase; RNA, lower case; DNA, italic lowercase. All LNA-C monomers were methyl cytosines.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1 441
subjected to electrophoresis in 15% polyacrylamide–TBE
under non-denaturing conditions and visualized by staining
with SYBR gold and quantified by Typhoon 9400 hardware
and Imagequant software (Amersham Biosciences, Uppsala,
Sweden).
RESULTS
Serum stability of siLNA
LNA confers both unprecedented affinity as well as very high
nuclease resistance on oligonucleotides (12–15,17). A priori,
this suggests that LNA may be used to increase the functional
half-life of siRNA in vivo by two different mechanisms, e.g. by
enhancing the resistance of the constituent RNA strands
against degradation by single-stranded RNases and by stabi-
lizing the siRNA duplex structure that is critical for activity.
To investigate how these mechanisms influence overall biosta-
bility, we assessed the integrity in fetal bovine serum, as well
as human and mouse serum, of either unmodified siRNA or
siLNAs that were modified to enhance exonuclease resistance
(siLNA5) or further modified to also increase duplex stability
(siLNA7). Briefly, siLNA5 has LNA modifications at the 30
ends and exhibits a duplex stability similar to the unmodified
siRNA1 (Tm = 69.7C for siLNA5 and 70.5C for siRNA1)
whereas siLNA7 has six additional duplex stabilizing sense
strand modifications at base-paired positions which increases
its Tm to >90C. As shown in Figure 1a and b, unmodified
siRNA (siRNA1) was markedly degraded after 6 h during
which it produces a smear of faster migrating species.
A similar diffuse band was not observed with the 30 end pro-
tected siLNA5, which in contrast to the unmodified siRNA
showed only weak signs of degradation after 24 h. The more
modified siLNA7 had a striking stability and showed no signs
of degradation even at 48 h. When incubated in either undi-
luted human or mouse serum (Figure 1c and d), the unmodified
siRNA1 were fully degraded within 6 h. An increased degrada-
tion rate was also observed with the siLNA5 where little full-
length product remained at 24 h. In contrast, siLNA7 remained
intact for the full 48 h of the assay in both human and mouse
serum.
Compatibility of LNA with the siRNA machinery
To verify experimentally the compatibility of LNA with the
siRNA machinery, a range of different LNA-modified siRNAs
(Table 1) were analysed for their ability to selectively inhibit
firefly luciferase in cultured cells expressing both firefly and
Renilla luciferase. As shown in Figure 2a, the firefly siRNA
(siRNA1) effectively and selectively reduced firefly luciferase
activity whereas an unrelated siRNA control was essentially
without effect. Introduction of LNA modifications in the 30
overhangs in either or both strands of the firefly siRNA
revealed no loss of inhibitory effect (siLNA1–3). One LNA
in the 50 end of the sense strand was fully compatible
with activity (siLNA4 and 5), while an LNA at the 50 end
of the antisense strand (siLNA8–11) dramatically impaired
the inhibitory effect. To exclude the possibility that this
impairment was due to a lack of a 50 phosphate, which has
been shown to be crucial for siRNA function (27), the 50 end of
the antisense strand in siLNA8 and 11 was phosphorylated
in vitro. However, this procedure did not recover any of the
lost effect (data not shown). SiLNAs wherein the sense strand
was modified in the 30 overhangs and at as many as seven base-
paired positions (siLNA6 and 7) retained significant inhibitory
activity whereas siLNAs comprising various combinations of
either fully modified sense or antisense strands did not have
any inhibitory effect (data not shown).
Two of the firefly siLNAs, the lightly modified siLNA5 and
the medium modified siLNA7, were further compared to the
unmodified siRNA1 in a dose–response experiment
(Figure 2b). SiLNA5 and siRNA1 had the same efficacy
but a slight difference in potency (estimated EC50 siLNA5
0.22 nM, siRNA1 0.08 nM) whereas siLNA7 had a somewhat
lower efficacy at the highest dose tested but similar potency
(estimated EC50 0.05 nM).
Our finding that an LNA at the 50 antisense position sub-
stantially impairs the function of the siRNA contrasts with the
findings of Braasch et al. who recently published on the effect
of several chemical modifications, including some LNA, on
siRNA against human caveolin (8). To determine whether this
discrepancy was due to the different choice of targets, we
repeated the analysis, this time targeting Renilla luciferase.
As shown in Figure 2c, we observe the same tendency as with
the firefly target. SiLNA12 and 13, carrying modifications in
the 30 overhangs were as functional as unmodified Renilla
siRNA (siRNA2). Again, the 50 end of the sense strand
could be modified without loss of activity (siLNA14), while
an LNA in the 50 antisense end significantly reduced the effect
(siLNA15). Interestingly, in this case part of the activity that
Figure 1. Serum stability of siRNA and siLNA. The different siLNA/siRNA
were incubated in 10% foetal bovine serum at 37C and withdrawn at indicated
time points. (a) The oligos were separated by PAGE and visualized with SYBR
gold. ‘ds’ depicts double-stranded siRNA marker and ‘ss’ single-stranded. (b)
Quantification of the bands. The mean and SD values are from three indepen-
dent experiments. (c) Same layout as with foetal bovine serum but with 100%
human serum or (d) 100% mouse serum.
442 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1
was lost as a result of the 50 antisense LNA (siLNA15) could
be recovered by simultaneously modifying the 30 sense end
(siLNA16) and even more so if modifications also included the
50 sense end (siLNA17).
To substantiate the generality of our finding, we finally
appraised siLNAs targeting an endogenous gene, neuropeptide
Y (NPY) in PC12 cells. As shown in Figure 2d, the unmodified
NPY siRNA (siRNA3) reduced the mRNA levels considerably
whereas an unrelated control, siRNA against dopamine D2
receptor, did not. Sense strand LNA modifications were, as
before, well tolerated with both lightly modified (siLNA18)
and medium modified (siLNA19) displaying a similar
inhibitory effect as unmodified siRNA. Again an LNA 50
antisense modification substantially impaired activity
(siLNA20), which, however, could be mostly recovered by
simultaneous modification of the 50 and 30 sense end
(siLNA21).
Positional effects of single LNA modifications
Next, we examined the effect of making single RNA to LNA
exchanges at base-paired positions in the antisense strand of
the firefly luciferase siLNA1. As shown in Figure 3, such
exchanges were tolerated in most of the tested positions.
Apart from the 50 antisense end (siLNA8), the notable excep-
tions are positions 10 (siLNA30), 12 (siLNA32) and 14
(siLNA34), where introduction of LNA leads to a clear
decrease of inhibitory activity. Although we cannot exclude
that these modifications somehow prevent loading of the
antisense strand into RISC, we believe this to be unlikely
given the functionality of many significantly more modified
siLNAs. Rather, as these positions are all close to the site
where RNA target cleavage occurs [between pos. 10 and 11
of the siRNA strand counting from the 50 end (28)], we suspect
that the LNA modifications may exert a direct conformational
or functional effect on the catalytic site.
The LNA substitutions at position 10 and 14 exchanged an
RNA-U for an LNA-T and an RNA-C for an LNA-mC both of
which lead to the introduction of an additional methyl-group
on the nucleobase. In the A-form helix formed between the
siRNA/RNA-target, these methyl groups will protrude into the
major groove with potential effects on helical geometry or
accessibility important for catalysis. To investigate this in
more detail, we repeated the experiment with LNA-U in
place of LNA-T at position 10. This new compound displayed
activity similar to the unmodified siRNA (siRNA1), thus lend-
ing support to the importance of having native nucleobases
close to the cleavage site (data not shown).
The replacement at position 12 (siRNA32) substituted an
RNA-A for an LNA-A indicating that factors other than helical
structure or accessibility are also important for proper catalytic
activity. Given the increased affinity imposed by LNA,
it seems likely that one such factor may be a changed
thermodynamic fingerprint of the siRNA in the vicinity of
the cleavage site, the importance of which has been indicated
by recent reports (29,30).
Reducing ‘off-target’ effects
Much experimental data supports the notion that cells can
incorporate both strands of an siRNA into the RISC complex
but that preference is given to one of the two strands (3,27).
Figure 2. Effect of different LNA loads on the activity of siRNAs against
exogenous (a) firefly luciferase gene, (c) Renilla luciferase or
(d) endogenous NPY gene. (a) Firefly luciferase activity. HEK293 cells
were co-transfected with firefly luciferase and plasmids, and siLNA (13
nM) and luciferase activity was assessed 24 h later. The firefly luciferase
activity was normalized to the Renilla luciferase activity and the uninhibited
activity (plasmids alone) was set to 100%. (b) Dose–response curves on
selected siLNA targeting firefly luciferase. The total siLNA/siRNA concentra-
tion was kept constant at 13 nM; the ratio of effective and irrelevant siLNA/
siRNA was varied. The graph shows the log concentration of the effective
siLNA from one of two representative experiments, with mean and SD derived
from duplicate samples. (c) Renilla luciferase activity was assessed as for
firefly luciferase. The Renilla activity was normalized to the firefly luciferase
activity. (d) NPY mRNA levels. Rat PC12 cells, endogenously expressing
NPY, were transfected with siLNA (100 nM). NPY mRNA was measured
24 h later by quantitative PCR. The NPY mRNA levels were normalized to
cyclophilin A. The uninhibited normalized NPY mRNA level was set to 100%.
The mean and SD values in the case of luciferase are from two independent
experiments performed in triplicate, and from two independent experiments
performed in duplicate in the case of NPY.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1 443
An explanation for this strand-bias was provided by Schwarz
et al. (31) and Khvorova et al. (29), who proposed that the
strand that displays the weakest binding energy at its closing 50
base-pair is incorporated preferentially. As a functional
genomic tool and as a prospective therapeutic, the incorpora-
tion of the unwanted, non-target complementary, sense strand
is a concern as it is a likely cause of ‘off-target’ effects (32)
and may lower the potency of the siRNA by limiting incor-
poration of the intended antisense strand.
If relative binding energies at the ends of the siRNA duplex
determine strand bias, it ought to be possible to favour incor-
poration of the antisense strand by selectively enhancing the
affinity of the 50 sense end with LNA. This intriguing possi-
bility was already hinted at by the previous observations that
activity loss due to LNA incorporation at the 50 antisense end
could be largely rescued by compensatory modifications in the
50 end of the sense strand (which a priori would serve to restore
the relative binding energies of the two ends of the siLNA).
To examine in more detail the ability of LNA to direct
strand loading, we constructed a plasmid system that made
it possible to monitor the activity of both the sense and anti-
sense strand. Briefly, a target region derived from the SARS
virus to which a medium effective siRNA (SARS 3-siRNA)
had previously been identified (25) was cloned into the 30UTR
of the firefly luciferase gene in both the sense (pS3Xs) and
antisense (pS3Xas) orientation (Figure 4a). The SARS siRNA
(Table 1) has identical closing base-pairs at both ends (A:U)
making it likely that enough of both the antisense and sense
strand would be incorporated into RISC to observe activity on
the respective targets.
As shown in Figure 4b, both SARS3-siRNA and SARS3-
siLNA (modified at the 30 overhangs and at the 50 sense end)
inhibited the sense target (pS3Xs) and to the same extent
indicating that both siRNA and siLNA are effective in loading
the antisense strand into RISC. However, when tested for
sense strand activity, the outcome was different. Here, the
siRNA showed clear downregulation of the target (pS3Xas),
albeit the effect was less than that observed with the antisense
strand. In contrast, no activity was observed with the siLNA
sense strand strongly supporting the conclusion that the 50
sense LNA modification has altered strand-bias in favour of
incorporation of the antisense strand. Both siRNA and siLNA
were also tested against the control plasmid pGL3 and found to
have no effect on luciferase expression.
Improving on low efficacy siRNAs
As described above, incorporation of sense strand may
decrease the potency of siRNAs by simply lowering the
Figure 3. Effect on the activity of single RNA to LNA substitutions in the antisense strand. Mean and SD values are derived from two or more experiments.
444 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1
number of RISC complexes loaded with the antisense strand.
Having established that 50 sense LNA appeared able to redirect
strand loading, we next examined whether these modifications
would also be able to improve the potency of two inefficient
siRNAs targeting Renilla luciferase, siRNA4 and 5 (23). Both
of these siRNAs have a strong G:C base-pair at their antisense
end and a weak A:U base-pair at their 50 sense end (Table 1)
making it likely that at least part of the poor activity could be
due to strand incorporation of the sense strand. As shown in
Figure 5a, the activity of both siRNAs were improved by the
50 sense LNA modification with siRNA4 reducing residual
luciferase activity from 57 to 18% (siLNA 40) and siRNA5
from 71 to 49% (siLNA 41).
To investigate if an LNA 50 sense modification could rescue
mediocre siRNAs against a therapeutically important target,
we compared the ability of three siRNAs and their correspond-
ing siLNAs to protect Vero cells from death induced by severe
acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus (SARS-
CoV). Of the three siRNAs, the reasonably effective
SARS-1 siRNA and the ineffective SARS-2 siRNA both
have a strong G:C base-pairs at the 50 sense end and a
weak A:U base-pair at the 50 antisense (Table 1). As such,
further stabilization by LNA of their 50 sense end is not
expected to lead to improved activity and consistent with
this notion none was observed (Figure 5b). In contrast, the
modestly effective SARS-3 siRNA, which has A:U base-pairs
at both ends showed the expected improvement when modi-
fied with LNA.
Decreasing or increasing the viral titres did not change the
relative behaviour of the siRNAs and siLNAs although a gen-
erally greater reduction or increase in cytotoxicity was noted at
the lower and higher titers, respectively (data not shown).
Unrelated siRNA and siLNA controls (firefly luciferase and
NPY) showed no inhibition of virus-induced cytotoxicity.
DISCUSSION
We have shown that the nucleotide analogue LNA is substan-
tially compatible with the siRNA intracellular machinery,
preserving molecule integrity whilst offering several
improvements that are relevant to the development of
siRNA technology for therapeutic use. Notably, LNA offers
the means to improve dramatically the half-life of siRNAs
through a combination of enhanced nuclease stability and
stabilization of the duplex structure. As this property can be
obtained with a modest number of LNA modifications that do
not affect the ability of the siRNA to mediate target knock-
down, we expect that siLNAs may exhibit significantly
enhanced efficacy when administered in vivo compared to
their unmodified counterparts.
Off-target effects brought about by inappropriate loading of
siRNA sense strands constitute a major concern for the use of
siRNAs as genomic tools and prospective drugs. Our data
provide evidence that LNA can be used to minimize such
effects, acting through two different mechanisms.
First, LNA substitution can alter strand-bias through selec-
tively increasing the affinity of the closing base-pair at the 50
end of the siRNA sense strand. We note that our analyses so far
have been confined to the ultimate 50 sense position and we
cannot exclude the possibility that even greater strand-bias
may be imposed by additional modifications to neighbouring
positions.
Second, LNA may be incorporated into positions in the
sense strand that, once loaded into the RISC complex, impair
its ability to participate in target cleavage. We have identified
these activity-impairing positions (pos. 10, 12 and 14) by
systematically analysing a whole set of single LNA insertions
in the antisense strand and found them to be in the vicinity of
the target cleavage site. The evidence that similar substitutions
applied to the sense strand will have a similar effect is indirect.
Nevertheless, we see no reason to believe this will not be the
case. If so, the combination of two or more activity-impairing
LNA modifications may facilitate complete loss of activity of
RISC complexes inappropriately loaded with sense strands.
The ability to influence strand loading by LNA modification
at the 50 sense end also provides an opportunity to improve the
potency of ineffective siRNAs by further enhancing antisense
strand incorporation into RISC. Although our data demon-
strate that such enhanced loading is not a general phenomenon,
it is an option to use LNA in this way where the choice of
target sequence is restrained.
Consistent with the findings of Braasch et al. (8), the present
data confirm that excessive LNA modifications, each of which
are permissive when introduced as separate modifications, can
reduce the knockdown efficacy of the siRNA. Based on the
present data, we can only speculate as to the underlying causes
Figure 4. Sense and antisense strand activity of siRNA and 50 sense end
modified siLNA. (a) Schematic representation of the SARS 3 target cloned
in the sense (pS3Xs) or the antisense (pS3Xas) direction behind firefly
luciferase. Also shown is the parental luciferase plasmid without the SARS
3 target (pGL3). (b) Activity of siRNA and siLNA against sense (pS3Xs),
antisense (pS3Xas) or control target (pGL3-Control). Mean and SD values
are from two experiments performed in duplicate.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1 445
which may include changes in siRNA structure that affect
RISC loading, problems with unwinding the duplex due to
excessive thermo-stability, changes in release kinetics after
substrate cleavage, etc. Whatever the cause, as we have
shown, the potential key therapeutic benefits of introducing
LNA into siRNAs can all be achieved with relative few modi-
fications that do not compromise siRNA activity. Other modi-
fications than LNA has been shown to provide benefits to
siRNA and could be conceivable when successfully combined
with LNA.
In conclusion, the RNA-like character of LNA combined
with its enhanced biophysical characteristics, e.g. increased
nuclease resistance and affinity, enabled us to construct hybrid
RNA–LNA molecules with new and favourable properties
over unmodified siRNA. We anticipate that these new mole-
cules, which we have termed siLNA, will impact positively on
the use of RNAi technology in functional genomics and the
broader perspective of translating the technology into a drug
platform.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This study was supported by the PhD program in biotechnology
with an industrial focus and the Foundation for Knowledge and
Competence Development, which also provided the funding
to pay the Open Access publication charges for this article.
REFERENCES
1. Elbashir,S.M., Harborth,J., Lendeckel,W., Yalcin,A., Weber,K. and
Tuschl,T. (2001) Duplexes of 21-nucleotide RNAs mediate RNA
interference in cultured mammalian cells. Nature, 411, 494–498.
2. Fire,A., Xu,S., Montgomery,M.K., Kostas,S.A., Driver,S.E. and
Mello,C.C. (1998) Potent and specific genetic interference by double-
stranded RNA in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature, 391, 806–811.
3. Elbashir,S.M., Lendeckel,W. and Tuschl,T. (2001) RNA interference is
mediated by 21- and 22-nucleotide RNAs. Genes Dev., 15, 188–200.
4. Hamilton,A.J. and Baulcombe,D.C. (1999) A species of small antisense
RNA in posttranscriptional gene silencing in plants. Science, 286,
950–952.
5. Zamore,P.D., Tuschl,T., Sharp,P.A. and Bartel,D.P. (2000) RNAi:
double-stranded RNA directs the ATP-dependent cleavage of mRNA at
21 to 23 nucleotide intervals. Cell, 101, 25–33.
6. Dorsett,Y. and Tuschl,T. (2004) siRNAs: applications in functional
genomics and potential as therapeutics. Nature Rev. Drug Discov., 3,
318–329.
7. Dykxhoorn,M., Novina,C. and Sharp,P.A. (2003) Killing the messenger:
short RNAs that silence gene expression. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 4,
457–467.
8. Braasch,D.A., Jensen,S., Liu,Y., Kaur,K., Arar,K., White,M.A. and
Corey,D.R. (2003) RNA interference in mammalian cells by chemically-
modified RNA. Biochemistry, 42, 7967–7975.
9. Harborth,J., Elbashir,S.M., Vandenburgh,K., Manninga,H.,
Scaringe,S.A., Weber,K. and Tuschl,T. (2003) Sequence, chemical, and
structural variation of small interferingRNAs and short hairpin RNAs and
the effect on mammalian gene silencing. Antisense Nucleic Acid Drug
Dev., 13, 83–105.
10. Amarzguioui,M., Holen,T., Babaie,E. and Prydz,H. (2003) Tolerance for
mutations and chemical modifications in a siRNA. Nucleic Acids Res.,
31, 589–595.
11. Czauderna,F., Fechtner,M., Dames,S., Aygun,H., Klippel,A., Pronk,G.J.,
Giese,K. and Kaufmann,J. (2003) Structural variations and stabilising
modifications of synthetic siRNAs in mammalian cells. Nucleic Acids
Res., 31, 2705–2716.
12. Wahlestedt,C., Salmi,P., Good,L., Kela,J., Johnsson,T., Hokfelt,T.,
Broberger,C., Porreca,F., Lai,J., Ren,K. et al. (2000) Potent and nontoxic
antisense oligonucleotides containing locked nucleic acids. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA, 97, 5633–5638.
13. Braasch,D.A. and Corey,D.R. (2001) Locked nucleic acid (LNA): fine-
tuning the recognition of DNA and RNA. Chem. Biol., 8, 1–7.
14. Kurreck,J., Wyszko,E., Gillen,C. and Erdmann,V.A. (2002) Design of
antisense oligonucleotides stabilized by locked nucleic acids. Nucleic
Acids Res., 30, 1911–1918.
15. Crinelli,R., Bianchi,M., Gentilini,L. and Magnani,M. (2002) Design and
characterization of decoy oligonucleotides containing locked nucleic
acids. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 2435–2443.
16. Bondensgaard,K., Petersen,M., Singh,S.K., Rajwanshi,V.K., Kumar,R.,
Wengel,J. and Jacobsen,J.P. (2000) Structural studies of LNA:RNA
duplexes by NMR: conformations and implications for RNase H activity.
Chemistry, 6, 2687–2695.
17. Braasch,D.A., Liu,Y. and Corey,D.R. (2002) Antisense inhibition of gene
expression in cells by oligonucleotides incorporating locked nucleic
acids: effect of mRNA target sequence and chimera design. Nucleic Acids
Res., 30, 5160–5167.
Figure 5. LNA improvement of medium-efficient siRNAs. (a) Renilla lucifer-
ase activity. Effect of siRNA and siLNA depending on the target sequence
(siRNA4 and 5 have different target sequences, accordingly also siLNA40 and
41). (b) Effect of siRNA and siLNA on SARS-induced cytotoxicity depending
on the target sequence (SARS 1–3). Vero cells were transfected with 85 nM
siRNA or siLNA and then infected with 6000 TCID50 SARS-CoV. SARS-
induced cytotoxicity was assessed 50 h later. The untransfected but infected
sample was set to 100% cytotoxicity. Mean and SD values in the Renilla case
are from two experiments performed in triplicate, and in the SARS case from
three experiments performed in quadruplicate.
446 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1
18. Obika,S., Nanbu,D., Hari,Y., Andoh,J., Morio,K., Doi,T. and Imanishi,T.
(1998) Stability and structural features of the duplexes containing
nucleoside analogues with a fixed N-type conformation, 20-O,40-C-
methyleneribonucleosides. Tetrahedron Lett., 39, 5401–5404.
19. Koshkin,A.A., Singh,S.K., Nielsen,P., Rajwanshi,V.K., Kumar,R.,
Meldgaard,M., Olsen,C.E. and Wengel,J. (1998) LNA (Locked Nucleic
Acids): synthesis of the adenine, cytosine, guanine, 5-methylcytosine,
thymine and uracil bicyclonucleoside monomers, oligomerisation, and
unprecedented nucleic acid recognition. Tetrahedron, 54, 3607–3630.
20. Singh,S.K., Nielsen,P., Koshkin,A.A. and Wengel,J. (1998) LNA
(Locked nucleic acids): synthesis and high-affinity recognition. J. Chem.
Commun., 455–456.
21. Koshkin,A.A., Nielsen,P., Meldgaard,M., Rajwanshi,V.K., Singh,S.K.
and Wengel,J. (1998) LNA (Locked Nucleic Acid): an RNA mimic
forming exceedingly stable LNA:LNA duplexes. J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
120, 13252–13253.
22. Chiu,Y.L. and Rana,T.M. (2002) RNAi in human cells: basic structural
and functional features of small interfering RNA. Mol. Cell, 10, 549–561.
23. Xu,Y., Zhang,H.Y., Thormeyer,D., Larsson,O., Du,Q., Elmen,J.,
Wahlestedt,C. and Liang,Z. (2003) Effective small interfering RNAs
and phosphorothioate antisense DNAs have different preferences for
target sites in the luciferase mRNAs. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun., 306, 712–717.
24. Thonberg,H., Scheele,C.C., Dahlgren,C. and Wahlestedt,C. (2004)
Characterization of RNA interference in rat PC12 cells: requirement of
GERp95. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 318, 927–934.
25. Elme´n,J., Wahlestedt,C., Brytting,M., Wahren,B. and Ljungberg,K.
(2004) SARS virus inhibited by siRNA. Preclinica, 2,
135–142.
26. Medhurst,A.D., Harrison,D.C., Read,S.J., Campbell,C.A., Robbins,M.J.
and Pangalos,M.N. (2000) The use of TaqMan RT-PCR assays for
semiquantitative analysis of gene expression in CNS tissues and disease
models. J. Neurosci. Methods, 98, 9–20.
27. Nykanen,A., Haley,B. and Zamore,P.D. (2001) ATP requirements and
small interfering RNA structure in the RNA interference pathway. Cell,
107, 309–321.
28. Elbashir,S.M., Martinez,J., Patkaniowska,A., Lendeckel,W. and
Tuschl,T. (2001) Functional anatomy of siRNAs for mediating efficient
RNAi in Drosophila melanogaster embryo lysate. EMBO J., 20,
6877–6888.
29. Khvorova,A., Reynolds,A. and Jayasens,S.D. (2003) Functional siRNAs
and miRNAs exhibit strand bias. Cell, 115, 209–216.
30. Reynolds,A., Leake,D., Boese,Q., Scaringe,S., Marshall,W.S. and
Khvorova,A. (2004) Rational siRNA design for RNA interference. Nat.
Biotechnol., 22, 326–330.
31. Schwarz,D.S., Hutvagner,G., Du,T., Xu,Z., Aronin,N. and Zamore,P.D.
(2003) Asymmetry in the assembly of the RNAi enzyme complex. Cell,
115, 199–208.
32. Jackson,A.L., Bartz,S.R., Schelter,J., Kobayashi,S.V., Burchard,J.,
Mao,M., Li,B., Cavet,G. and Linsley,P.S. (2003) Expression profiling
reveals off-target gene regulation by RNAi. Nat. Biotechnol., 21,
635–637.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 1 447
