ProFunc: a server for predicting protein
function from 3D structure
Roman A. Laskowski*, James D. Watson and Janet M. Thornton
European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK
Received February 15, 2005; Revised and Accepted March 21, 2005
ABSTRACT
ProFunc (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/thornton-srv/data-
bases/ProFunc) is a web server for predicting the
likely function of proteins whose 3D structure is
known but whose function is not. Users submit
the coordinates of their structure to the server in
PDB format. ProFunc makes use of both existing
and novel methods to analyse the protein’s sequence
and structure identifying functional motifs or close
relationships to functionally characterized proteins.
A summary of the analyses provides an at-a-glance
view of what each of the different methods has found.
More detailed results are available on separate
pages. Often where one method has failed to find
anything useful another may be more forthcoming.
The server is likely to be of most use in structural
genomics where a large proportion of the proteins
whose structures are solved are of hypothetical
proteins of unknown function. However, it may also
find use in a comparative analysis of members of
large protein families. It provides a convenient com-
pendium of sequence and structural information that
often hold vital functional clues to be followed up
experimentally.
INTRODUCTION
A large proportion of the structures deposited at the PDB (1)
by the various structural genomics initiatives (2) are of ‘hypo-
thetical proteins’, i.e. proteins of unknown function. These are
classed as hypothetical when sequence search methods have
failed to match them to proteins that have been functionally
characterized. However, knowing the 3D structure of a protein
opens up the possibility of ascertaining its function from an
analysis of that structure. Recently, many methods have been
developed for predicting protein function from structure.
These range from global comparisons, such as matching the
protein’s fold against other proteins of known 3D structure,
to identification of more local features, such as active site
residues or DNA-/ligand-binding motifs (3). None of these
structure-based methods can expect to be successful in all
cases. For example, methods that are able to detect catalytic
residues in a 3D structure will give no useful information if the
protein in question is not an enzyme. Therefore, a prudent
approach is to use as many methods as possible, both
structure-based and sequence-based, not only to increase
the chances of obtaining a helpful match, but also to benefit
from cases where several methods arrive at the same or similar
conclusions.
This is the principle behind the ProFunc server (4), which
runs a number of different methods to analyse both the
sequence and the structure of a submitted protein and provide
a single, convenient summary of what each method has found.
THE ProFunc SERVER
Figure 1 shows the analyses that are currently run whenever
a protein structure is submitted to ProFunc (http://www.ebi.ac.
uk/thornton-srv/databases/ProFunc).
Sequence-based searches
The first batch of processes, on the left-hand side of Figure 1,
are all standard sequence-related searches. Two runs of Blast
(5) are made: the first against the protein sequences with known
structures in the PDB to find any obvious matches to proteins
of known structure, and the second against the UniProt data-
base of protein sequences (6). The results from the latter are
aligned using a simple pile-up procedure to give a multiple
sequence alignment, from which residue conservation scores
are computed for the target sequence using the method
described previously by Valdar and Thornton (7). Residue
conservation plays a key part in some of the structural
analyses to be described below.
For every UniProt sequence matched by Blast, the protein’s
location on its genome is found and its 10 gene neighbours on
either side are extracted. These are tabulated and illustrated in
a schematic diagram. Neighbouring genes are often function-
ally related, so a functionally characterized neighbour may
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +44 1223 492 542; Fax: +44 1223 494 468; Email: roman@ebi.ac.uk
ª The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W89–W93
doi:10.1093/nar/gki414
provide some clue to the target protein’s role. Where the target
protein’s own genome has not been determined, or is not
informative, the functional information can sometimes come
from the genome of one of the other sequences matched by
Blast. Figure 2 shows an example.
Finally, the target sequence is scanned against the
numerous motifs, patterns, fingerprints and hidden Markov
models (HMMs) of Interpro (8) by running InterProScan (9).
InterPro holds the sequence patterns from the PROSITE,
Pfam, SMART, PRINTS, BLOCKS, TIGR and ProDom
databases. A separate scan is then performed against the
SUPERFAMILY (10) library of HMMs derived from the
SCOP structural superfamilies, potentially giving matches
to the existing PDB entries or parts thereof.
Structure-based analyses
The second batch of processes that the target structure under-
goes is the set of structure-based analyses listed in the middle
column of Figure 1. The first of these is a search for known
structures having the same, or similar, overall fold as the
target. The program used is secondary structure matching
(SSM) (11), which uses a fast graph-matching algorithm to
compare the secondary structure elements (SSEs) of the target
structure against those of the structures in its database. Any
strong matches are superposed and an r.m.s.d. for equivalent
C-alphas is calculated. Finding a fold relative can often
provide strong indications about the target protein’s likely
functional type.
The SURFNET algorithm (12) is then used to compute all
the clefts in the protein structure, ranking them in order of size.
The clefts can be viewed in RasMol (13) via automatically
generated scripts that colour the cleft surfaces by specific
properties, such as cleft size, residue type or conservation
score. Residue conservation is a particularly powerful means
of highlighting which are the key residues in the structure, and
so can usually help pick out the most likely location of the
protein’s functional site(s) (14–16). The residue conservation
scores are also mapped onto the whole protein surface, which,
again, can be viewed in RasMol. This can help identify other
functionally important regions in the structure, such as likely
protein–protein interaction sites (15,17).
The target structure is then scanned against a database of
helix–turn–helix (HTH) templates taken from PDB structures
known to be involved in DNA binding (18). Each template
consists of the Ca coordinates of the HTH motif. Many false
positives are returned by this search, but the majority can
be filtered out if their solvent accessibility is below a certain
cutoff.
The last in this batch of processes is a search for structural
motifs called ‘nests’. A ‘nest’ is an anion or cation binding site
formed by three or more amino acids in the sequence whose
Figure 1. Schematic diagram showing the different methods, both sequence- and structure-based, that are applied to a given structure when it is submitted to the
ProFunc server. The leftmost column shows the methods that use the sequence of the submitted protein, the middle column lists the methods that analyse the protein’s
structure, and the rightmost column lists the 3D template methods that are used to match the structure to existing PDB entries.
W90 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
main-chain y–j dihedral angles alternate between the right-
and left-handed a and g regions of the Ramachandran plot.
Such motifs are found to be frequently associated with the
functional sites of proteins (19,20).
3D template searches
The final batch of searches to which the target structure is
subjected is the group of 3D template searches listed in the
right-hand column of Figure 1. The templates used and the
method of their detection and scoring are described in detail
elsewhere (R. A. Laskowski, J. D. Watson and J. M. Thornton,
manuscript submitted), but are summarized below.
We use four different types of templates: enzyme active
sites, ligand-binding sites, DNA-binding sites and ‘reverse’
templates generated from the target structure itself. All tem-
plates consist of specific 3D conformations of between two
and five amino acid residues. A fast 3D search program called
Jess (21) is used to rapidly locate relative conformations of
groups of residues in a given PDB file that closely match a
specific template, reporting the r.m.s.d. between the matched
and template residues. The comparison involves the side-chain
atoms and, for the smaller residues, one or more of the main-
chain atoms. For symmetrical side chains, the alternative
conformations are also taken into account in the search.
The hits detected by Jess are then scored and ranked. The
r.m.s.d. between the matched and template residues turns out
not to be a particularly good measure for discriminating
between true and false positives. A much better measure is
the similarity between the local environments surrounding the
matched residues in the target structure and the template’s
parent structure. This is computed by first pairing up identical
residues in equivalent positions in the two proteins within a
10 s sphere of the centre of the template match. Then, the
paired residues are filtered to leave only those pairs that could
have come from a sequence alignment of the two proteins in
question (i.e. the residues in each pair are in the same relative
sequential order in their respective sequences). Many different
sets of pairings are possible, so each is scored and the highest
scoring one is chosen. The score takes into account the number
of paired residues in the supposed sequence alignment and the
number of insertions that would be required in one or both of
the sequences to arrive at this alignment.
Such a local similarity score is capable of identifying even
quite distant homologues in cases where the residues involved
in the functional site have been well conserved over evolu-
tionary time, despite a marked divergence in the remainder
of the proteins’ sequences, and even their structures. So, for
example, proteins having a sequence identity of 20–30% over-
all can have a much higher sequence identity, of say 40–50%,
in the region of the functional site (R. A. Laskowski,
J. D. Watson and J. M. Thornton, manuscript submitted).
Enzyme active sites. The first group of templates used in the
template searches come from a manually curated database of
the 3D conformations of enzyme active site residues. Each
consists of 2–5 residues. These are the residues known from
the literature to be catalytic, plus one or more additional resi-
dues whose 3D positions are highly conserved relative to the
catalytic residues. The template database was originally called
PROCAT and searched using a program called TESS (22),
but has now been superseded by the Catalytic Site Atlas (23)
and is searched by Jess (21). The database currently contains
400 enzyme active site templates (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/
thornton-srv/databases/CSA). Figure 3 shows how a match
to one of these templates can provide particularly strong
functional information.
Ligand-binding sites. The ligand-binding site templates
identify the 3D conformations of residues that bind specific
Het Groups in structures in the PDB. The PDB contains 5500
different Het Groups in complexes with proteins. For every
type of Het Group, a dataset of non-homologous proteins
binding that group are selected and used for automatically
generating a set of three-residue ligand-binding templates.
Each structure can generate one or more templates; the
rules being that the residues forming the template must be
interacting with the Het Group, that no residue in the triplet
Figure 2. An extract from the genome neighbour analysis for a structure of unknown function. The structure is that of hypothetical protein YqeY from Bacillus
subtilis (PDB code 1ng6). The Pfam annotation suggests that the protein might have a role in tRNA metabolism, but the genome analysis shown hints at the possibility
of it being a ribosomal protein. The schematic diagrams show the neighbouring genes in (a) B.subtilis, (b) Bacillus halodurans and (c) Oceanobacillus iheyensis.
Each gene is represented by an arrow indicating the length of the gene and its direction of transcription. The YqeY protein and its orthologues in the two other genomes
are coloured pink, the sequence similarities being 75.7% to the B.halodurans protein and 69.4% to the O.iheyensis protein. In all three genomes, the gene of interest
is immediately preceded by the rpsU gene, which corresponds to the 30S ribosomal protein S21. This pattern occurs in other bacterial genomes (data not shown),
and suggests that the protein might be a ribosomal protein.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W91
may be >5.0 s from both the others, that no two templates
from the same structure have more than two residues in
common, and that none of the templates contains more than
a single hydrophobic residue. The last of these restrictions
aims at biasing the templates to contain mainly surface resi-
dues. As of February 2005, the database contained 13 057
ligand-binding templates.
DNA-binding sites. The steps for generating templates for the
DNA-binding sites are identical to those for the ligand-binding
templates. The data come from a non-homologous dataset of
protein–DNA complexes. As of February 2005, the database
contained 1200 DNA-binding templates.
‘Reverse’ templates. The fourth and final template method
employed by ProFunc is the ‘reverse’ template method imple-
mented in a program called SiteSeer. Rather than scan the
target structure against a prepared database of templates the
target itself is first broken up into a large set of several hundred
templates. These are then scanned against a representative set
of the structures in the PDB and any hits are scored and ranked
as before. SiteSeer is able to find matches that the other
template methods miss and, specifically, tends to match func-
tionally important sites—as these are the ones most likely to
have been preserved and hence give the highest local simil-
arity scores. The list of representative structures scanned by
SiteSeer is updated weekly using the Pisces server (24),
obtaining a list of protein chains that are no more than 90%
sequence identical and come from structures solved by X-ray
crystallography at 3.0s resolution or better. The list contained
11 750 individual protein chains at February 2005.
ProFunc PROCESSING
Many of the processes that make up ProFunc are computation-
ally demanding, particularly the Superfamily sequence search
and the SiteSeer ‘reverse’ template search. Where possible the
processes are run in parallel on the EBI’s linux processor
farms. A number of the searches are farmed off to other servers
using SOAP (simple object access protocol) (25).
These include the BLAST sequence searches, sent to the
EBI’s BLAST server, and the fold search, sent to the EBI’s
SSM server. Use of SOAP has two main advantages: first,
the task of maintaining the data and programs for a specific
application is the responsibility of the server administrators
and can be entrusted to them; and second, the computation is
performed on someone else’s processor(s), further distributing
the overall processing load. The primary disadvantage is that
one has no control over the external server used and therefore
the pipeline is badly affected when the servers are down.
ProFunc OUTPUT
Depending on how busy the processor farm is, the ProFunc run
on a single structure can take between half an hour and several
hours. The server reports on progress and makes the results
from the different processes available as soon as they are
ready. Results are presented in summary form on the results
page, with greater detail available on additional pages. Many
of the analyses are supported by RasMol views of the specific
matches in the target structure (e.g. location of template hits,
superposition of matching folds, etc.).
SUMMARY
In bringing together a number of sequence and structure-based
methods, the ProFunc server is a convenient tool for use in
structural genomics. One submits a new structure to the server
and, within a couple of hours, gets a number of complementary
analyses relating to the protein’s possible function. It is also
likely to be useful for general analysis of newly solved
structures as it can speedily identify sequence, structural
and possibly functional relationship between the new structure
and those already in the PDB. The server was developed as
part of the structural genomics pipeline of the Midwest Center
for Structural Genomics and has been running for over a
year. It can be accessed at http://www.ebi.ac.uk/thornton-srv/
databases/ProFunc.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3. A simple case where structural information can provide strong con-
firmatory evidence for a hypothesized function. The example shown is of PDB
entry 1ufo a hypothetical protein from Thermus thermophilus suspected of
being a hydrolase. (a) The protein’s fold matches a number of carboxyles-
terases, the match shown being to PDB structure 1aur (in red) which shares only
a 24% sequence identity with 1ufo, but matches 11 SSEs and gives an r.m.s.d. of
1.83 s on equivalent Ca coordinates when the two structures are superposed.
(b) The protein returns a strong match to the enzyme active site template for the
serine proteases. The Ser-His-Asp template is shown by the thick transparent
bonds, while the matching side chains from the 1ufo structure are shown as thin
solid bonds. The r.m.s.d. between the template and 1ufo atoms is 0.29s, which
is well below the 1.2 s cutoff for this template. Furthermore, when the 1ufo
structure is superposed on the 1tah structure from which the template has been
derived, there are 12 identical and 12 similar residues in equivalent 3D positions
in the two structures within 10 s of the template’s centre. This high degree of
local similarity in the region of the matched residues suggests that they could
correspond to a Ser-His-Asp catalytic triad and that the hypothetical protein is a
serine protease.
W92 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue
A couple of improvements are planned for the near future.
First, a summary of the hits from all the methods run on a given
structure will be provided in terms of common functional
terms. This should make it easier to see where the methods
are consistently coming to the same, or similar, conclusions.
The terms will be drawn not only from the protein names,
as given in the UniProt, PDB, InterPro, etc. entries from
which the hits have come, but also from any available func-
tional annotations from these databases and from the Gene
Ontology (26,27).
A second improvement will be to combine the ProFunc
results with PDBsum analyses, generated specifically for
the structure. The PDBsum database (28) already has a feature
that enables upload of a structure for the generation of secure
PDBsum pages and its analyses could greatly help in the study
of any newly solved protein structure.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Dr Martin Senger for his SOAP
interface to the BLAST server and Dr Siamak Sobhany for
access to his SSM SOAP server. This work was performed
with funding from the National Institutes of Heath, grant num-
ber GM62414, the US DoE under contract W-31-109-Eng-38
and also as part of the BioSapiens Project which is funded by
the European Commission within its FP6 Programme, under
the thematic area ’Life sciences, genomics and biotechnology
for health’, contract number LHSG-CT-2003-503265. Funding
to pay the Open Access publication charges for this article was
provided by the former grant.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Berman,H.M., Westbrook,J., Feng,Z., Gilliland,G., Bhat,T.N.,
Weissig,H., Shindyalov,I.N. and Bourne,P.E. (2000) The Protein Data
Bank. Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 235–242.
2. Berman,H.M. and Westbrook,J.D. (2004) The impact of structural
genomics on the Protein Data Bank. Am. J. Pharmacogenomics,
4, 247–252.
3. Watson,J.D., Laskowski,R.A. and Thornton,J.M. (2005) Predicting
protein function from structure and structural data. Curr. Opin. Struct.
Biol., in press.
4. Laskowski,R.A., Watson,J.D. and Thornton,J.M. (2003) From protein
structure to biochemical function? J. Struct. Funct. Genomics,
4, 167–177.
5. Altschul,S.F., Madden,T.L., Schaffer,A.A., Zhang,J., Zhang,Z.,
Miller,W. and Lipman,D.J. (1997) Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST:
a new generation of protein database search programs. Nucleic
Acids Res., 25, 3389–3402.
6. Apweiler,R., Bairoch,A., Wu,C.H., Barker,W.C., Boeckmann,B.,
Ferro,S., Gasteiger,E., Huang,H., Lopez,R., Magrane,M. et al. (2004)
UniProt: the Universal Protein knowledgebase. Nucleic Acids Res.,
32, D115–D119.
7. Valdar,W.S.J. and Thornton,J.M. (2001) Conservation helps to identify
biologically relevant crystal contacts. J. Mol. Biol., 313, 399–416.
8. Mulder,N.J., Apweiler,R., Attwood,T.K., Bairoch,A., Barrell,D.,
Bateman,A., Binns,D., Biswas,M., Bradley,P., Bork,P. et al. (2003)
The InterPro Database, 2003 brings increased coverage and new features.
Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 315–318.
9. Zdobnov,E.M. and Apweiler,R. (2001) InterProScan: an integration
platform for the signature-recognition methods in Inter Pro.
Bioinformatics, 17, 847–848.
10. Madera,M., Vogel,C., Kummerfeld,S.K., Chothia,C. and Gough,J.
(2004) The SUPERFAMILY database in 2004: additions and
improvements. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D235–D239.
11. Krissinel,E. and Henrick,K. (2003) Protein structure comparison in 3D
based on secondary structure matching (SSM) followed by Ca alignment,
scored by a new structural similarity function. In Kungl,A.J. and
Kungl,P.J. (eds), Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on
Molecular Structural Biology, 3–7 September. Vienna, Austria, p. 88.
12. Laskowski,R.A. (1995) SURFNET: a program for visualizing molecular
surfaces, cavities and intermolecular interactions. J. Mol. Graph.,
13, 323–330.
13. Sayle,R.A. and Milner-White,E.J. (1995) RASMOL: biomolecular
graphics for all. Trends Biochem. Sci., 20, 374–376.
14. Lichtarge,O. and Sowa,M.E. (2002) Evolutionary predictions of
binding surfaces and interactions. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.,
12, 21–27.
15. Madabushi,S., Yao,H., Marsh,M., Kristensen,D.M., Philippi,A.,
Sowa,M.E. and Lichtarge,O. (2002) Structural clusters of evolutionary
trace residues are statistically significant and common in proteins.
J. Mol. Biol., 316, 139–154.
16. Glaser,F., Pupko,T., Paz,I., Bell,R.E., Bechor,D., Martz,E. and
Ben-Tal,N. (2003) ConSurf: identification of functional regions in
proteins by surface-mapping of phylogenetic information.
Bioinformatics, 19, 163–164.
17. Lichtarge,O., Bourne,H.R. and Cohen,F.E. (1996) An evolutionary trace
method defines binding surfaces common to protein families.
J. Mol. Biol., 257, 342–358.
18. Jones,S., Barker,J.A., Nobeli,I. and Thornton,J.M. (2003) Using
structural motif templates to identify proteins with DNA binding
function. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 2811–2823.
19. Watson,J.D. and Milner-White,E.J. (2002) A novel main-chain
anion-binding site in proteins: the nest. A particular combination of phi,
psi values in successive residues gives rise to anion-binding sites that
occur commonly and are found often at functionally important regions.
J. Mol. Biol., 315, 171–182.
20. Watson,J.D. and Milner-White,E.J. (2002) The conformations of
polypeptide chains where the main-chain parts of successive residues are
enantiomeric. Their occurrence in cation and anion-binding regions of
proteins. J. Mol. Biol., 315, 183–191.
21. Barker,J.A. and Thornton,J.M. (2003) An algorithm for constraint-based
structural template matching: application to 3D templates with statistical
analysis. Bioinformatics, 19, 1644–1649.
22. Wallace,A.C., Borkakoti,N. and Thornton,J.M. (1997) TESS:
a geometric hashing algorithm for deriving 3D coordinate templates for
searching structural databases. Application to enzyme active sites.
Protein Sci., 6, 2308–2323.
23. Porter,C.T., Bartlett,G.J. and Thornton,J.M. (2004) The Catalytic Site
Atlas: a resource of catalytic sites and residues identified in enzymes
using structural data. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D129–D133.
24. Wang,G. and Dunbrack,R.L.,Jr (2003) PISCES: a protein sequence
culling server. Bioinformatics, 19, 1589–1591.
25. Senger,M., Rice,P. and Oinn,T. (2003) Soaplab—a unified Sesame door
to analysis tools. In Cox,S.J. (ed.), Proceedings, UK e-Science,
All Hands Meeting, 2–4 September. Nottingham, UK, pp. 509–513.
26. The Gene Ontology Consortium (2000), Gene Ontology tool for the
unification of biology. Nature Genet., 25, 25–29.
27. Camon,E., Magrane,M., Barrell,D., Lee,V., Dimmer,E., Maslen,J.,
Binns,D., Harte,N., Lopez,R. and Apweiler,R. (2004)
The Gene Ontology Annotation (GOA) Database: sharing
knowledge in Uniprot with Gene Ontology. Nucleic Acids Res.,
32, D262–D266.
28. Laskowski,R.A., Chistyakov,V.V. and Thornton,J.M. (2005)
PDBsum more: new summaries and analyses of the known
3D structures of proteins and nucleic acids. Nucleic Acids Res.,
33, D266–D268.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Web Server issue W93
