ArrayExpress—a public repository for microarray
gene expression data at the EBI
H. Parkinson*, U. Sarkans, M. Shojatalab, N. Abeygunawardena, S. Contrino, R. Coulson,
A. Farne, G. Garcia Lara, E. Holloway, M. Kapushesky, P. Lilja, G. Mukherjee, A. Oezcimen,
T. Rayner, P. Rocca-Serra, A. Sharma, S. Sansone and A. Brazma
European Bioinformatics Institute, EMBL-EBI Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton CB10 1SD, UK
Received September 22, 2004; Revised and Accepted October 1, 2004
ABSTRACT
ArrayExpress is a public repository for microarray
data that supports the MIAME (Minimum Informa-
tion About a Microarray Experiment) requirements
and stores well-annotated raw and normalized data.
As of November 2004, ArrayExpress contains data
from 12 000 hybridizations covering 35 species.
Data can be submitted online or directly from
local databases or LIMS in a standard format, and
password-protected access to prepublication data
is provided for reviewers and authors. The data can
be retrieved by accession number or queried by vari-
ous parameters such as species, author and array
platform. A facility to query experiments by gene
and sample properties is provided for a growing
subset of curated data that is loaded in to the
ArrayExpressdatawarehouse. Data canbe visualized
and analysed using Expression Profiler, the inte-
grated data analysis tool. ArrayExpress is available
at http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress.
INTRODUCTION
ArrayExpress is an international public repository for micro-
array data established at the European Bioinformatics Institute
(EBI) in 2002 (1). ArrayExpress supports standards and
recommendations developed by the Microarray Gene Expres-
sion Data (MGED) society (www.mged.org), including the
Minimum Information About a Microarray Experiment
(MIAME) (2) and Microarray Gene Expression Mark up
Language (MAGE-ML) (3). Along with Gene Expression
Omnibus (4) and CIBEX (5), it is one of the three repositories
recommended by the MGED society (6) for storing data
related to publications. The ArrayExpress suite of databases
and applications comprises: (i) MIAMExpress, a web-based
MIAME supportive data-submission tool; (ii) the Array-
Express repository that provides public and password-
protected access to the submitted data; (iii) a query optimized
data warehouse containing a curated subset of normalized
data; and (iv) Expression Profiler, an integrated online visu-
alization and analysis tool. All the software in the Array-
Express suite is open source. Here we will focus on describing
MIAMExpress, the repository and the data warehouse;
Expression Profiler has been reviewed recently (7).
As the number of journals requiring submission to public
repositories is growing, the cost of microarray experiments is
falling and as data submission tools are improving, the volume
of data in ArrayExpress is growing rapidly. During the last
12 months the ArrayExpress content has grown more than
10-fold (Figure 1a), and as of November 2004, the repository
contains 12 000 hybridizations comprising more than 300
studies from 35 species (Figure 1b). The majority of studies
concern samples from Homo sapiens or Mus musculus.
Slightly more than 25% of the experiments have been per-
formed using Affymetrix arrays. Although the majority of
experiments study gene expression, there is a growing volume
of ChIP on Chip and Comparative Genome Hybridization data
in ArrayExpress.
SUBMISSION AND CURATION
There are two major submission routes to ArrayExpress:
(i) online via the MIAMExpress data submission tool, and
(ii) via a MAGE-ML-based pipeline set-up with an external
application or database. Currently, more than a half of all sub-
missions have been submitted online.MIAMExpress is primar-
ily aimed at users with no substantial local bioinformatics
support and with no access to a local database providing direct
deposition. No prior knowledge of the MIAME guidelines is
required, as contextual help on the information required and
help on the use of MIAMExpress is provided via links from the
web interface. Submitters progress through a series of simple
web forms todescribe their experiment andupload thedatafiles.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +44 1223 494672; Fax: +44 1223 494468; Email: parkinson@ebi.ac.uk
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use permissions, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org.
ª 2005, the authors
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 33, Database issue ª Oxford University Press 2005; all rights reserved
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D553–D555
doi:10.1093/nar/gki056
MIAMExpress is an open source software that can be custo-
mized for use bya single laboratory, or for particular application
domains. Examples of customization hosted at the EBI include
the toxicology (8) and plant-specific MIAMExpress versions.
MIAMExpress is now installed in 35 locations worldwide.
Source code and installation information can be found at
http://sourceforge.net/projects/miamexpress/.
The ArrayExpress curation team processes each submission
before it is loaded into the repository. Submissions are
checked for MIAME compliance, accuracy and completeness
of biological information provided, as well as for data con-
sistency (e.g. it is checked if submitted data files match the
specified array designs). During the curation process, the cura-
tion team may contact the submitter if inconsistencies in the
data are found. Once the data are successfully loaded into
ArrayExpress repository, the experiment is issued an accession
number and a password is provided to the submitter if
requested. The data in the repository are owned by the sub-
mitter, released on the date specified or upon publication in a
journal and no changes are made without the submitter’s con-
sent. Where array designs are commercially available these are
pre-loaded into ArrayExpress by the curators in response to
user request. Information on custom-made arrays is submitted
as a tab-delimited file containing position information and
annotation information.
The ArrayExpress curators work with external databases
when setting up a direct data-submission pipeline to ensure
that data are MIAME compliant and well formatted. Once a
pipeline is established, the submissions are curated at the
source database and monitored by ArrayExpress curators.
MAGE-ML-based pipelines have been established from
15 external databases, manufacturers or tools, including the
Stanford Microarray Database (SMD) (9), MIDAS at TIGR
(10), from externally installed MIAMExpress systems at
Cambridge University and the European Molecular Biology
Laboratory at Heidelberg, as well as the array manufacturers,
Affymetrix and Agilent.
Further data curation is performed when populating the
ArrayExpress warehouse from the repository. The curators
select data based on their MIAME compliance, presence of
normalized data and the quality of the biological annotation.
Array designs are additionally annotated to the current version
of the sequence databases at the EBI and up-to-date gene
annotation, such as InterPro (11) Gene Ontology (GO)
terms (12) and gene names are added, while the original
array annotation supporting the publication is maintained in
the repository.
DATA ACCESS AND QUERY
The highest level of organization in the ArrayExpress repos-
itory is the Experiment, which consists of one or more hybrid-
izations, usually linked to a publication. The ArrayExpress
query interface provides the ability to query for Experiments,
Protocols and Array designs by their various attributes, such as
species, authors or array platforms. Once an experiment has
been selected the users can examine the description of the
samples and protocols by navigating through the experiment,
or they can download the data for analysis locally. The data
can also be analysed and visualized online using Expression
Profiler. Password-protected access to pre-publication data is
provided for submitters and reviewers.
The ArrayExpress data warehouse [which is based on the
BioMart technology (11)] supports queries on gene attributes,
such as gene names, gene function (GO annotations) or infor-
mation on which family a gene belongs to or the motifs and
domains it contains (InterPro terms), and on sample properties.
The user can retrieve and visualize the gene expression values
for multiple experiments. For example, querying the gene
name ‘jun’ and sample property ‘leukemia’ retrieves all the
experiments that contain data for a gene annotated with this
name and that have been studied in experiments described
using the term ‘leukemia’. A list of genes that match the
query is returned. These can be visualized using line plots
and data can be selected for further analysis. Links are pro-
vided back to the repository where users can access the full
annotation and supporting raw data. Experimental data and
corresponding array designs selected by the curators on the
basis of MIAME compliance, annotation quality and compar-
ability are loaded periodically into the warehouse. A sche-
matic diagram of the software architecture is shown
in Figure 2.
FUTURE
The online submission tool MIAMExpress is being extended
to allow a spreadsheet based data batch uploading to facilitate
(a)
(b)
Figure 1. (a) The number of hybridizations from October 2003 to September
2004. (b) The content of the database is shown broken down by species.
D554 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
large-scale experiment submissions. A graph-based visualiza-
tion tool is being added to MIAMExpress and ArrayExpress.
The ArrayExpress repository and data warehouse interfaces
will be unified. The gene-based query facility in the warehouse
will be used as the basis for integrating ArrayExpress into
all EBI services more closely, for instance expression data
will be accessible from UniProt and Ensembl databases via
a Distributed Annotation System (DAS) (http://www.biodas.
org) server. As the volume of submissions continues to grow,
we expect that the curation phase at the point of submission to
the repository will be fully automated and curation efforts will
focus on adding value to submitted datamade available through
the data warehouse.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Wewould like to acknowledge the work of Patrick Kemmeren,
Catherine Leroy, PierreMarguerite, BhuwanTiwari, JaakVilo,
Cath Brooksbank, Peteri Jokkinen and the EBI systems group.
The EMBL, the European Commission (TEMBLOR, CAGE),
International Life Sciences Institute (ILSI) and the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) support ArrayExpress Development.
REFERENCES
1. Brazma,A., Parkinson,H., Sarkans,U., Shojatalab,M., Vilo,J.,
Abeygunawardena,N., Holloway,E., Kapushesky,M., Kemmeren,P.,
Lara,G.G. et al. (2003) Array Express: a public for microarray
gene expression data at the EBI. Nucleic Acids Res., 31,
68–71.
2. Brazma,A., Hingamp,P., Quackenbush,J., Sherlock,G., Spellman,P.,
Stoeckert,C., Aach,J., Ansorge,W., Ball,C.A., Causton,H.C. et al. (2001)
Minimum information about a microarray experiment (MIAME)—
toward standards for microarray data. Nature Genet., 29, 365–371.
3. Spellman,P.T., Miller,M., Stewart,J., Troup,C., Sarkans,U., Chervitz,S.,
Bernhart,D., Sherlock,G., Ball,C., Lepage,M. et al. (2002) Design and
implementation of microarray gene expression markup language
(MAGE-ML). Genome Biol., 3, RESEARCH0046.
4. Edgar,R., Domrachev,M. and Lash,A.E. (2002) Gene Expression
Omnibus:NCBI gene expression and hybridization array data repository.
Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 207–210.
5. Ikeo,K., Ishi-i,J., Tamura,T., Gojobori,T. and Tateno,Y. (2003) CIBEX:
center for information biology gene expression database. C. R. Biol.,
326, 1079–1082.
6. Ball,C.A., Brazma,A., Causton,H., Chervitz,S., Edgar,R., Hingamp,P.,
Matese,J.C., Parkinson,H.E., Quackenbush,J., Ringwald,M., Sansone,S.,
Sherlock,G., Spellman,P., Stoeckert,C., Tateno,Y., Taylor,R., White,J.
and Winegarden,N. (2004) Submission of microarray data to public
repositories. PLoS Biol., 2, 1276–1277.
7. Kapushesky,M., Kemmeren,P., Culhane,A.C., Durinck,S., Ihmels,J.,
Korner,C., Kull,M., Torrente,A., Sarkans,U., Vilo,J. et al. (2004)
Expression Profiler: next generation—an online platform for
analysis of microarray data. Nucleic Acids Res., 32,
W465–W470.
8. Mattes,W.B., Pettit,S.D., Sansone,S.A., Bushel,P.R. and Waters,M.D.
(2004) Database development in toxico genomics: issues and efforts.
Environ. Health Perspect., 112, 495–505.
9. Sherlock,G., Hernandez-Boussard,T., Kasarskis,A., Binkley,G.,
Matese,J.C., Dwight,S.S., Kaloper,M., Weng,S., Jin,H., Ball,C.A. et al.
(2001) The Stanford Microarray. Nucleic Acids Res., 29,
152–155.
10. Saeed,A.I., Sharov,V., White,J., Li,J., Liang,W., Bhagabati,N.,
Braisted,J., Klapa,M., Currier,T., Thiagarajan,M., Sturn,A., Snuffin,M.,
Rezantsev,A., Popov,D., Ryltsov,A., Kostukovich,E., Borisovsky,I.,
Liu,Z., Vinsavich,A., Trush,V. and Quackenbush,J. (2003) TM4: a free,
open-soure system for microarray data management and analysis.
Biotechniques, 34, 374–378.
11. Mulder,N.J., Apweiler,R., Attwood,T.K., Bairoch,A., Barrell,D.,
Bateman,A., Binns,D., Biswas,M., Bradley,P., Bork,P. et al. (2003) The
InterPro Database, 2003 brings increased coverage and new features.
Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 315–318.
12. Harris,M.A., Clark,J., Ireland,A., Lomax,J., Ashburner,M., Foulger,R.,
Eilbeck,K., Lewis,S., Marshall,B., Mungall,C. et al. (2004) The Gene
Ontology (GO)databaseand informatics resource.NucleicAcidsRes.,32,
D258–D261.
13. Kasprzyk,A., Keefe,D., Smedley,D., London,D., Spooner,W.,
Melsopp,C.,Hammond,M., Rocca-Serra,P., Cox,T. andBirney,E. (2004)
EnsMart: ageneric system for fast and flexible access to biological data.
Genome Res., 14, 160–169.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2. (a) The ArrayExpress architecture and database side activities are shown. (b). The functionality experienced by the user is shown.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D555
