The SWISS-PROT protein knowledgebase and its
supplement TrEMBL in 2003
Brigitte Boeckmann*, Amos Bairoch, Rolf Apweiler1, Marie-Claude Blatter,
Anne Estreicher, Elisabeth Gasteiger, Maria J. Martin1, Karine Michoud,
Claire O’Donovan1, Isabelle Phan, Sandrine Pilbout and Michel Schneider
Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Centre Medical Universitaire, 1 rue Michel Servet, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland and
1The EMBL Outstation—The European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK
Received September 16, 2002; Revised and Accepted October 23, 2002
ABSTRACT
The SWISS-PROT protein knowledgebase (http://
www.expasy.org/sprot/ and http://www.ebi.ac.uk/
swissprot/) connects amino acid sequences with
the current knowledge in the Life Sciences. Each
protein entry provides an interdisciplinary overview
of relevant information by bringing together experi-
mental results, computed features and sometimes
even contradictory conclusions. Detailed expertise
that goes beyond the scope of SWISS-PROT is made
available via direct links to specialised databases.
SWISS-PROT provides annotated entries for all
species, but concentrates on the annotation of
entries from human (the HPI project) and other
model organisms to ensure the presence of high
quality annotation for representative members of all
protein families. Part of the annotation can be
transferred to other family members, as is already
done for microbes by the High-quality Automated
and Manual Annotation of microbial Proteomes
(HAMAP) project. Protein families and groups of
proteins are regularly reviewed to keep up with
current scientiﬁc ﬁndings. Complementarily,
TrEMBL strives to comprise all protein sequences
that are not yet represented in SWISS-PROT, by
incorporating a perpetually increasing level of
mostly automated annotation. Researchers are wel-
come to contribute their knowledge to the scientiﬁc
community by submitting relevant ﬁndings to
SWISS-PROT at swiss-prot@expasy.org.
INTRODUCTION
SWISS-PROT (1) is a protein sequence and knowledge
database that is valued for its high quality annotation, the
usage of standardized nomenclature, direct links to specialized
databases and minimal redundancy. The format of SWISS-
PROT follows as closely as possible that of the EMBL
Nucleotide Sequence Database (2) for standardization pur-
poses. A description of the distinct line types and their format
is available at http://www.expasy.org/sprot/userman.html. A
sample SWISS-PROT entry can be viewed at http://www.
expasy.org/cgi-bin/niceprot.pl?P49810.
Core data and annotation
The core data, which is mandatory to each SWISS-PROT entry,
consists principally of the amino acid sequence, the protein
name (description), taxonomic data and citation information. If
further information on the protein is available, the entries
contain detailed annotation on items such as the function(s) of
the protein, enzyme-specific information (catalytic activity,
cofactors, metabolic pathway, regulation mechanisms), biolo-
gically relevant domains and sites, posttranslational modifica-
tion(s), molecular weight determined by mass spectrometry,
subcellular location(s) of the protein, tissue-specific expression,
developmentally-specific expression of the protein, secondary
structure, quaternary structure, splice isoform(s), polymor-
phism(s), similarities to other proteins, use of the protein in a
biotechnological process, diseases associated with deficiencies
in the protein, use of the protein as a pharmaceutical drug,
sequence conflicts, etc.
To acquire a maximum of up-to-date knowledge regarding a
protein, information is not only obtained from publications
reporting new sequence data, but also from review articles with
an aim to revise periodically the annotations of families or
groups of proteins. Furthermore, we have enlisted external
experts, who have been recruited to send us their comments
and updates concerning specific groups of proteins (see http://
www.expasy.org/cgi-bin/experts).
Standardized nomenclature and controlled vocabularies
Consistent nomenclature is indispensable for communication
and literature search. Right from the start, SWISS-PROT aimed
to standardize the nomenclature for a given protein and its
isoforms across related organisms. For various SWISS-PROT
items, we use controlled vocabularies, e.g. for tissues, plasmids
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: brigitte.boeckmann@isb-sib.ch
# 2003 Oxford University Press Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 1 365–370
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkg095
and keywords, which are listed in documents distributed with
SWISS-PROT (see http://www.expasy.org/sprot/sp-docu.html).
Whenever available, we make use of the official nomenclature
defined by international committees while still providing the
published synonyms.
Integration with other databases
SWISS-PROT provides cross-references to external data
collections such as the underlying DNA sequence entries in
the DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank nucleotide sequence databases, 2D
and 3D protein structure databases, various protein domain and
family characterization databases, posttranslational modifica-
tion (PTM) databases, species-specific data collections, variant
databases and disease databases.
Minimal redundancy
Many sequence databases contain, for a given protein
sequence, separate entries which correspond to different
literature reports. In SWISS-PROT, we try as much as possible
to merge all these data in order to minimise the redundancy of
the database. Differences between sequencing reports due to
splice variants, polymorphisms, disease-causing mutations,
experimental sequence modifications or simply sequencing
errors are indicated in the feature table of the corresponding
SWISS-PROT entry. Splice isoforms may differ considerably
from one another, with potentially less than 50% sequence
similarity between isoforms. The tool VARSPLIC (3), which
is freely available (ftp://ftp.expasy.org/databases/sp_tr_nrdb/
varsplic.txt), enables the recreation of all annotated splice
variants from the feature table of a SWISS-PROT entry, or for
the complete database. A fasta-formatted file containing all
splice variants annotated in SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL (1)
can be downloaded for use with similarity search programs.
Most sequence analysis and proteomic tools on ExPASy
(http://www.expasy.org/tools/), e.g. BLAST or PeptIdent, have
been adapted to take into account, in addition to all SWISS-
PROT and TrEMBL entries, all annotated splice isoforms.
TrEMBL: A computer-annotated supplement to
SWISS-PROT
Due to the increased data flow from genome projects to
the sequence databases, the SWISS-PROT protein knowledge-
base faced a number of challenges in its time- and labour-
intensive way of manual database annotation. While it is
necessary to maintain the high annotation quality as described
above, it is also vital to make sequences available as quickly as
possible. To address this, we introduced TrEMBL (translation
of EMBL nucleotide sequence database) in 1996. TrEMBL
consists of computer-annotated entries derived from the
translation of all coding sequences (CDS) in the nucleotide
sequence databases, except for CDS already included in
SWISS-PROT. It also contains protein sequences extracted
from the literature and protein sequences submitted directly by
the user community.
It is subdivided into two sections: SP-TrEMBL contains
sequences, which will eventually be incorporated into
SWISS-PROT and REM-TrEMBL contains those, which will
not. These include immunoglobulins and T-cell receptors,
synthetic sequences, patent application sequences, fragments
of less than 8 amino acids and coding sequences where there is
strong experimental evidence that the sequence does not code
for a real protein. In addition, there is a weekly update to
TrEMBL called TrEMBLnew. TrEMBLnew is produced
weekly from new nucleotide sequences deposited in the
EMBL nucleotide sequence database. At each TrEMBL
release, the TrEMBLnew entries are processed; any entries
redundant against SWISS-PROT/TrEMBL (4) are merged and
the remainder then progressed into TrEMBL (5).
PROGRESS REPORT ON PROJECTS
SWISS-PROT is regularly enhanced in its content and format
to adequately mirror new findings. The distinct line types are
continuously overhauled, their content adapted to the current
knowledge and the structure standardized to facilitate easy
retrieval of related data. Details on recent changes and
forthcoming developments are available in the release notes
at http://www.expasy.org/sprot/relnotes/. Various projects with
considerable progress are described in more detail below.
The Human Proteomics Initiative (HPI)
The goal of the HPI project (6) is to annotate all known human
protein sequences and their mammalian orthologs. HPI places
a special emphasis on actors playing a role in generating high
levels of protein diversity.
The majority of proteins are the target of PTMs. Close to two
hundred different PTMs are currently known: e.g. various
proteolytic cleavages, the additions of simple chemical groups
or complex molecules, disulfide bond formation. We add and
update the annotation of PTMs according to experimental
evidence.
Up to 60% of human genes have alternatively spliced
isoforms (7,8), with an estimated average of 2.75 alternative
splice isoforms per gene (7). All known alternatively spliced
isoform sequences for a given protein are described in the
feature table of the SWISS-PROT entry, and each publication
concerning the described sequence is referenced. The existence
of various alternative splicing isoforms is validated by
comparison with genomic and EST sequences and by careful
analysis of the gene structure.
Single amino acid polymorphism (SAP) variants, primarily
those linked to disease states, are continuously integrated into
SWISS-PROT. Currently, more than 18% of the human entries
describe at least one SAP. The total number of SAPs is 13 697.
Whenever it is possible, we provide a direct link to dbSNP
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SNP/) at the National Center for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI).
SWISS-PROT is gradually being enhanced by the addition of
a number of features that are specifically intended for
researchers working on human genetic diseases, such as links
to human gene databases [OMIM (9), GeneCards (10),
GeneLynx (11), Genew (12)] as well as to many gene-specific
mutation databases. Medically relevant keywords are created
continuously and information relevant to the use of specific
proteins as therapeutic agents is stored. Brand names, as well
as names of companies developing and selling the drug are
also indicated.
366 Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 1
A special effort is being made to annotate proteins encoded
on chromosomes 20, 21 and 22, which were the first
chromosomes to be fully sequenced and partially annotated
(13–15). Currently, SWISS-PROT is nearly synchronised with
the current state of knowledge of proteins encoded on these
chromosomes.
SWISS-PROT contains 8398 annotated human sequences.
These sequences are associated with 26 897 literature refer-
ences, 21 563 experimental or predicted PTMs. 2463 splice
variants are described in 1371 entries. Up-to-date statistics are
available at http://www.expasy. org/sprot/hpi/hpi_stat.html. For
all aspects of the HPI project, we appreciate the help and
collaboration of the scientific community. Information con-
cerning the human proteome is highly critical to a large section
of the life science community. We, therefore, appeal to the user
community to fully participate in this initiative by providing all
the necessary information to help and accelerate the compre-
hensive annotation of the human proteome (hpi@isb-sib.ch).
The International Protein Index (IPI)
IPI (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/IPI) provides a top-level guide to the
main databases that describe the human proteome, namely
SWISS-PROT, TrEMBL, RefSeq and Ensembl. IPI maintains a
database of cross-references between the primary data sources
in order to provide a set of human proteins with minimal
redundancy yet maximal completeness (one sequence per
transcript). Stable identifiers (with incremental versioning) are
maintained within IPI facilitating the tracking of sequences
between IPI releases. IPI is produced automatically through
mapping on the basis of protein similarity between the
different data sets. Each IPI entry consists of a cluster of
related entries from the constituent databases, together with a
sequence and a description line taken from a master entry.
These data are presented in FASTA format and in SWISS-
PROT format. The latter contains additional cross-references
linking IPI to GO (16), Genew, LocusLink (17) and InterPro
(18), and identifies the chromosome on which the gene
encoding each IPI entry is found.
High-quality Automated and Manual Annotation of
microbial Proteomes (HAMAP)
More than 80 archaeal and bacterial genomes have been
sequenced and many more are under way. In order to be able to
handle this huge number of microbial proteins, we have set up
the HAMAP project (http://www.expasy.org/sprot/hamap/),
which aims to automatically annotate a significant percentage
of proteins from complete bacterial and archaeal proteomes
while maintaining the same level of quality that we obtain
through manual annotation. The targets of automated annota-
tion are proteins with no similarity to other proteins (ORFans)
and proteins that are members of protein (sub)families.
Various prediction tools are applied to proteins that show no
similarity to known protein families. Possible transmembrane
regions, signal sequence, coiled coils, ATP/GTP binding-sites,
LPXTG motifs and some defined repeats are automatically
annotated using rules of consistency and dependency, and
without any further manual verification.
Proteins belonging to well-characterized protein (sub)fami-
lies can be annotated automatically using a rule system that
describes the extent and nature of annotations that can be
assigned by similarity with a prototype manually-annotated
entry. Such a rule system also includes a carefully edited
multiple alignment of the (sub)family, which is used both to
propagate feature annotation from a model entry and to
generate identification profiles. Species-specific rules and rules
specific to the biochemical pathways are used to develop a
system able to spot inconsistencies at the level of the entire
proteome.
Currently, we have developed 650 (sub)family rules, each
with at least one multiple sequence alignment and correspond-
ing profile for identification of further family members. These
profiles are scanned nightly against the TrEMBL entries from
complete proteomes. Based on their profile score, entries with
high-confidence matches are selected for automated annotation
according to the family rule. These entries are further checked
to make sure that no errors are introduced into SWISS-PROT.
More than 36 000 proteins from complete proteomes have been
annotated (manually or semi-automatically) and integrated into
SWISS-PROT so far.
Since many proteins are common to both prokaryotes and
plastids (chloroplast and cyanelle) genomes, we have included
complete plastid proteomes in the frame of HAMAP. For the
moment, 24 such genomes have been completely sequenced
and they consist of about 2500 proteins. The family rules can
take into account special conditions required for the proper
annotation of these proteins in their specific context.
More than 40% of the SWISS-PROT entries from microbial
and plastids proteomes belong to a HAMAP family. Five
complete proteomes have been fully annotated in SWISS-
PROT: Escherichia coli, Buchnera aphidicola subsp.
Acyrtosiphon pisum, Haemophilus influenzae, Mycoplasma
genitalium and Mycoplasma pneumoniae. Bacillus subtilis and
Methanococcus jannaschii will be completed shortly.
Model organisms
In addition to our efforts in the priority annotation of human
proteins (see HPI project) and microbes (see HAMAP), 9
eukaryotic species that are the target of genome sequencing
and/or mapping projects are considered as model organisms:
Arabidopsis thaliana, Caenorhabditis elegans, Candida
albicans, Danio rerio, Dictyostelium discoideum, Drosophila
melanogaster, Mus musculus, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and
Schizosaccharaomyces pombe. Data exchange established with
species-specific databases ensures that new and corrected data
are incorporated and provided to the public as quickly as
possible. Cross-references to these databases are regularly
updated.
Collectively, the entries from all model organisms (including
human) represent about a third of all SWISS-PROT (August
2002) entries. SWISS-PROT builds species-specific indices for
most model organisms. Statistical and comparative analysis
information for proteomes of fully sequenced genomes can be
obtained at http://www.ebi.ac.uk/proteome/, a site that also
provides access to non-redundant data sets for these organisms.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 1 367
Plant Proteome Annotation Project (PPAP)
We have initiated the PPAP. Emphasis is currently given to the
annotation of plant-specific protein families from A. thaliana.
The main problem for plant sequences encountered to date is
the unreliability of the gene prediction programs. About one
third of the predicted genes need correction when compared
with newly released full-length cDNAs. We will broaden our
scope to other species when additional plant genomes become
available. SWISS-PROT contains currently 8831 sequence
entries from plants, of which 1675 are from A. thaliana. More
information on PPAP can be found at http://www.expasy.org/
sprot/ppap.
The New Taxonomy database (NEWT)
The NEWT database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/newt/) serves as a
taxonomic portal to SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL. For each
species, NEWT displays the SWISS-PROT scientific name,
SWISS-PROT common name and SWISS-PROT synonym(s),
lineage, number of protein sequence entries in SWISS-PROT
and TrEMBL as well as links to each entry. The taxonomic
classification used in SWISS-PROT is that maintained at the
NCBI (see http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/). Species
with protein sequences stored in the SWISS-PROT protein
database are named according to SWISS-PROT nomenclature:
following SWISS-PROT conventions, a systematic approach
for naming viral and bacterial strains has been adopted and we
endeavor to include both the teleomorph name and the
anamorph name for fungi. NEWT is updated daily and stores
the taxonomy tree structure, which enables users to navigate
from one taxon to another and to access the lineage for each
taxon. Currently (August 2002), we provide more than 16 000
links to relevant external pictures and sites presenting various
scientific data.
Cross-references and unique feature identifiers
Since its inception, SWISS-PROT has placed a major emphasis
on integration with other databases and thus became a central
hub for biomolecular information archived in currently 66
databases (http://www. expasy. org/cgi-bin/lists?dbxref.txt)
(20). For many years, this interconnectivity was achieved
almost exclusively via SWISS-PROT DR (Database Cross-
Reference) lines, i.e. explicit links [to 44 databases]. There are
an average of 7.5 cross-references for each sequence entry.
More recently, implicit links [to currently 22 databases] have
been introduced (20), i.e. virtual DR lines created on the fly on
the ExPASy server.
We have recently increased the level of depth and complexity
of database cross-references, by allowing links also to and
from subsequences or particular sites, rather than only to
complete entries. This concept can be applied to databases
specialised in certain types of PTMs, or in mutations. We have,
therefore, introduced unique and stable feature identifiers
(FTId), which allows referral to a position-specific annotation
item in the feature table. Currently, these are systematically
attributed to FT VARIANT lines of human sequence entries,
and to certain glycosylation sites, but will ultimately be
assigned to all types of FT lines. The FTIds of human variants
are used to refer to a sequence variation in a unique and stable
manner, and serve as anchors for specifically directed links to
dbSNP (9). The same principle is used to further enhance the
links to GlycoSuiteDB (21), an annotated database of glycan
structures. An example for the new type of cross-references
can be found in the SWISS-PROT entry P02765.
SWISS-PROT documentation files
SWISS-PROT is distributed with a large number of documen-
tation files. Some of these files have been available for a long
time (the user manual, release notes, the various indices for
authors, citations, keywords, etc.), but many species-specific
documents have been created recently and we are continuously
adding new files. See http://www.expasy.org/sprot/sp-docu.
html for a list of all the documents that are currently available.
Automatic functional annotation in TrEMBL
For automatic annotation, a novel system of standardised
transfer of annotation from well-characterized proteins in
SWISS-PROT to non-annotated TrEMBL entries has been
developed (22). RuleBase (5) manages and stores more
than 500 annotation rules, which are applied to defined protein
groups in TrEMBL. To assign TrEMBL entries into protein
groups, the highly diagnostic protein family signature database
InterPro (18) is used. This is an integrated resource of protein
families, domains and sites which amalgamates the efforts of
the member databases which are currently PROSITE (23),
PRINTS (24), Pfam (25), ProDom (26), SMART (27) and
TIGRFAMs (28). This system has been used to improve the
annotation in 25% of all TrEMBL entries. A new data mining
approach to the automatic annotation is being developed to
complement this approach, which should lead to an increased
coverage by automatic annotation over the next year.
Evidence attribution in TrEMBL
Evidence attribution is of growing importance since large
biomolecular databases usually combine data from a broad
variety of sources. TrEMBL, in particular, contains data
automatically imported from the underlying EMBL/DDBJ/
GenBank coding sequences, partial manual curation, data
imported from other databases, data from specific programs
and the results of automatic annotation systems. Although
every effort is made to ensure correct and consistent data, the
data quality is often limited by the quality of the input data.
Currently, it is often difficult for database users to recognise
where individual data items come from. To address these
issues, we started, in June 2000, to add evidence tags to the
internal version of TrEMBL. Evidence tags will allow users to
trace the source of each data item added by a curator and to
readily distinguish between experimental and predicted data.
An evidence-tagged version of the TrEMBL database will soon
be available in XML format. Please see ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/
databases/trembl/evidenceDocumentation.html for more infor-
mation. We would welcome any feedback from the user
community.
368 Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 1
PRACTICAL INFORMATION
SWISS-PROT contains 113 470 sequence entries. Up-to-date
statistics are available at http://www.expasy.org/sprot/relnotes/
relstat.html. The data file (sequences and annotations) requires
377 Mb of disk storage space. The documentation and index
files require 121 Mb of disk space. TrEMBL contains 755 169
sequence entries (SP-TrEMBL: 685 601; REM-TrEMBL:
79 568), TrEMBLnew contains 93 546 entries. Up-to-date
statistics are available at http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ swissprot/
sptr_stats/. The SP-TrEMBL and REM-TrEMBL data files
require 1.2 Gb and 82 Mb of disk storage space, respectively.
Interactive access to SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL
The most efficient and user-friendly way to browse inter-
actively in SWISS-PROT or TrEMBL is to use the ExPASy
web server at http://www.expasy.org/ (see http://www.
expasy.org/doc/expasy.pdf), one of its complete and up-to-
date mirror sites in Australia, Canada, China, Korea, Taiwan
and the USA, or the EBI server (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/).
On both the ExPASy and the EBI Web servers, you can use
the Sequence Retrieval System (SRS) (29) software package to
query and retrieve sequence entries. The EBI and ExPASy also
offer a range of search services (see http://www.ebi.ac.uk/
Tools/ or http://www.expasy.org/tools/) to run Smith–
Waterman, FASTA and BLAST sequence similarity searches
or proteomic identification tools against SWISS-PROT and
TrEMBL.
How to obtain the SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL databases
SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL can be obtained by anonymous
FTP from the ExPASy server ftp.expasy.org and EBI server
ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/. Further information how to obtain weekly
updates and complete data sets in various formats is available
at http://www.expasy.org/sprot/download.html.
Format issues
Currently, SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL are maintained and
distributed as flat files. An inherent problem of flat file
databanks is that their maintenance becomes increasingly
difficult when they grow large in size and many people are
involved in the production of the data. To overcome these
shortcomings, a Relational Database Management System has
been developed and we are in the process of porting the
production of SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL to this new system,
as well as developing a new file format based on the Extensible
Markup Language (XML): the SWISS-PROT Markup
Language (SP-ML) see http://www.ebi.ac.uk/swissprot/SP-
ML for documentation and samples. In order to develop a
good representation of the data using either XML or a
relational schema, we are designing a conceptual data model
that describes the structure and constraints present in the data,
using the Unified Modeling Language (UML) notation.
Submission of new data and updates
To submit updates and/or corrections to SWISS-PROT, you
can either use the email address: swiss-prot@expasy.org or
the WWW address http://www.expasy.org/sprot/sp_update_
form.html. To submit new sequence data to SWISS-PROT
and for all enquiries regarding the submission process contact:
SWISS-PROT, The EMBL Outstation—The European
Bioinformatics Institute Wellcome Trust Genome Campus,
Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK. Tel: þ44 1223494444;
Fax: þ44 1223494468; Email: datasubs@ebi.ac.uk (for
submission); datalib@ebi.ac.uk (for enquiries).
No fees for academic users
The use of SWISS-PROT is free of charge for academic users.
However, in September 1998 we implemented a system of
annual subscription fees for commercial users of the database.
The Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB) and the EMBL/
EBI mandated the company Geneva Bioinformatics (GeneBio)
(see http://www.genebio.com) to act as their representative for
the purpose of concluding the necessary license agreements
and levying the fees. The funds raised are used at the SIB and
the EBI to bring and keep SWISS-PROT up-to-date and to
further enhance its quality.
CONCLUSIONS
Over the past years SWISS-PROT could not only keep up with
the high quality of annotation, but has continuously enhanced
its format and content to adjust to the exploding knowledge in
proteomics. With exemplary model organisms in view, we
accomplished high annotation standards that were transferred
to all the database entries. Automated annotation procedures
are used for SWISS-PROT in a very conservative manner and
are only applied where they allow the achievement of the
same level of quality as obtained by manual annotation. The
extensive integration of SWISS-PROT with specialized
databases enables users to navigate through the current
knowledge in the Life Sciences providing an insight into the
universe of proteins.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We wish to thank Andrea Auchincloss, Livia Famiglietti and
Michele Magrane for helpful discussions, and Vivienne Baillie
Gerritsen for the correction of the manuscript. All statistical
information given in this article is retrieved from SWISS-
PROT release 40.27 (August 2002) and TrEMBL release 21.10
(September 2002), respectively.
REFERENCES
1. O’Donovan,C., Martin,M.J., Gattiker,A., Gasteiger,E., Bairoch,A. and
Apweiler,R. (2002) High-quality protein knowledge resource: SWISS-
PROT and TrEMBL. Brief. Bioinform., 3, 275–284.
2. Stoesser,G., Baker,W., van den Broek,A., Camon,E., Garcia-Pastor,M.,
Kanz,C., Kulikova,T., Leinonen,R., Lin,Q., Lombard,V. et al. (2002) The
EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 21–26.
3. Kersey,P., Hermjakob,H. and Apweiler,R. (2000) VARSPLIC: alterna-
tively-spliced protein sequences derived from SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL.
Bioinformatics, 11, 1048–1049.
4. O’Donovan,C., Martin,M.J., Glemet,E., Codani,J.-J. and Apweiler,R.
(1999) Removing redundancy in SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL.
Bioinformatics, 15, 258–259.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 1 369
5. Apweiler,R. (2001) Functional information in SWISS-PROT: the basis for
large-scale characterisation of protein sequences. Brief. Bioinform., 2,
9–18.
6. O’Donovan,C., Apweiler,R. and Bairoch,A. (2001) The human proteomics
initiative (HPI). Trends Biotechnol., 19, 178–181.
7. Brett,D., Pospisil,H., Valcarcel,J., Reich,J. and Bork,P. (2002) Alternative
splicing and genome complexity. Nature Genet., 30, 29–30.
8. Modrek,B. and Lee,C. (2002) A genomic view of alternative splicing.
Nature Genet., 1, 13–19.
9. Wheeler,D.L., Church,D.M., Lash,A.E., Leipe,D.D., Madden,T.L.,
Pontius,J.U., Schuler,G.D., Schriml,L.M., Tatusova,T.A., Wagner,L. and
Rapp,B.A. (2002) Database resources of the National Center for
Biotechnology Information: 2002 update. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 13–16.
10. Rebhan,M., Chalifa-Caspi,V., Prilusky,J. and Lancet,D. (1998) GeneCards:
a novel functional genomics compendium with automated data mining and
query reformulation support. Bioinformatics, 14, 656–664.
11. Lenhard,B., Hayes,W.S. and Wasserman,W.W. (2001) GeneLynx: a gene-
centric portal to the human genome. Genome Res., 11, 2151–2157.
12. Wain,H.M., Lush,M., Ducluzeau,F. and Povey,S. (2002) Genew: the human
gene nomenclature database. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 169–171.
13. Deloukas,P., Matthews,L.H., Ashurst,J., Burton,J., Gilbert,J.G., Jones,M.,
Stavrides,G., Almeida,J.P., Babbage,A.K., Bagguley,C.L. et al. (2001) The
DNA sequence and comparative analysis of human chromosome 20.
Nature, 414, 865–871.
14. Hattori,M., Fujiyama,A., Taylor,T.D., Watanabe,H., Yada,T., Park,H.S.,
Toyoda,A., Ishii,K., Totoki,Y., Choi,D.K. et al. (2000) The DNA sequence
of human chromosome 21. Nature, 405, 311–319.
15. Dunham,I., Shimizu,N., Roe,B.A., Chissoe,S., Hunt,A.R., Collins,J.E.,
Bruskiewich,R., Beare,D.M., Clamp,M., Smink,L.J. et al. (1999) The DNA
sequence of human chromosome 22. Nature, 402, 489–495.
16. Ashburner,M., Ball,C.A., Blake,J.A., Botstein,D., Butler,H., Cherry,J.M.,
Davis,A.P., Dolinski,K., Dwight,S.S., Eppig,J.T. et al. (2000) Gene
ontology: tool for the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology
Consortium. Nature Genet., 25, 25–29.
17. Pruitt,K.D. and Maglott,D.R. (2001) RefSeq and LocusLink: NCBI gene-
centered resources. Nucleic Acids Res., 29, 137–140.
18. Apweiler,R., Attwood,T.K., Bairoch,A., Bateman,A., Birney,E.,
Biswas,M., Bucher,P., Cerutti,L., Corpet,F., Croning,M.D. et al. (2001) The
InterPro database, an integrated documentation resource for protein
families, domains and functional sites. Nucleic Acids Res., 29,
37–40.
19. Fleischmann,R.D., Adams,M.D., White,O., Clayton,R.A., Kirkness,E.F.,
Kerlavage,A.R., Bult,C.J., Tomb,J.-F., Dougherty,B.A., Merrick,J.M. et al.
(1995) Whole-genome random sequencing and assembly of Haemophilus
influenzae Rd. Science, 269, 496–512.
20. Gasteiger,E., Jung,E. and Bairoch,A. (2001) SWISS-PROT: connecting
biomolecular knowledge via a protein database. Curr. Issues Mol. Biol., 3,
47–55.
21. Cooper,C.A., Harrison,M.J., Wilkins,M.R. and Packer,N.H. (2001)
GlycoSuiteDB: a new curated relational database of glycoprotein glycan
structures and their biological sources. Nucleic Acids Res., 29, 332–335.
22. Fleischmann,W., Moeller,S., Gateau,A. and Apweiler,R. (1999) A novel
method for automatic and reliable functional annotation. Bioinformatics,
15, 228–233.
23. Falquet,L., Pagni,M., Bucher,P., Hulo,N., Sigrist,C.J.A., Hofmann,K. and
Bairoch,A. (2002) The PROSITE database, its status in 2002. Nucleic
Acids Res., 30, 235–238.
24. Attwood,T.K., Blythe,M.J., Flower,D.R., Gaulton,A., Mabey,J.E.,
Maudling,N., McGregor,L., Mitchell,A.L., Moulton,G., Paine,K. and
Scordis,P. (2002) PRINTS and PRINTS-S shed light on protein ancestry.
Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 239–241.
25. Bateman,A., Birney,E., Cerruti,L., Durbin,R., Etwiller,L., Eddy,S.R.,
Griffiths-Jones,S., Howe,K.L., Marshall,M. and Sonnhammer,E.L.L.
(2002) The Pfam Protein Families Database. Nucleic Acids Res., 30,
276–280.
26. Corpet,F., Servant,F., Gouzy,J. and Kahn,D. (2000) ProDom and ProDom-
CG: tools for protein domain analysis and whole genome comparisons.
Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 267–269.
27. Letunic,I., Goodstadt,L., Dickens,N.J., Doerks,T., Schultz,J., Mott,R.,
Ciccarelli,F., Copley,R.R., Ponting,C.P. and Bork,P. (2002) Recent
improvements to the SMART domain-based sequence annotation resource.
Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 242–244.
28. Haft,D.H., Loftus,B.J., Richardson,D.L., Yang,F., Eisen,J.A., Paulsen,I.T.
and White,O. (2001) TIGRFAMs: a protein family resource for the
functional identification of proteins. Nucleic Acids Res., 29, 41–43.
29. Etzold,T. and Argos,P. (1993) SRS—an indexing and retrieval tool for flat
file data libraries. Comput. Appl. Biosci., 9, 49–57.
370 Nucleic Acids Research, 2003, Vol. 31, No. 1
