Expansion of the BioCyc collection of
pathway/genome databases to 160 genomes
Peter D. Karp*, Christos A. Ouzounis1, Caroline Moore-Kochlacs, Leon Goldovsky1,
Pallavi Kaipa, Dag Ahre´n1, Sophia Tsoka1, Nikos Darzentas1, Victor Kunin1
and Nu´ria Lo´pez-Bigas1
Bioinformatics Research Group, SRI International, EK207, 333 Ravenswood Avenue, Menlo Park, CA 94025,
USA and 1Computational Genomics Group, The European Bioinformatics Institute,
EMBL Cambridge Outstation, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK
Received August 4, 2005; Revised and Accepted September 26, 2005
ABSTRACT
The BioCyc database collection is a set of 160 path-
way/genome databases (PGDBs) for most eukaryotic
and prokaryotic species whose genomes have been
completely sequenced to date. Each PGDB in the
BioCyc collection describes the genome and pre-
dicted metabolic network of a single organism,
inferred from the MetaCyc database, which is a refer-
ence source on metabolic pathways from multiple
organisms. In addition, each bacterial PGDB includes
predicted operons for the corresponding species.
The BioCyc collection provides a unique resource
for computational systems biology, namely global
and comparative analyses of genomes and meta-
bolic networks, and a supplement to the BioCyc
resource of curated PGDBs. The Omics viewer avail-
able through the BioCyc website allows scientists to
visualize combinations of gene expression, proteo-
mics and metabolomics data on the metabolic maps
of these organisms. This paper discusses the compu-
tational methodology by which the BioCyc collection
has been expanded, and presents an aggregate ana-
lysis of the collection that includes the range of num-
ber of pathways present in these organisms, and the
most frequently observed pathways. We seek scient-
ists to adopt and curate individual PGDBs within the
BioCyc collection. Only by harnessing the expertise
of many scientists we can hope to produce biological
databases, which accurately reflect the depth and
breadth of knowledge that the biomedical research
community is producing.
INTRODUCTION
How should biological knowledge repositories be created
and updated in the post-genome era to maximize the accuracy
of our rapidly evolving knowledge about the genome and
biochemical network of each organism? Without a clear
roadmap for this vast information space, chaos will reign
among the hundreds of competing and overlapping databases
that are arising. We propose a strategy based on the following
tenets.
For every organism whose genome has been sequenced and
that has a significant experimental community, it is critical that
an organism-specific database be created, and curated on an
ongoing basis, to provide an up-to-date, authoritative, central
resource on the evolving knowledge about the genome and the
biochemical network of that organism. Often called model
organism databases, or organism-specific databases, examples
include EcoCyc for Escherichia coli (1), PseudoCyc for
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (2), PlasmoCyc for Plasmodium
falciparum (3), SGD for Saccharomyces cerevisiae (4),
TAIR for Arabidopsis thaliana (5), MGD for Mus musculus
(mouse) (6) and FlyBase for Drosophila melanogaster (7).
No one group can curate all the world’s genomes. There-
fore, it is imperative to involve many scientists in the updation
of each database, ideally centred around scientific communit-
ies sharing an interest in a specific organism, or a related group
of organisms (8). Pathway/genome databases (PGDBs) pro-
vide a mechanism to integrate genome information into
higher-order biochemical or gene networks, such as metabolic
pathways and transcription units (9,10). They also express
a scientific theory within a formal ontology and make it
available for computational analysis (11).
The BioCyc collection described herein is partly a mech-
anism for bootstrapping this process. We originally demon-
strated the value of this approach by constructing a PGDB
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 650 8594358; Fax: +1 650 8593735; Email pkarp@ai.sri.com
Correspondence may also be addressed to Christos A. Ouzounis. Tel: +44 1223 494653; Fax: +44 1223 494471; Email: cao@ebi.ac.uk
 The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 19 6083–6089
doi:10.1093/nar/gki892
 Published online October 24, 2005
for Haemophilus influenzae (12), the first species whose
genome was deciphered, 10 years ago (13). By creating
draft versions of many organism-specific PGDBs that can
then be adopted by outside groups for curation, we are lower-
ing the barrier to initiating such curation efforts. Because most
of the BioCyc PGDBs are openly available, outside groups can
use, update and redistribute them, without intellectual property
restrictions. We request (although we do not require)
that adopters make the modified versions of their PGDBs
openly available as well. Adopters are free to publish
PGDBs on their own websites by using the same Pathway
Tools software that powers the BioCyc website (14). We fur-
ther propose that when adopters insert new experimentally
determined metabolic pathways in an adopted PGDB, they
also kindly submit those pathways for inclusion in the Meta-
Cyc database (15). The set of reference metabolic pathways in
MetaCyc will thus continue to expand by including commun-
ity contributions, enabling more accurate pathway predictions
in the future.
Pathway Tools provides a suite of graphical interactive
editing tools (such as a pathway editor and an operon editor)
that allow multiple geographically distributed authors to
concurrently update a single PGDB through the Internet.
This approach is our recommended mechanism for collabora-
tion among multiple authors; concurrent updating of multiple
copies of a single organism’s PGDB will yield divergent
databases that will be difficult to reconcile or merge.
As well as bootstrapping curation efforts by other groups,
the BioCyc database collection is a useful resource in its own
right. It provides a collection of metabolic pathway reconstruc-
tions and (where applicable) operon predictions for many
organisms, available as a reference source through the BioCyc
website. Each database can serve as a resource for the ana-
lysis of gene expression, proteomics and metabolomics data
(alone or in combination) by using the Pathway Tools Omics
Viewer, a web-based tool for painting overlaying datasets
onto the Cellular Overview diagram—a wiring diagram
for the metabolic network of the cell (see http://BioCyc.org/
expr-examples/animation.html for an example).
The BioCyc collection is also an important tool for both
scientific research and technology development on a genome-
wide scale (16). For instance, EcoCyc has been used to profile
properties of metabolic enzymes and pathways (17) and their
relationships to protein families (18). EcoCyc has also been
used to explore the conservation of a well-defined set of
metabolic enzymes across all domains of life (19). Examples
of method development include the recognition of enzymes
from sequence (20) or their genome and pathway context (21).
Other uses include the benchmarking of automatic annota-
tion projects (22) and metabolic reconstructions (23). For
instance, we are in the process of comparing the imported
annotations for BioCyc against automatically derived annota-
tions using a consistent sequence comparison strategy across
all species, to investigate whether imported annotations
reflect the most up-to-date information from public databases
of functional annotation (Goldovsky,L., Ahre´n,D., Tsoka,S.,
Darzentas,N., Ouzounis,C.A., unpublished data).
The 160 genome-specific databases within the BioCyc
collection are organized into three different tiers according
to the quality of their database content, which is a function
of the degree of manual curation they have undergone.
 Tier 1 BioCyc databases are of the highest quality. They have
undergone multiple person-years of curation and are updated
on an ongoing basis, with regular releases. The Tier 1 PGDBs
are EcoCyc, MetaCyc and the BioCyc Open Chemical Data-
base (BOCD) (see http://biocyc.org/open-compounds.
shtml). Note that MetaCyc and BOCD are not organism-
specific databases, thus yielding the 160 total databases in
the BioCyc collection.
 Tier 2 BioCyc databases were computationally generated by
the PathoLogic program and have undergone less than one
person-year of manual curation to review and polish their
contents. BioCyc contains 17 PGDBs in Tier 2, including
HumanCyc (24), AgroCyc and FrantCyc (25).
 Tier 3 BioCyc databases are those emphasized in this paper.
They were computationally generated by the PathoLogic
program and have undergone neither manual curation nor
review. For example, we have not manually reviewed the
PathoLogic pathway predictions, nor have we refined the
contents of Tier 3 PGDBs, such as by manually adding
additional experimentally known metabolic pathways for
that organism. BioCyc contains 142 PGDBs in Tier 3.
The remainder of this paper describes the methods used to
create the Tier 3 BioCyc databases.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Data sources
Creation of the Tier 3 BioCyc PGDBs began with annotated
genomes for each organism. Unlike the approaches used by
other groups, our approach does not reannotate each genome
but instead builds new layers of knowledge on the basis of
existing genome annotation. Annotations for most Tier 3
prokaryotic genomes were obtained from the Comprehensive
Microbial Resource (CMR) (26) in the version available on
November 13, 2004 (species/strain names in Supplement 1).
For those genomes not included in CMR, annotations were
imported from the UniProt database (which includes the
curated Swiss-Prot database and the automatically generated
TrEMBL supplement) (27). Most of the latter annotations
were indeed imported from TrEMBL and directly reflect
the original function assignments deposited in the cor-
responding GenBank files by the original genome sequencing
projects (28).
Inclusion criteria and input format
Annotations for species not available in CMR were obtained
from the UniProt database (27). Only those species with high
coverage in UniProt have been considered (>90% of total
number of proteins). To determine this level of coverage,
all protein sequences from the COGENT database (29) were
cross-referenced to the corresponding UniProt entries using
the MagicMatch algorithm (30), an efficient algorithm that
matches identical sequences across databases. The corres-
ponding UniProt files were checked for species names to
ensure that the same species is considered.
Although metabolic map reconstruction is robust and can
be achieved even with partial genome information (31), we
decided not to include any organisms that are not available
in CMR and with <90% coverage of their genome by
6084 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 19
protein-coding genes in UniProt (Table 1), as mentioned
above.
Of the 16 species not in CMR but available in the COGENT
database (29), the breakdown is as follows. Only seven species
have >90% coverage in UniProt and are not in any other tier,
and thus included in Tier 3 (see Table 1 for details). One
species (Ashbya gossypii) contains very few annotations in
the form of EC numbers and was excluded from the current
release, despite >90% coverage in UniProt. Finally, the
remaining eight species whose coverage is <90% and are
not supported by other resources were not included (see
Table 1). It is conceivable that, depending on community
requests, PGDBs for some of these species can be readily
created, if our criteria are relaxed, because of the significance
of these organisms, such as the mosquito Anopheles gambiae,
the two Caenorhabditis species or mouse. Thus, of all gen-
omes available at the time of this project (September 2004),
only nine genomes were not ultimately incorporated into the
BioCyc collection of PGDBs (Table 1).
The Pathway Tools engine for generating new PGDBs,
called PathoLogic, accepts as its input a set of files describing
the annotated genome of an organism. It accepts a file format
called PathoLogic format, in which each file describes all
genes within one replicon. For each gene, the file specifies its
name, base pair position, product type (e.g. protein and rRNA),
functional description of the gene product and EC number.
CMR data transformation
We transformed each CMR genome to PathoLogic format
using a two-step process. In Step 1 we loaded the entire
CMR into BioWarehouse, an Oracle-based bioinformatics
database warehouse system (see http://bioinformatics.ai.sri.
com/biowarehouse/). For genomes sequenced at TIGR,
CMR provides two alternative annotations of the genome:
one produced by the sequencing centre that sequenced the
genome and one produced by TIGR using an automated
annotation pipeline. We always loaded the former annotation
into BioWarehouse. CMR also provides a reannotation of the
genome using a combination of automated and manual
analyses. In Step 2 we developed a Lisp-based program that
issued SQL queries to BioWarehouse to retrieve the CMR data
for each genome and wrote that data out in PathoLogic
format.
While validating the preceding programs, we discovered
that CMR does not contain most RNA-coding genes for
many genomes. Therefore, those genes are lacking from many
of the CMR-derived genomes in BioCyc version 9.0. We
expect these genes to be present in later versions of CMR
and in later generated versions of BioCyc. For scientists wish-
ing to adopt a CMR-derived genome, SRI will generate anew a
PGDB from the original GenBank entry for the genome, thus
providing a complete PGDB for curation.
In the future, because of the complexity of the CMR data-
base and its omission of RNA-coding genes, other databases
such as COGENT (29) and RefSeq (32) will have to be
considered.
UniProt data transformation
UniProt annotations in the form of description line and
EC number were imported into PathoLogic-format files for
further processing. The following fields were extracted from
UniProt: description line and EC number for function assign-
ment as well as gene and species name for the derivation of
the corresponding entities in PGDBs.
PathoLogic execution
The Tier 3 BioCyc PGDBs were created by using the
PathoLogic program (14). PathoLogic computationally creates
a new PGDB from the annotated genome of an organism. Its
first step is to transform the input genome (in the form of a
GenBank file or a PathoLogic-format file) into a set of objects
within the Ocelot object database system (14). Each replicon,
gene and protein within the input file is converted to an Ocelot
object that represents those replicons, genes and proteins.
Its second step is to infer the metabolic pathway com-
plement of the organism by reference to the MetaCyc data-
base, copying appropriate metabolic pathway, reaction and
small-molecule objects from MetaCyc to the new PGDB.
PathoLogic matches enzymes in the annotated genome against
metabolic pathways in the MetaCyc database. The matching
is based on EC number and on the enzyme name assigned in
the annotated genome. PathoLogic computes a score for each
pathway, which indicates the likelihood that it is present in the
organism, based on the number of enzymes present in each
pathway and on their uniqueness to the pathway. Pathways
with a score above a given threshold are predicted as present
and copied into a PGDB. The score is selected to err on the side
of more false-positive predictions to ensure that possible path-
ways are brought to the attention of the user. The PathoLogic
operon predictor (33) was executed to populate the microbial
PGDBs with objects describing predicted operons. All com-
putationally predicted pathways and operons are marked with
computational evidence codes, which are displayed on the
BioCyc websites as computer icons in the upper right side
of each display page.
PathoLogic execution time on a SunBlade-1500 (1.06 GHz/
2 GB RAM) workstation is 15 min per microbial genome.
Table 1. A list of the 16 species not available in CMR
Genus and species name Strain name Coverage (%) Status
Anabaena sp. PCC 7120 >90 UniProt
Anopheles gambiae PEST 39 Excluded
Ashbya gossypii na >90 Deleted
a
Caenorhabditis briggsae na 0 Excluded
Caenorhabditis elegans na 73 Excluded
Cyanidioschyzon merolae 10D 0 Excluded
Drosophila melanogaster na >90 UniProt
Encephalitozoon cuniculi na >90 UniProt
Leptospira interrogans L1-130 >90 UniProt
Listeria monocytogenes F2365 >90 UniProt
L.monocytogenes F6854 40 Excluded
L.monocytogenes H7858 48 Excluded
Mus musculus na 59 Excluded
Nanoarchaeum equitans Kin4-M 78 Excluded
Neurospora crassa na >90 UniProt
Schizosaccharomyces pombe na >90 UniProt
Columns: genus/species name, strain name, coverage in UniProt and status
in BioCyc (Tier 3 or exclusion). na (for strain name): non-applicable; >90%
coverage in UniProt, included (7 cases).
aA.gossypii poor in annotations, despite high coverage in UniProt, deleted
(1 case); <90% coverage in UniProt, excluded (8 cases).
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 19 6085
MetaCyc
The MetaCyc database (http://MetaCyc.org/) is a collection
of metabolic pathways and enzymes from a wide variety of
organisms, primarily microorganisms and plants (15). The
goal of MetaCyc is to contain a representative sample of
each experimentally elucidated pathway, and thereby to cata-
logue the universe of metabolism. MetaCyc also describes
reactions, chemical compounds and genes. As of version 9.0,
MetaCyc contains 547 pathways elucidated in more than 340
organisms, 5000 reactions, 2062 enzymes, 3900 compounds
and 5400 literature citations. In addition, 55% of the path-
ways and 90% of the enzymes contain comments that can
help the user to understand the physiological role of a pre-
dicted pathway. More than 120 species have two or more
pathways represented in MetaCyc, with E.coli and A.thaliana
represented by the greatest number of pathways, 169 and 59,
respectively.
Database implementation of BioCyc
The entire collection of BioCyc databases is stored within
the same database management system, the Ocelot object
database system (14). Ocelot employs an object-oriented
data model that includes a taxonomic hierarchy of classes
that define the database schema, a set of instances of those
classes that represent biological entities and a set of slots that
define attributes of (and relationships among) those entities.
All BioCyc databases share the same database schema,
namely the Pathway Tools schema (34). By sharing the same
schema among all databases, we ensure that the same soft-
ware environment can be used to manipulate the databases and
that comparisons can be computed consistently across all
databases. The schema consists of 1350 class definitions
that define data types (such as biochemical reactions, small
molecules, genes, promoters, operons and metabolic path-
ways) and taxonomic classification systems (34). For example,
the Pathway Tools schema includes a classification system
for pathways, for small molecules, for biochemical reactions
(the Enzyme Commission system) and for genes (35).
RESULTS
Shared aspects of BioCyc databases
The entire collection of PGDBs encompasses 21 187 pathways
distributed across 160 species, thus resulting in a mean value
of 132.4 (SD 52) and a median value of 137.5 pathways per
species (Figure 1a). Thus, most metabolic reconstructions
generate a substantial amount of pathway information from
the imported annotations. There are three species with 25 or
fewer pathways—namely Mycobacterium avium paratu-
berculosis (5 pathways), Ralstonia solanacearum GMI1000
(14 pathways) and Pyrococcus horikoshii shinkaj OT3
(15 pathways)—and three species with more than 230
pathways—namely Bradyrhizobium japonicum USDA 110
(231 pathways), Streptomyces avermitilis MA-4680 (231 path-
ways) and Mesorhizobium loti MAFF303099 (234 pathways).
The organisms with very small numbers of pathways seem
to be artefacts caused by very sparse genome annotations or
annotations in which the gene functions are provided in
unusual formats.
Some of the most conserved pathways (19) are fully
recovered in the BioCyc PGDB collection, such as glycolysis,
nucleotide biosynthesis and amino acid (e.g. glycine, trypto-
phan, lysine) biosynthesis (Figure 1b and Table 2). This obser-
vation might be biased by the sample of organisms under
consideration, yet it uncovers some of the most conserved
(or, possibly, well-annotated) segments of metabolism. The
high occurrence of one of these pathways, the Calvin cycle,
is probably due to false-positive predictions because the
Calvin cycle shares many reactions with the TCA cycle.
Thus, the presence of TCA cycle reactions provides evidence
for the Calvin cycle. Modification of our pathway prediction
algorithms to reduce false-positive predictions is an ongo-
ing work.
It is worth noting that degradation pathways (with the
exception of ribose degradation) appear to be much less
conserved (Supplementary Data, complete table).
Distribution patterns of pathways across 160 genomes
When correlated to genome size (as the number of protein-
coding genes), pathways in the BioCyc collection appear to
follow a trend (Figure 2). In particular, Bacteria follow a highly
consistent monotonic relationship, with a few exceptions.
25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45(a)
(b)
pathways
30 50 80 99 100
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
percentage of pathway completeness
0.177
0.06
0.358
0.2110.194
Figure 1. Distribution of BioCyc pathways across species. (a) Frequency
analysis: the x-axis shows the number of detected pathways and the y-axis
the number of species containing those pathways. (b) Completeness analysis:
the x-axis shows the percentage of pathway completeness and the y-axis the
frequency of pathways with the corresponding degree of completeness—more
than 60% of pathways are more than 50% complete in the BioCyc collection of
PGDBs.
6086 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 19
Archaea also follow the pattern of Bacteria, with the excep-
tion of P.horikoshii shinkaj OT3. Finally, eukaryotes do
not exhibit such a consistent pattern, with the exception of
Schizosaccharomyces pombe (Figure 2).
DISCUSSION
Scientists interested in adopting one or more of the BioCyc
PGDBs should contact the authors. We will supply data files
for the PGDBs as well as the Pathway Tools software. Pathway
Tools supports updating, querying, analysis and Web publish-
ing of PGDBs in the following manner.
SRI has established a central repository of publicly
available PGDBs, similar to peer-to-peer file sharing in spirit.
PGDB creators can register their PGDBs in the central
repository for potential downloading by interested parties.
The registry of shared PGDBs created by SRI and by third
parties is available (see http://BioCyc.org/registry.html).
The Pathway/Genome Editors within Pathway Tools are
graphical interactive tools for updating information within
a PGDB. For example, given new findings in the literature,
a scientist could add a new metabolic pathway to a PGDB or
alter an existing pathway. They can alter the annotation of a
gene, and add commentary and literature citations. They can
annotate features on proteins, such as enzyme active sites or
phosphorylation sites. They can also update the description
of the genetic network of an organism by defining new oper-
ons, promoters and transcription-factor binding sites, and by
defining regulatory interactions between transcription factors
and their binding sites. These are the same tools used by the
curators who update the EcoCyc and MetaCyc databases.
Pathway Tools is also the software used to power the
BioCyc.org website. We encourage PGDB adopters to publish
their PGDBs on their websites by using Pathway Tools and
thus make them available to the scientific community.
We plan to regenerate the unadopted Tier 3 BioCyc PGDBs
every 6 months to incorporate improvements in the data
sources from which they were generated and improvements
in MetaCyc and the Pathway Tools that will provide improved
inferences.
RELATED WORK
The WIT database (36) has not been available on the web for
more than 1 year, and appears to have been succeeded by
the PUMA2 system (see http://compbio.mcs.anl.gov/puma2/
cgi-bin/index.cgi). It contains metabolic reconstructions for
more than 1000 organisms, but because of the absence of
publications about the PUMA2 methodology we cannot
perform a detailed comparison with BioCyc.
Version 35.0 of the KEGG database contains predicted
metabolic maps for 333 organisms (37). Both KEGG and
the BioCyc collection predict pathways by comparing the
enzymes within a given genome against a known set of
reference pathways. But many differences between the two
methodologies exist.
One difference in pathway prediction methodology is
that the two resources (KEGG reference maps and MetaCyc)
use different reference pathway databases as the basis for
prediction. MetaCyc contains extensive comments that
describe individual pathways and enzymes; KEGG has very
few such comments. MetaCyc cites the primary literature
sources from which pathway and enzyme data were obtained.
KEGG contains very few literature citations. KEGG maps are
very much larger than MetaCyc pathways, and are mosaics
that combine pathways and reactions from many organisms,
whereas MetaCyc pathways describe single metabolic
pathways that have been experimentally elucidated in single
organisms.
In addition, the KEGG methodology has been shown to
erroneously assign enzymes to pathway reactions based on
matching on incomplete EC numbers such as ‘1.2.3.-’, result-
ing in many incorrect enzyme–reaction associations within
KEGG (38).
The KEGG pathway prediction process also appears to be
different from that used by PathoLogic. It appears to begin by
computing new functions for all gene products within a gen-
ome, thus replacing a genome annotation that is often derived
from significant manual work by scientists with one that is
purely computationally derived, and thus potentially of lower
quality (because the KEGG publications are unclear, we note
that there is uncertainty in how this genome reannotation is
performed). Our work builds from the originally submitted
genome annotation. In addition, the KEGG algorithm does
not actually predict pathways—it simply colours a set of static
Table 2. The 30 pathways that occur most frequently across the BioCyc
databases, and their frequency ( f ) of occurrence
PATHWAY-UNIQUE ID Pathway description f
PWY0-162 De novo biosynthesis of
pyrimidine ribonucleotides
153
GLYCOLYSIS Glycolysis I 152
TRNA-CHARGING-PWY tRNA charging pathway 152
DENOVOPURINE2-PWY Purine nucleotides
de novo biosynthesis I
152
PWY0-166 De novo biosynthesis of pyrimidine
deoxyribonucleotides
151
PHOSLIPSYN-PWY Phospholipid biosynthesis I 150
GLYSYN-PWY Glycine biosynthesis I 149
HEMESYN2-PWY Biosynthesis of proto- and sirohaeme 146
P1-PWY Salvage pathways of purine and
pyrimidine nucleotides
144
FASYN-INITIAL-PWY Fatty acid biosynthesis—initial steps 144
1CMET2-PWY formylTHF biosynthesis 144
PWY0-163 Salvage pathways of pyrimidine
ribonucleotides
142
P106-PWY Serine-isocitrate lyase pathway 142
THIOREDOX-PWY Thioredoxin pathway 140
ARO-PWY Chorismate biosynthesis 139
P124-PWY Glucose fermentation to lactate II 139
CALVIN-PWY Calvin cycle 136
FOLSYN-PWY Tetrahydrofolate biosynthesis 136
PWY0-662 PRPP biosynthesis I 136
RIBOKIN-PWY Ribose degradation 133
TRPSYN-PWY Tryptophan biosynthesis 133
PEPTIDOGLYCANSYN-PWY Peptidoglycan biosynthesis 133
PWY0-901 Selenocysteine biosynthesis 132
FASYN-ELONG-PWY Fatty acid elongation—saturated 131
PWY-841 Purine nucleotides de novo
biosynthesis II
131
RIBOSYN2-PWY Riboflavin and FMN and
FAD biosynthesis
130
P61-PWY UDP-glucose conversion 130
DAPLYSINESYN-PWY Lysine biosynthesis I 130
ILEUSYN-PWY Isoleucine biosynthesis I 130
ACETATEUTIL-PWY Acetate utilization 129
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 19 6087
KEGG map diagrams to indicate which enzymes within a
map are present within a given genome. This approach avoids
actually predicting whether a pathway is present or absent—
that decision is left to the user—whereas our PathoLogic
algorithm does call each pathway in MetaCyc as present or
absent in the organism it is analysing.
Neither KEGG nor PUMA2 make their pathway databases
openly available for adoption and curation by experts (the
PUMA2 website does not have a downloads section). Further-
more, the software environment underlying KEGG does not
support the rich level of curation and annotation as does the
graphical editing environment and schema within the Pathway
Tools software underlying BioCyc. For example, the KEGG
software does not allow the editing of pathway information,
to remove erroneous reactions that are not present in a given
organism, or to add organism-specific reactions to a pathway.
The Pathway Tools schema supports 220 different database
fields to capture a broad array of information from genomes to
pathways; we are unaware of a description of the KEGG
schema that provides comparable information.
BioCyc AVAILABILITY
All BioCyc PGDBs are accessible online through the Web at
http://BioCyc.org/ for interactive querying. The website is
freely available to all users. The Pathway Tools software is
freely available to academics. More information on down-
loading the software and databases is available at http://
biocyc.org/download.shtml.
We provide several mechanisms by which computational
or experimental biologists can compute with the data within
the BioCyc PGDBs (39). BioCyc PGDBs in Tiers 1 and 2 are
queryable via application program interfaces (APIs) and are
available by data file download. We plan to make Tier 3
PGDBs available for download, upon publication. In any
event, we will make any Tier 3 PGDBs available for download
for adoption based on requests to the authors.
Pathway Tools APIs allow users to query BioCyc data-
bases in the Java, Perl and Lisp languages (described at
http://bioinformatics.ai.sri.com/ptools/ptools-resources.html).
All three APIs provide extremely comprehensive and easy-
to-use query facilities. The APIs access the data through a
binary executable program that bundles the Pathway Tools
software with all the BioCyc databases and runs on Linux,
Windows and Sun workstations. This executable runs as a
desktop application and also supports local installation of
the BioCyc website on an intranet.
Flatfile versions of BioCyc PGDBs can be downloaded
in four formats including SBML (see sbml.org) and BioPAX
(see biopax.org).
Figure 2. Relationship between number of pathways (x-axis) and number of genes (y-axis) for all species in the BioCyc collection. Bacterial species are shown in
light grey, archaeal species in open-grey squares and eukaryotes in black. The fitted line—a linear regression curve—refers to Bacteria only; most Archaea exhibit a
similar relationship. The two outlier bacterial species with fewer than 25 pathways can be seen on the left part of the graph: Mycobacterium avium paratuberculosis
and Ralstonia solanacearum GMI1000. The three largest eukaryotic genomes with >10 000 genes show a significant underrepresentation of pathways for their
genome size.
6088 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 19
Most BioCyc PGDBs are freely and openly available and
may be redistributed. A fee applies to commercial installations
of some BioCyc PGDBs and to the Pathway Tools software.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by grant GM70065 from the National
Institutes of Health, by SRI International, and by EMBL-EBI.
N.L.B. is supported by a long-term Fellowship from the Human
Frontiers Science Program and S.T. by a Career Development
Award from the UK Medical Research Council. This financial
support does not constitute an endorsement of the views
expressed herein. Funding to pay the Open Access publication
charges for this article was provided by NIH grant GM70065.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Keseler,I.M., Collado-Vides,J., Gama-Castro,S., Ingraham,J.,
Paley,S., Paulsen,I.T., Peralta-Gil,M. and Karp,P.D. (2005) EcoCyc:
a comprehensive database resource for Escherichia coli.
Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D334–D337.
2. Romero,P. and Karp,P. (2003) PseudoCyc, a pathway-genome database
for Pseudomonas aeruginosa. J. Mol. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 5, 230–239.
3. Yeh,I., Hanekamp,T., Tsoka,S., Karp,P.D. and Altman,R.B. (2004)
Computational analysis of Plasmodium falciparum metabolism:
organizing genomic information to facilitate drug discovery. Genome
Res., 14, 917–924.
4. Christie,K.R., Weng,S., Balakrishnan,R., Costanzo,M.C., Dolinski,K.,
Dwight,S.S., Engel,S.R., Feierbach,B., Fisk,D.G., Hirschman,J.E. et al.
(2004) Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD) provides tools to
identify and analyze sequences from Saccharomyces cerevisiae and
related sequences from other organisms. Nucleic Acids Res., 32,
D311–D314.
5. Rhee,S.Y., Beavis,W., Berardini,T.Z., Chen,G., Dixon,D., Doyle,A.,
Garcia-Hernandez,M., Huala,E., Lander,G., Montoya,M. et al. (2003)
The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR): a model organism
database providing a centralized, curated gateway to Arabidopsis biology,
research materials and community. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 224–228.
6. Eppig,J.T., Bult,C.J., Kadin,J.A., Richardson,J.E., Blake,J.A.,
Anagnostopoulos,A., Baldarelli,R.M., Baya,M., Beal,J.S., Bello,S.M.
et al. (2005) The Mouse Genome Database (MGD): from genes to
mice—a community resource for mouse biology. Nucleic Acids Res.,
33, D471–D475.
7. Drysdale,R.A., Crosby,M.A., Gelbart,W., Campbell,K., Emmert,D.,
Matthews,B., Russo,S., Schroeder,A., Smutniak,F., Zhang,P. et al. (2005)
FlyBase: genes and gene models. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D390–D395.
8. Ouzounis,C.A. and Karp,P.D. (2002) The past, present and future of
genome-wide re-annotation. Genome Biol., 3 COMMENT2001.
9. Karp,P.D. (1998) Metabolic databases. Trends Biochem. Sci., 23,
114–116.
10. Karp,P.D., Krummenacker,M., Paley,S. and Wagg,J. (1999) Integrated
pathway-genome databases and their role in drug discovery. Trends
Biotechnol., 17, 275–281.
11. Karp,P.D. (2001) Pathway databases: a case study in computational
symbolic theories. Science, 293, 2040–2044.
12. Karp,P.D., Ouzounis,C. and Paley,S. (1996) HinCyc: a knowledge
base of the complete genome and metabolic pathways of H. influenzae.
Proc. Int. Conf. Intell. Syst. Mol. Biol., 4, 116–124.
13. Fleischmann,R.D., Adams,M.D., White,O., Clayton,R.A., Kirkness,E.F.,
Kerlavage,A.R., Bult,C.J., Tomb,J.F., Dougherty,B.A., Merrick,J.M.
et al. (1995) Whole-genome random sequencing and assembly of
Haemophilus influenzae Rd. Science, 269, 496–512.
14. The Pathway Tools software. In Karp,P.D., Paley,S. and Romero,P. (eds),
Bioinformatics., 18 (Suppl. 1), S225–S232.
15. Krieger,C.J., Zhang,P., Mueller,L.A., Wang,A., Paley,S., Arnaud,M.,
Pick,J., Rhee,S.Y. and Karp,P.D. (2004) MetaCyc: a multiorganism
database of metabolic pathways and enzymes. Nucleic Acids Res.,
32, D438–D442.
16. Tsoka,S. and Ouzounis,C.A. (2003) Metabolic database systems for the
analysis of genome-wide function. Biotechnol. Bioeng., 84, 750–755.
17. Ouzounis,C.A. and Karp,P.D. (2000) Global properties of the metabolic
map of Escherichia coli. Genome Res., 10, 568–576.
18. Tsoka,S. and Ouzounis,C.A. (2001) Functional versatility and molecular
diversity of the metabolic map of Escherichia coli. Genome Res., 11,
1503–1510.
19. Peregrin-Alvarez,J.M., Tsoka,S. and Ouzounis,C.A. (2003) The
phylogenetic extent of metabolic enzymes and pathways. Genome Res.,
13, 422–427.
20. des Jardins,M., Karp,P.D., Krummenacker,M., Lee,T.J. and
Ouzounis,C.A. (1997) Prediction of enzyme classification from protein
sequence without the use of sequence similarity. Proc. Int. Conf. Intell.
Syst. Mol. Biol., 5, 92–99.
21. Green,M.L. and Karp,P.D. (2004) A Bayesian method for identifying
missing enzymes in predicted metabolic pathway databases. BMC
Bioinformatics, 5, 76.
22. Karp,P.D., Paley,S., Krieger,C.J. and Zhang,P. (2004) An evidence
ontology for use in pathway/genome databases. Pac. Symp. Biocomput.,
9, 190–201.
23. Paley,S.M. and Karp,P.D. (2002) Evaluation of computational
metabolic-pathway predictions for Helicobacter pylori. Bioinformatics,
18, 715–724.
24. Romero,P., Wagg,J., Green,M.L., Kaiser,D., Krummenacker,M. and
Karp,P.D. (2005) Computational prediction of human metabolic
pathways from the complete human genome. Genome Biol., 6, R2.
25. Larsson,P., Oyston,P.C., Chain,P., Chu,M.C., Duffield,M.,
Fuxelius,H.H., Garcia,E., Halltorp,G., Johansson,D., Isherwood,K.E.
et al. (2005) The complete genome sequence of Francisella tularensis,
the causative agent of tularemia. Nature Genet., 37, 153–159.
26. Peterson,J.D., Umayam,L.A., Dickinson,T., Hickey,E.K. and White,O.
(2001) The comprehensive microbial resource. Nucleic Acids Res.,
29, 123–125.
27. Bairoch,A., Apweiler,R., Wu,C.H., Barker,W.C., Boeckmann,B.,
Ferro,S., Gasteiger,E., Huang,H., Lopez,R., Magrane,M. et al. (2005)
The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt). Nucleic Acids Res.,
33, D154–D159.
28. Benson,D.A., Karsch-Mizrachi,I., Lipman,D.J., Ostell,J. and
Wheeler,D.L. (2005) GenBank. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D34–D38.
29. Janssen,P., Enright,A.J., Audit,B., Cases,I., Goldovsky,L., Harte,N.,
Kunin,V. and Ouzounis,C.A. (2003) COmplete GENome Tracking
(COGENT): a flexible data environment for computational genomics.
Bioinformatics, 19, 1451–1452.
30. Smith,M., Kunin,V., Goldovsky,L., Enright,A.J. and Ouzounis,C.A.
(2005) MagicMatch—cross-referencing sequence identifiers across
databases. Bioinformatics, 21, 3429–3430.
31. Ahren,D.G. and Ouzounis,C.A. (2004) Robustness of metabolic map
reconstruction. J. Bioinform. Comput. Biol., 2, 589–593.
32. Pruitt,K.D., Tatusova,T. and Maglott,D.R. (2005) NCBI Reference
Sequence (RefSeq): a curated non-redundant sequence database of
genomes, transcripts and proteins. Nucleic Acids Res., 33,
D501–D504.
33. Romero,P.R. and Karp,P.D. (2004) Using functional and organizational
information to improve genome-wide computational prediction of
transcription units on pathway-genome databases. Bioinformatics,
20, 709–717.
34. Karp,P.D. (2000) An ontology for biological function based on molecular
interactions. Bioinformatics, 16, 269–285.
35. Serres,M.H. and Riley,M. (2000) MultiFun, a multifunctional
classification scheme for Escherichia coli K-12 gene products. Microb.
Comp. Genomics, 5, 205–222.
36. Overbeek,R., Larsen,N., Pusch,G.D., D’Souza,M., Selkov,E.,Jr,
Kyrpides,N., Fonstein,M., Maltsev,N. and Selkov,E. (2000) WIT:
integrated system for high-throughput genome sequence analysis and
metabolic reconstruction. Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 123–125.
37. Kanehisa,M., Goto,S., Kawashima,S., Okuno,Y. and Hattori,M. (2004)
The KEGG resource for deciphering the genome. Nucleic Acids Res.,
32, D277–D280.
38. Green,M.L. and Karp,P.D. (2005) Genome annotation errors in
pathway databases due to semantic ambiguity in partial EC numbers.
Nucleic Acids Res., 33, 4035–4039.
39. Krummenacker,M., Paley,S., Mueller,L., Yan,T. and Karp,P.D. (2005)
Querying and computing with BioCyc databases. Bioinformatics,
21, 3454–3455.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, No. 19 6089
