Ensembl 2005
T. Hubbard, D. Andrews, M. Caccamo, G. Cameron1, Y. Chen1, M. Clamp, L. Clarke,
G. Coates, T. Cox, F. Cunningham, V. Curwen, T. Cutts, T. Down, R. Durbin,
X. M. Fernandez-Suarez1, J. Gilbert, M. Hammond1, J. Herrero1, H. Hotz, K. Howe, V. Iyer,
K. Jekosch, A. Kahari1, A. Kasprzyk1, D. Keefe1, S. Keenan, F. Kokocinsci, D. London1,
I. Longden1, G. McVicker1, C. Melsopp1, P. Meidl, S. Potter, G. Proctor, M. Rae, D. Rios1,
M. Schuster1, S. Searle, J. Severin1, G. Slater1, D. Smedley1, J. Smith, W. Spooner,
A. Stabenau1, J. Stalker, R. Storey, S. Trevanion, A. Ureta-Vidal1, J. Vogel, S. White,
C. Woodwark1 and E. Birney1,*
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute and 1European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL–EBI), Wellcome Trust Genome
Campus, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire CB10 1SA, UK
Received October 6, 2004; Revised and Accepted November 1, 2004
ABSTRACT
The Ensembl (http://www.ensembl.org/) project pro-
vides a comprehensive and integrated source of
annotation of large genome sequences. Over the
last year the number of genomes available from the
Ensembl site has increased by 7 to 16, with the addi-
tionofthesixvertebrategenomesofchimpanzee,dog,
cow, chicken, tetraodon and frog and the insect
genome of honeybee. The majority have been anno-
tatedautomaticallyusing theEnsemblgenebuildsys-
tem, showing its flexibility to reliably annotate a wide
variety of genomes. With the increased number
of vertebrate genomes, the comparative analysis
provided to users has been greatly improved,
with new website interfaces allowing annotation of
different genomes to be directly compared. The
Ensemblsoftwaresystemisbeing increasinglywidely
reused in different projects showing the benefits of a
completely open approach to software development
and distribution.
INTRODUCTION
Genome sequences provide a natural framework about which
to organize biological data. In the few years in which they have
been available, genome databases have proved invaluable
resources to researchers. Ensembl provides one of the most
popular sources of automatic analysis and integration of large
genome sequence data. It now contains 16 genomes, 7 of
which have been added during the last year. These include
11 vertebrates: human, chimpanzee, mouse, rat, dog, cow,
chicken, fugu, zebrafish, tetraodon and frog; two worms:
Caenorhabditis briggsae and Caenorhabditis elegans; and
three insects: fruitfly, mosquito and honeybee.
Ensembl provides access to these data in a variety of ways to
suit different audiences and types of use. The largest number of
researchersuse theEnsemblwebsite (http://www.ensembl.org/)
and can rapidly locate individual items of interest either by
entering keywords or from the built-in sequence similarity
search interface. For cases where researchers are working
with large groups of items, such as all of a particular class of
genes, Ensembl provides a web-based data-mining interface
called EnsMart as an alternative to browsing individual web
pages. For bioinformaticians, Ensembl provides access to all
the data behind the Ensembl website both as downloadable
datasets and via direct access to databases containing that
data which are hosted on the Ensembl site (access using
mysql to ensembldb.ensembl.org, user anonymous). The com-
plete software system for manipulating and storing genome
information that has been created by the project is also freely
available with source code for all to use.
This paper briefly outlines some of the main developments
of the Ensembl project since the report last year (1) and their
relevance to researchers. For information about new features
and data contained in the monthly updates of Ensembl,
researchers are recommended to read the ‘what’s new’
pages accompanying every release. For more detailed infor-
mation about Ensembl, researchers are referred to the series of
papers published last year that describe both technical aspects
of the software implementation and the scientific aspects of the
genome annotation system (2–11).
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +44 1223 494420; Fax: +44 1223 494470; Email: birney@ebi.ac.uk
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use permissions, please contact journals.permissions@oupjournals.org.
ª 2005, the authors
Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 33, Database issue ª Oxford University Press 2005; all rights reserved
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D447–D453
doi:10.1093/nar/gki138
GENE ANNOTATION
A core part of Ensembl is its automatic gene build system,
which is used to consistently annotate genomes for which there
is no curated geneset. The genome sequences of human, chim-
panzee, mouse, rat, chicken, fugu, zebrafish, C.briggsae, mos-
quito and honeybee have been annotated in this way.
Annotation of the newest genomes, dog, cow and frog, is in
progress. The exceptions are fruitfly [annotation imported
from flybase (12)], C.elegans [annotation imported from
wormbase (13)] and tetraodon (annotation provided by Geno-
scope). Ensembl genesets have formed the basis for the initial
analysis and publication of most vertebrate genomes. During
the last year, the rat (14), C.briggsae (15) and chicken (16)
genomes have been published.
Full descriptions of the gene build system (7) and the gene-
wise family of algorithms that it uses (8) have recently been
published. Briefly, the system is mainly based on building
gene models from initial alignments of protein and cDNA
sequences to a genome sequence. Where a genome has limited
species-specific cDNA data, the number of genes in the gene-
set will reflect the number of homologous cDNAs from other
related organisms that can be aligned. Where expressed
sequence tag (EST) collections are thought to contain a sig-
nificant number of artefact sequences, they are considered a
less reliable source of evidence for gene structures and so
separate gene builds are created from them (9). Where
ESTs have been generated by a small number of groups
and are thought to be of consistent quality they are used in
the main gene build, but gene models are only built from them
if there is no other evidence. This approach has been used in
the chicken and honeybee gene builds.
Over the year, the flexibility of the gene build system has
been exploited to create genesets for genomes such as zebra-
fish, honeybee and chicken, which have varied amounts of
species-specific cDNA data. Of these three gene builds, the
most difficult one has been for honeybee, which is evolution-
arily very distant from other sequenced organisms. Zebrafish
and chicken gene builds are much more complete, being evo-
lutionarily closer to other sequenced vertebrates. Experimental
validation of a randomly selected sample of gene models from
the geneset made for the chicken genome (17) shows a low
false positive rate of 4% (Eyras et al., submitted for pub-
lication). As cDNA resources for these genomes increase, it is
fully expected that the number of genes in their genesets will
increase until it is similar to those of comparable organisms.
As the genome sequence of human has been finished, gene-
sets for individual chromosomes have been manually curated
and published [for a review see (18)]. Ensembl is part of a new
international collaboration to refine the human geneset invol-
ving the Havana group (19) [which provides most of the
curated annotation in the Vega database (20)], the NCBI
groups [that curate RefSeq (21) and generate automatic
gene builds], the UCSC browser group (22) and Uniprot
(23). The aim is to resolve transcript sequence differences
and generate and maintain a set of human genes with stable
identifiers, where the CDS part of the gene structure can be
agreed between all groups. The process of comparison of
genesets has proved very fruitful and is leading to improved
automatic gene building methods for both the Ensembl
and NCBI. It is anticipated that this agreed geneset will
progressively increase in size as the entire human genome
is fully curated. The current Ensembl human gene build is
already benefiting from this comparison, as where the CDS
part of a Vega curated transcript or Ensembl transcript and a
NCBI transcript agree perfectly and are complete (from ATG
to stop codon), these propagate automatically into the next
Ensembl geneset.
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS
A major ongoing focus of the Ensembl project is to increase
the integrationbetweengenomes throughcomparative analysis.
Ensembl currently contains three types of similarity informa-
tion: (i) Ensembl family entries (ENSF identifiers) cluster
Ensembl peptides across all annotated genomes together
with UniProt metazoan entries on the basis of protein simi-
larity. (ii) Pairwise DNA similarity alignments are stored for
each groups of genomes that can be aligned (i.e. vertebrates,
insects and worms). These alignments are either generated
locally using BLASTZ (24) and a variety of other algorithms
or are imported BLASTZ alignments downloaded from the
UCSC (22). These alignments are also grouped to generate
large-scale synteny blocks. (3) Putative orthologues relation-
ships are stored across all annotated genomes, generated using
automatic algorithms that take into account transcript similar-
ity (seeded using the widely used reciprocal best match
approach) and synteny. During the year the amount of com-
parative data provided by Ensembl has grown considerably,
both from the increase in the number of vertebrate genomes
and the development of a computation pipeline to generate
these data more rapidly. For example, alignment data for
almost all possible pairwise DNA similarity comparisons is
now available.
The most prominent addition to the website is multicontig-
view (Figure 1), which allows regions of genome sequence
from multiple species to be viewed aligned to each other,
something that was previously only possible using the external
Apollo java browser (25). As well as making these alignments
accessible to a wider audience, multicontigview allows the
alignment of as many genomes as desired and is able to
show in a single display both DNA similarity and putative
orthologue relationships. Multicontigview is complementary
to the display of regions of conservation in contigview.
Whereas the latter is useful to identify important regions in
a single genome, multicontigview allows researchers to com-
pare annotation between genomes to look for places where
annotation may be missing.
With a comprehensive set of comparative data now avail-
able, links to comparative data views have been added
throughout the Ensembl website. For example, in geneview,
putative orthologues are listed in all other organisms and links
are provided to a multicontigview display showing putative
orthologues, aligned across genome sequence and to alignview
showing alignments of homologous transcripts.
ENSEMBL WEBSITE
As well as the major new website view multicontigview dis-
cussed above, the core web code has also been substantially
D448 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
Figure 1. Screenshot of Ensemblmulticontigview. The view shows genome sequence with annotation from human, mouse and chicken, aligned according to DNA–
DNA similarity, shown in green. Pairwise similarity is shown between the ‘primary’ genome (human in this case) and each of the other genomes. Menus allow
additional genomes to be added to the display. The ‘P’ button allows a different genome to be selected as the primary one. Genes automatically identified as putative
orthologues are linked by blue lines. The region shown is centred around theHOXB3 gene in the HOX cluster on human chromosome 17 and is shown to be syntenic
with a region on mouse chromosome 11. All Ensembl known gene structures are conserved and have been correctly identified as orthologues. Two novel Ensembl
gene structures predicted in mouse are not seen in human. It would be interesting to investigate the corresponding region in human to understand why they were not
predicted there. Features such as alignments to cDNAs and proteins can be turned on using the menus to facilitate such a comparison. Putative orthologue prediction
and DNA similarity show a much weaker and incomplete link to a region in the chicken genome; however this is on chromosome Un, which is a fake chromosome
composed of fragments that could not be mapped onto chromosomes in the current assembly.Whereas the chicken fragment containsHOXB3 andHOXB1,HOXB4
and others are absent. The putative chicken orthologue for human HOXB4 is found in another chicken fragment in the fake Un chromosome (data not shown),
suggesting that the chicken equivalent of the human chromosome 17 HOX cluster is fragmented in the current chicken assembly.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D449
Home Human What's New TextSearch BlastSearch MartSearch Export Data Download Disease Browser Docs
Find [e.g. ENSG00000079482, ENSG00000144460]
Gene SNP report
Gene HOXB3 (HUGO ID)
Ensembl Gene ID ENSG00000120093
Genomic
Location
View gene in genomic location: 47101885 - 47126487 bp (47.1 Mb) on chromosome 17
This gene is located in sequence: AC103702.3.1.187386
Description Homeobox protein Hox-B3 (Hox-2G) (Hox-2.7). [Source: SWISSPROT (P14651)]
Gene information View information about this gene.
SNPs for Transcript ENST00000311626 (Peptide ENSP00000308252)
ID class alleles ambiguity status chr pos SNP type AA change AA co-ordinate
4793578 snp C/T Y suspected 17 47102032 utr
2229303 snp C/T Y suspected 17 47102583 syn S 349 (3)
890432 snp C/T Y proven by frequency 17 47103870 intron
2229304 snp A/C M proven by frequency 17 47104231 non-syn P -> T 82 (1)
9910044 snp A/G R proven by cluster 17 47107355 intron
9910045 snp A/G R suspected 17 47107359 intron
9913170 snp A/G R suspected 17 47107365 intron
2555113 snp C/G S suspected 17 47107786 intron
All
D450 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
rewritten to make it a more modular set of software compo-
nents and thereby improve its flexibility (4). This has allowed
new data views to be constructed quickly in response to user
requests, such as genesnpview (Figure 2), which shows infor-
mation about single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for a
single gene at genome, transcript and translation level in a
single page. All of the data on genesnpview is available on
other web pages, but researchers working in detail on indi-
vidual genes have found it very convenient to have a single
web page containing everything relating to the genome varia-
tion around a single gene structure. The Ensembl website has a
large number of different data ‘views’ and to make it easier for
users to discover and explore them, the revamped sitemap
page (http://www.ensembl.org/sitemap/) provides links to each
of them with example entry points that are auto generated to
ensure they continue to work when the underlying genome
data is updated. The sitemap pages for each species only show
the ‘views’ that are available for a particular genome, for
example there is no mapview for fugu as the genome sequence
is currently available only as a set of unmapped fragments that
have not been positioned on chromosomes.
There is far more biological data that can be displayed as
features on genomic coordinates than it is practical to import
into core Ensembl databases. For example, laboratories around
the world are generating large amounts of sequence data that
can be aligned to a reference genome and both experimental-
ists and bioinformaticians are generating annotation of fea-
tures in promoters. Rather than centralize the integration of
these data, we have enabled Ensembl with the DAS (distrib-
uted annotation system) (26) to allow researchers to view data
of their choice in the context of the annotation provided by
Ensembl. This might be data they have generated themselves,
but it can also be third-party data. DAS enabled viewers such
as Ensembl contigview can be configured to display data from
any DAS server as an extra track on the display. Users can
configure this using the DAS menu of contigview. In cases
where researchers have data that they wish to display, but do
not want to setup their own DAS server, they can also upload
their data in a simple flat file format into the Ensembl DAS
server using the same menu.
During the year DAS support has been extended. DAS
sources can now also be attached to protview, allowing exter-
nal annotation on protein sequences to be displayed just as it
can be on genomic coordinates in contigview. Ensembl has
also recently extended the DAS specification to add a new
DAS data type based on identifiers (such as gene names,
Uniprot identifiers, etc.) rather than coordinates, referred to
as geneDAS. This allows textual annotation such as descrip-
tions from UniProt (23) and InterPro (27) and references from
pubmed to be added via DAS to geneview and protview pages.
ENSEMBL INFRASTRUCTURE
The Ensembl software system provides an efficient way of rep-
resenting genome data in a relational database and providing
access to it via an object-oriented application programming
interface (API) (3). This API is used by computational pipe-
lines (5) to generate and store genome annotation. The API is
also used by the website (4) and EnsMart data-mining system
(11) to provide researchers with access to the database. Bioin-
formaticans can use the API to access ensembl databases
remotely (from ensembldb.ensembl.org) or local databases
containing their own data.
The database representation and API are being continuously
developed to address bottlenecks affecting website and pipe-
line performance and increase flexibility. For example, during
the year there was a substantial change to the database schema
to make it easier to support multiple haplotype sequences and
different genome assemblies. These features have been used to
handle the pseudoautosomal regions shared between the
human X and Y chromosome and the alternative MHC haplo-
type sequence on human chromosome 6. The API was also
extended to provide support for generic mapping operations
between genome assemblies that were previously carried out
in external software. This should make it easier to transfer and
compare gene annotation across genome assemblies, which
should in turn lead to better stability of gene stable identifiers
for users. Efforts have also been made to increase the degree of
automation of processes such as gene building and compar-
ative analysis by extending the pipeline system. This automa-
tion is essential to allow Ensembl to scale to the increasing
number of vertebrate genomes, but also makes it easier for
others to adopt Ensembl technology.
As part of the development of the software infrastructure to
support comparative analysis, a rationalization of the database
structure has been carried out, so that all inter-genome data is
contained in a single database, ensembl-compara. The avail-
ability of the this database for download as well as external
access (ensembldb.ensembl.org), alongside the core annota-
tion databases for each organism, provides a rich source of
structured and pre-calculated data that can be used as a starting
point for many comparative genome bioformatics projects.
APIs to ensembl-compara are provided in Perl and Java
from Ensembl and as well as through BioJava (28).
REUSING ENSEMBL SOFTWARE
Ensembl has developed a strong network of bioinformatician
users in both academia and industry and Ensembl software is
being installed both to mirror Ensembl generated data and used
as a software foundation for user projects. For example,
Figure 2. Screenshot of Ensembl genesnpview. This new gene-centric view shows in a single display the genomic context of a gene and its surrounding SNPs. The
figure shows the region of the humangenomearound theHOXB3 gene in theHOXcluster on chromosome 17. The display shows three different resolutions: the genes
over a 270 kb region are shown aroundHOXB3; theHOXB3 gene itself (gene id ENSG00000120093) and the HOXB3 transcript (transcript id ENST00000311626)
with intragenic sequence and introns truncated so that it is mainly CDS and untranslated region (UTR) sequence that is shown. By default the flanking regions
are truncated to 50 bp. This can be changedwith the ‘Context’ menu and in this case has been set to 200 bp, revealing six intronic SNPs. It can be seen that the CDS of
the transcript includes one known protein domain (the Pfam PF00046 homeobox domain). There are only two SNPs that fall within the CDS and only one of these is
non-synonyomous leading to a proline (P) to threonine (T) amino acid change in the second exon as a result of an A to C base change. There is a further flanking SNP
(C to T change) in the 30-UTR. A table immediately below the figure provides more information about the SNPs that intersect the transcript being viewed. The three
menu bars ‘SNP class’, ‘Validation’ and ‘SNP type’ allow the SNPs being displayed to be filtered. If there weremultiple transcripts for the gene selected, they would
each be displayed. The view thus combines data in a single view that can partly be found in contigview, transview, protview and snpview.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D451
NASC, the European Arabidopsis stock centre, has set up an
Ensembl browser for the Arabidopsis genome (http://
atensembl.arabidopsis.info/); the Temasek Life Sciences
Laboratory in Singapore is using Ensembl to both generate
and display annotation for two Ciona genomes savingyi and
intestinalis (http://www2.bioinformatics.tll.org.sg/) and a
researcher at the Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics has setup
an Ensembl browser for the cotton pathogen Ashbya gossypii
genome (http://agd.unibas.ch/).
Ensembl technology is also being extensively reused at the
Wellcome Trust Genome Campus to support other projects. At
the European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) the EnsMart data-
mining system has been spun out into a separate project (Bio-
Mart; http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomart/) to enable it to provide
data-mining front ends to a variety of databases [e.g. Uniprot
and the Macromolecular Structure Database (MSD)] and allow
chained data-mining queries between them. At the Sanger
Institute, both the Vega (Vertebrate Genome Annotation Data-
base, http://vega.sanger.ac.uk/) (10,20) and Glovar (Global
Variation Database, http://www.glovar.org/) projects are reus-
ing parts of the Ensembl system for databases and web
front ends. The Epigenomics Consortium (29) (http://www.
epigenome.org/) has built a viewer based on Ensembl web
drawing code and DAS sources (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/
PostGenomics/epigenome/). DECIPHER (DatabasE of Chro-
mosomal Imbalance and Phenotype in Humans using Ensembl
Resources) and other projects are starting to embed images of
karyotypes, gene regions etc. into their web pages, which are
generated dynamically from Ensembl databases or DAS
sources using Ensembl drawing code.
In a world with a plethora of databases, these examples of
reuse should be a positive trend both for researchers and
bioinformaticians. Not only can bioinformaticians develop
interfaces to new data faster through software reuse, but
researchers using websites built from common components
are more likely to already be familiar with the interface
from other sites. Similarly, using DAS servers to reuse existing
data when presenting it in new ways should improve data
consistency for researchers, since the data remain in a single
location and when it is updated the view in all interfaces built
upon it changes simultaneously.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Ensembl remains focused on providing an integrated dataset
and website covering all vertebrate genomes and a genome
information infrastructure of use to many researchers. It con-
tinues to be a challenge to evolve the system to handle and
represent the ever increasing number of genomes. In particular
over the next year, a number of low coverage whole genome
shotgun vertebrate genomes are expected. Development of
comparative genome analysis will continue to be a major
focus. For example, the present pairwise storage of genome
comparisons will not scale well to the expected number of
new genomes, so new ways to calculate and represent the
data are being developed. Finally, with the anticipated com-
pletion of the human HapMap project a further rich source of
variation data will become available, which Ensembl will
integrate.
CONTACTING ENSEMBL
Ensembl is a joint project of the EBI and the Wellcome Trust
Sanger Institute (WTSI), both of which are located on the
Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Cambridge, UK. To
receive announcements about updates, subscribe to the
‘announce’ mailing list: majordomo@ebi.ac.uk ‘subscribe
ensembl-announce’. To follow the day-to-day development
of Ensembl, subscribe to the ‘development’ mailing list:
majordomo@ebi.ac.uk ‘subscribe ensembl-dev’. Requests
for information and support can be sent to helpdesk@
ensembl.org, which is a fully supported helpdesk. Extensive
additional documentation can be found on the Ensembl web-
site, including installation guides and tutorials, both about
using the software system and the web interface.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The Ensembl project is principally funded by the Wellcome
Trust with additional funding from EMBL, NIH-NIAID and
BBSRC. We are grateful to users of our website and the
developers on our mailing lists for much useful feedback
and discussion.
REFERENCES
1. Birney,E., Andrews,D., Bevan,P., Caccamo,M., Cameron,G., Chen,Y.,
Clarke,L., Coates,G., Cox,T., Cuff,J. et al. (2004) Ensembl 2004.
Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D468–D470.
2. Birney,E., Andrews,T.D., Bevan,P., Caccamo,M., Chen,Y., Clarke,L.,
Coates,G., Cuff,J., Curwen,V., Cutts,T. et al. (2004) An overview of
Ensembl. Genome Res., 14, 925–928.
3. Stabenau,A., McVicker,G., Melsopp,C., Proctor,G., Clamp,M. and
Birney,E. (2004) The Ensembl core software libraries. Genome Res.,
14, 929–933.
4. Stalker,J., Gibbins,B., Meidl,P., Smith,J., Spooner,W., Hotz,H.R. and
Cox,A.V. (2004) The Ensembl Web site: mechanics of a genome
browser. Genome Res., 14, 951–955.
5. Potter,S.C., Clarke,L., Curwen,V., Keenan,S., Mongin,E., Searle,S.M.,
Stabenau,A., Storey,R. and Clamp,M. (2004) The Ensembl analysis
pipeline. Genome Res., 14, 934–941.
6. Cuff,J.A., Coates,G.M., Cutts,T.J. and Rae,M. (2004) The Ensembl
computing architecture. Genome Res., 14, 971–975.
7. Curwen,V., Eyras,E., Andrews,T.D., Clarke,L., Mongin,E., Searle,S.M.
and Clamp,M. (2004) The Ensembl automatic gene annotation system.
Genome Res., 14, 942–950.
8. Birney,E., Clamp,M. and Durbin,R. (2004) GeneWise and
Genomewise. Genome Res., 14, 988–995.
9. Eyras,E., Caccamo,M., Curwen,V. and Clamp,M. (2004) ESTGenes:
alternative splicing from ESTs in Ensembl. Genome Res., 14, 976–987.
10. Searle,S.M., Gilbert,J., Iyer,V. and Clamp,M. (2004) The otter
annotation system. Genome Res., 14, 963–970.
11. Kasprzyk,A., Keefe,D., Smedley,D., London,D., Spooner,W.,
Melsopp,C., Hammond,M., Rocca-Serra,P., Cox,T. andBirney,E. (2004)
EnsMart: a generic system for fast and flexible access to biological data.
Genome Res., 14, 160–169.
12. Flybase Consortium (2003) The FlyBase database of the Drosophila
genome projects and community literature. Nucleic Acids Res.,
31, 172–175.
13. Harris,T.W., Chen,N., Cunningham,F., Tello-Ruiz,M., Antoshechkin,I.,
Bastiani,C., Bieri,T., Blasiar,D., Bradnam,K., Chan,J.et al. (2004)
WormBase: a multi-species resource for nematode biology and
genomics. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D411–D417.
14. Rat Genome Sequencing Consortium (2004) Genome sequence of the
Brown Norway rat yields insights into mammalian evolution. Nature,
428, 493–521.
15. Stein,L.D., Bao,Z., Blasiar,D., Blumenthal,T., Brent,M.R., Chen,N.,
Chinwalla,A., Clarke,L., Clee,C., Coghlan,A. et al. (2003) The Genome
D452 Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue
Sequence of Caenorhabditis briggsae: a Platform for Comparative
Genomics. PLoS Biol., 1.
16. International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium (2001) Initial
sequencing and analysis of the human genome. Nature, 409, 860–921.
17. International Chicken Genome Sequencing Consortium (2004)
Sequencing and comparative analysis of the chicken genome. Nature,
in press.
18. International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium (2004)
Finishing the euchromatic sequence of the human genome. Nature,
431, 931–945.
19. Ashurst,J.L. and Collins,J.E. (2003) Gene annotation: prediction and
testing. Annu. Rev. Genomics Hum. Genet., 4, 69–88.
20. Ashurst,J., Chen,C.-K., Gilbert,J., Jekosch,K., Keenan,S., Meidl,P.,
Searle,S., Stalker,J., Storey,R., Trevanion,S. et al. (2004) The Vertebrate
GenomeAnnotation(Vega)database.NucleicAcidsRes.,33,D459–D465.
21. Pruitt,K.D., Tatusova,T. and Maglott,D.R. (2003) NCBI Reference
Sequence project: update and current status. Nucleic Acids Res.,
31, 34–37.
22. Karolchik,D., Baertsch,R., Diekhans,M., Furey,T.S., Hinrichs,A.,
Lu,Y.T., Roskin,K.M., Schwartz,M., Sugnet,C.W., Thomas,D.J. et al.
(2003) The UCSC Genome Browser Database. Nucleic Acids Res.,
31, 51–54.
23. Leinonen,R., Diez,F.G., Binns,D., Fleischmann,W., Lopez,R. and
Apweiler,R. (2004) UniProt Archive. Bioinformatics, in press.
24. Schwartz,S., Kent,W.J., Smit,A., Zhang,Z., Baertsch,R., Hardison,R.C.,
Haussler,D. and Miller,W. (2003) Human–mouse alignments with
BLASTZ. Genome Res., 13, 103–107.
25. Lewis,S.E., Searle,S.M., Harris,N., Gibson,M., Lyer,V.,
Richter,J., Wiel,C., Bayraktaroglir,L., Birney,E., Crosby,M.A.
et al. (2002) Apollo: a sequence annotation editor. Genome Biol.,
3, RESEARCH0082.
26. Dowell,R.D., Jokerst,R.M., Day,A., Eddy,S.R. and Stein,L. (2001) The
Distributed Annotation System. BMC Bioinformatics, 2, 7.
27. Mulder,N.J., Apweiler,R., Attwood,T.K., Bairoch,A., Barrell,D.,
Bateman,A., Binns,D., Biswas,M., Bradley,P., Bork,P. et al. (2003) The
InterPro Database, 2003 brings increased coverage and new features.
Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 315–318.
28. Pocock,M.R., Down,T. and Hubbard,T.J.P. (2000) BioJava:
Open Source Components for Bioinformatics. Sigbio Newslett.,
20, 10–12.
29. Novik,K.L., Nimmrich,I., Genc,B., Maier,S., Piepenbrock,C., Olek,A.
and Beck,S. (2002) Epigenomics: genome-wide study of
methylation phenomena. Curr. Issues Mol. Biol.,
4, 111–128.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2005, Vol. 33, Database issue D453
