IMRN International Mathematics Research Notices
1996, No. 13
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants
Alexander B. Givental
The objective of this paper is to describe the construction and some applications
of the equivariant counterpart to the Gromov-Witten (GW) theory; i.e.; intersection theory
on spaces of (pseudo-) holomorphic curves in (almost) Ka¨hler manifolds.
Given a Killing action of a compact Lie group G on a compact Ka¨hler manifold X;
the equivariant GW-theory provides; as we will show in Section 3; the equivariant coho-
mology space H⁄G(X) with a Frobenius structure (see [11]). We will discuss applications
of the equivariant theory to the computation ([15]; [18]) of quantum cohomology algebras
of flag manifolds (Section 5); to the simultaneous diagonalization of the quantum cup-
product operators (Sections 7; 8); to the S1-equivariant Floer homology theory on the loop
space LX (see Section 6 and [14]; [13]); and to a “quantum” version of the Serre duality
theorem (Section 12).
In Sections 9–11 we combine the general theory developed in Sections 1–6 with
the fixed-point localization technique [21]; in order to prove the mirror conjecture (in the
form suggested in [14]) for projective complete intersections.
By the mirror conjecture; one usually means some intriguing relations (discovered
by physicists) between symplectic and complex geometry on a compact Ka¨hler Calabi-
Yau n-fold and; respectively; complex and symplectic geometry on another Calabi-Yau
n-fold; called the mirror partner of the former one. The remarkable application [8] of the
mirror conjecture to the enumeration of rational curves on Calabi-Yau 3-folds (1991; see
the theorem below) raised a number of new mathematical problems—challenging tests
of maturity for modern methods of symplectic topology.
On the other hand; in 1993 I suggested that the relation between symplectic and
complex geometry predicted by the mirror conjecture can be extended from the class of
Calabi-Yau manifolds to more general compact symplectic manifolds if one admits non-
Received 29 April 1996. Revision received 20 June 1996.
Communicated by N. Yu. Reshetikhin.
614 Alexander B. Givental
constant holomorphic functions on suitable noncompact Calabi-Yau manifolds to the
role of the mirror partners. According to this generalized form of the mirror conjecture;
GW-invariants of a symplectic manifold can be interpreted in terms of oscillating in-
tegrals over the mirror partner and saddle-point asymptotics of these integrals near
critical points of the holomorphic function.
We refer to [14]; [13] for a detailed discussion of the generalized mirror conjecture
supported there by the examples of complex projective spaces and general toric symplec-
tic manifolds. In this paper we prove the conjecture (see Corollary 11:10; Corollary 10:8;
Corollary 9:2; and the remark following it) for complete intersections in CPn given by r
equations of degrees (l1; : : : ; lr) with l1C¢ ¢ ¢Clr • nC1; that is; for Fano (<) and Calabi-Yau
(D) projective complete intersections.
In particular;we explain in Section 11 how to pass the following test of maturity.
Theorem. Consider the Picard-Fuchs differential equationµ
d
dt
¶4
I D 5et
µ
5
d
dt
C 1
¶µ
5
d
dt
C 2
¶µ
5
d
dt
C 3
¶µ
5
d
dt
C 4
¶
I
satisfied by the periods
I(t) D
Z
°3
t
du0 ^ ¢ ¢ ¢ ^ du4
d(u0 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C u4) ^ d(u0 ¢ ¢ ¢u4)
of the nonvanishing holomorphic 3-forms on the Calabi-Yau 3-folds Yt with Hodge num-
bers h2;1 D 1; h1;1 D 101 given by the affine equations Yt: u0 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C u4 D 1; u0 ¢ ¢ ¢u4 D et.
Pick the basis I0; : : : ; I3 of solutions to this differential equation determined by
I0(t)C I1(t)P C I2(t)P2 C I3(t)P3 D
1X
dD0
e(PCd)t
Q5d
mD1(5P Cm)Qd
mD1(P Cm)5
(modP4):
Introduce the new variable T (t) D I1(t)=I0(t). Then
I0
I0
C I1
I0
(t(T ))P C I2
I0
(t(T ))P2 C I3
I0
(t(T ))P3 D ePT C P
2
5
1X
dD1
ndd
3
1X
kD1
e(PCkd)T
(P C kd)2 (modP
4);
where the components of the right-hand side form the basis of solutions to the differential
equationµ
d
dT
¶2 1
K(eT )
µ
d
dT
¶2
J D 0 with K(q) D 5C
1X
dD1
ndd
3 q
d
1¡ qd ;
and nd is the virtual number of degree-d rational curves in CP4 situated on a generic
degree-5 hypersurface X; a Calabi-Yau 3-fold with Hodge numbers h2;1 D 101; h1;1 D 1.
An analogous result holds for any nonsingular Calabi-Yau 3-dimensional projec-
tive complete intersection X.
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 615
The virtual numbers of rational curves on a Calabi-Yau 3-fold X are defined in
several equivalent ways in quantum cohomology theory1 and are equal to the algebraic
numbers of such curves on X provided with a generic almost Ka¨hler structure. It is known
that for generic quintic hypersurfaces X ‰ CP4; the virtual number nd coincides with the
number of the degree-d rational curves in CP4 situated in X; at least for d • 9. The
number n1 D 2875 of straight lines on a generic quintic 3-fold has been known since the
last century; and n2 D 609250 and n3 D 317206375 were found (see [8]) several years ago;
while n4 D 242467530000 was predicted in [8] and confirmed in [21] (as an illustration of
a method that allows us; in principle; to find each nd). The simultaneous description of all
the numbers nd given in the theorem was conjectured in [8] on the basis of physical ideas
of mirror symmetry between the Calabi-Yau manifolds X and Y whose Hodge diamonds
happened to be mirror-symmetric to one another.
As far as we know; our theorem and its generalization to Calabi-Yau projective
complete intersections given in Section 11 provide the first examples of Calabi-Yau man-
ifolds for which predictions of the mirror symmetry are verified for rational curves of all
degrees.
The results of Sections 9–11 can be immediately carried over to complete inter-
sections in products of projective spaces. The method can be also applied to complete
intersections in general toric varieties where; however; some generalization of our alge-
braic formalism and some refinement in foundations of the equivariant GW-theory would
be necessary.
I am thankful to S. Barannikov; I. Grojnowski; B. Kim; D. Morrison; R. Plesser;
N. Reshetikhin; A. Schwarz; and A. Varchenko for numerous stimulating discussions and
especially to M. Kontsevich who taught me his approach to Gromov-Witten theory. The
proof of the theorem formulated above grew out of our joint attempt in the spring of
1995 to prove it using the method [21] of summation over trees. The influence of our
discussions on other results of this paper is also significant.
1 Moduli spaces of stable maps
It was M. Gromov [16] who first suggested constructing (and constructed some) topolog-
ical invariants of a symplectic manifold X as bordism classes of spaces of pseudoholo-
morphic curves in X. Recently M. Kontsevich [21] introduced the concept of stable maps;
which gives rise to an adequate compactification of these spaces. We recall here some
basic facts from [21] about these compactifications.
1See; for instance; [28]; [25] and also [1]; [24]; where the problem of counting multiple covers is resolved.
616 Alexander B. Givental
Let (C; p) be a compact connected complex curve with only double singular points
and withn ordered nonsingular marked points (p1; : : : ; pn). Two holomorphic maps (C; p)!
X; (C0; p0)! X to an almost Ka¨hler manifold X are called equivalent if they can be iden-
tified by a holomorphic isomorphism (C; p) ! (C0; p0). A holomorphic map (C; p) ! X is
called stable if it does not have infinitesimal automorphisms (or; equivalently; if its au-
tomorphism group is finite). In other words; a map is unstable if either it is constant on
a genus-0 irreducible component of Cwith less than three special (Dmarked or singular)
points; or if C is a torus; carries no marked points and the map is constant.
According to Gromov’s compactness theorem [16]; any sequence of holomorphic
maps C! X of a nonsingular compact curve C has a subsequence Hausdorff-convergent
to a holomorphic map OC ! X of (maybe reducible) curve OC of the same genus g and
representing the same total homology class d 2 H2(X;Z). A refinement of this theorem
from [21] says that equivalence classes of stable maps C ! X with given g; n; d form a
single compact Hausdorff space—the moduli space of stable maps—which we denote
Xg;n;d. Here g D dimH1(C;O) D 1¡ ´(CnCsing)=2.
In the case X D pt; the moduli spaces coincide with Deligne-Mumford compact-
ifications NMg;n of moduli spaces of genus-g Riemannian surfaces with n marked points.
They are compact nonsingular orbifolds (i.e.; local quotients of nonsingular manifolds
by finite groups) and thus bear the rational fundamental cycle which allows one to build
up an intersection theory. In general; the moduli spaces Xg;n;d are singular and may have
“wrong” dimension; and the idea of the program that began with [22]; [21] is to provide
Xg;n;d with virtual fundamental cycles insensitive to perturbations of the almost Ka¨hler
structure on X. In some nice cases; however; the spaces X0;n;d are already nonsingular
orbifolds of the “right” dimension.
Beginning with this point; we will use only genus-0 stable maps and use the
notation Xn;d for the moduli spaces X0;n;d.
A compact complex manifold is called convex if it is a homogeneous space of its
Lie algebra of holomorphic vector fields.
Theorem 1.1 [21]; [7]. If X is convex; then all nonempty moduli spaces Xn;d of genus-0
stable maps are compact nonsingular complex orbifolds of “right” dimension hc1(TX); diC
dimC XC n¡ 3.
Additionally; there are canonical morphisms Xn;d ! Xn¡1;d; Xn;d ! NM0;n; Xn;d !
Xn between the moduli spaces Xn;d called forgetful; contraction; and evaluation (and
defined by forgetting one of the marked points; forgetting the map; and evaluating the
map at marked points; respectively). We refer to [21]; [7] for details of their construction.
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 617
In the rest of this paper we will stick to convex manifolds; we comment; however;
on which results are expected to hold in greater generality. A number of recent preprints
by B. Behrend and B. Fantechi; J. Li and G. Tian; and T. Fukaya and K. Ono show that Kont-
sevich’s “virtual fundamental cycle” program is being realized successfully;which leaves
no doubt that these generalizations are correct. Still; some verifications are necessary in
order to make them precise theorems.
2 Equivariant correlators
The Gromov-Witten theory borrows from quantum field theory the name (quantum) cor-
relators for numerical topological characteristics of the moduli spacesXn;d (characteristic
numbers); and borrows from bordism theory the construction of such correlators as inte-
grals of suitable wedge-products of various universal cohomology classes (characteristic
classes of the GW-theory) over the fundamental cycle.
We list here some such characteristic classes.
(1) Pull-backs of cohomology classes from Xn by the evaluation maps e1 £ ¢ ¢ ¢ £
en: Xn;d! Xn at the marked points.
(2) Any polynomial in the first Chern classes c(1); : : : ; c(n) of the line bundles over
Xn;d consisting of tangent lines to the mapped curves at the marked points. One defines
these line bundles (by identifying the Cartesian product of the forgetful and evaluation
maps XnC1;d ! Xn;d £ X with the universal stable map over Xn;d) as normal line bundles
to the n embeddings Xn;d! XnC1;d defined by the nmarked points of the universal stable
map. We will call these line bundles the universal tangent lines at the marked points.
(3) Pull-backs of cohomology classes of the Deligne-Mumford spaces by contrac-
tion maps …: Xn;d! NM0;n. We will make use of the classes AI :D Ai1;:::;ik Poincare´-dual to
fundamental cycles of fibers of forgetful maps NM0;n! NM0;k.
We define the GW-invariant
AIh`1; : : : ; `nin;d :D
Z
Xn;d
…⁄AI ^ e⁄1`1 ^ ¢ ¢ ¢ ^ e⁄n`n:
It has the following meaning in enumerative geometry: it counts the number of pairs
“a degree-d holomorphic map CP1 ! X with given k points mapped to given k cycles; a
configuration of n¡ k marked points mapped to the n¡ k given cycles.”
Suppose now that the convex manifold X is provided with a Hamiltonian Killing
action of a compact Lie group G. Then G acts also on the moduli spaces of stable maps.
The evaluation; forgetful; and contraction maps are G-equivariant; and one can define
correlators AIh`1; : : : `nin;d of equivariant cohomology classes of X.
618 Alexander B. Givental
The equivariant cohomology H⁄G(M) of a G-space M is defined as the ordinary
cohomology H⁄(MG) of the homotopic quotient MG D EG £G M—the total space of the
M-bundle p: MG! BG associated with the universal principal G-bundle EG! BG. The
algebraH⁄(BG) D H⁄G(pt) of characteristic classes of principal G-bundles plays the role of
the coefficient ring of the equivariant theory (so that H⁄G(M) is an H
⁄
G(pt)-module). IfM is
a compact manifold with smooth G-action; the push-forward p⁄: H⁄G(M)! H⁄G(pt) (“fiber-
wise integration”) provides the equivariant cohomology of M with intersection theory
with values in H⁄G(pt). In the case of Hamiltonian actions; the corresponding intersection
pairing h¢; ¢i is nondegenerate over H⁄G(pt).
We introduce the equivariant GW-invariants; AI(h`1; : : : ; `nin;d; with values in
H⁄(BG); where `1; : : : ; `n 2 H⁄G(X). Values of such invariants on fundamental cycles of
mapsB! BG are accountable for enumeration of rational holomorphic curves in families
of complex manifolds with the fiber X associated with the principal G-bundles over a
finite-dimensional manifold B.
3 The WDVV-equation
One of the main structural results concerning Gromov-Witten invariants—the composi-
tion rule [28]; [25]—expresses all genus-0 correlators via the three-given-marked-point
ones (we denote them h`1; : : : ; `nin;d since the corresponding AI D 1) satisfying; addi-
tionally; the Witten-Dijkgraaf-Verlinde-Verlinde equation. We will see here that the same
result holds true for equivariant GW-invariants (at least in the convex case).
Following [10]; we introduce the potential
F D
1X
nD0
1
n!
X
d
qd ht; : : : ; tin;d: (1)
It is a formal function on the vector (super-) spaceH⁄G(X) with values in the coefficient ring
⁄ D H⁄G(pt;C[[q]]). Here C[[q]] stands for some completion of the group algebra C[H2(X;Z)]
so that the symbol qd D qd11 ¢ ¢ ¢qdkk represents the class (d1; : : : ; dk) in the lattice Zk D
H2(X;Z) of 2-cycles. Fundamental classes of holomorphic curves in X have nonnegative
coordinates with respect to a basis of Ka¨hler forms; so that the formal power series
algebra C[[q]] can be taken on the role of the completion. Strictly speaking; the formula
(1) defines F up to a quadratic polynomial of t; since the spaces Xn;0 are defined only for
n ‚ 3.
Denote by r the gradient operator with respect to the equivariant intersection
pairing h ; i onH⁄G(X). The WDVV-equation is an identity between third directional deriva-
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 619
tives of F. It says that
hrFfi;fl;rF°;–i (2)
is totally symmetric (up to usual signs) with respect to permutations of the four directions
fi;fl; °; – 2 H⁄G(X).
Theorem 3.1. The WDVV-equation holds for convex X.
Notice that¿
r
Z
X
a ^ t;r
Z
X
b ^ t
À
D ha; bi (3)
has geometrical meaning of integration
R
¢‰X£X a› b over the diagonal in X£ X.
In order to prove the nonequivariant version of the WDVV-equation; one inter-
prets the 4-point correlators A1234hfi;fl; °; –i4;d; which are totally symmetric in fi;fl; °; –
as integrals over the fibers ¡‚ of the contraction map …: X4;d ! NM4 D CP1; and spe-
cializes the cross-ratio ‚ to 0; 1; or 1. Stable maps corresponding to generic points of;
say; ¡0 are glued from a pair of maps f1: (CP1; p1; p2; a1) ! X; f2: (CP1; p3; p4; a2) ! X of
degrees d1 C d2 D d with three marked points each; satisfying the diagonal condition
f1(a1) D f2(a2). One can treat such a pair as a point in X3;d1 £X3;d2 situated on the inverse
image ¡d1;d2 of the diagonal ¢ ‰ X£X under the evaluation map e3£ e3. The glueing map
td1Cd2Dd¡d1;d2 ! ¡0 is an isomorphism at generic points; and therefore it identifies the
analytic fundamental cycles. This means that
A1234hfi;fl; °; –i4;d D
X
d1Cd2Dd
hrhfi;fl; ti3;d1 ;rh°; –; ti3;d2i:
The above argument applies to the correlatorsA1234hfi;fl; °; –; t; : : : ; tinC4;d with additional
marked points and gives rise to
hrFfi;fl;rF°;–i D
1X
nD0
1
n!
X
d
qdA1234hfi;fl; °; –; t ¢ ¢ ¢ ti4Cn;d; (4)
which is totally symmetric in fi;fl; °; –.
Convexity of X is used here only in order to make sure that the moduli spaces
have fundamental cycles and that the diagonal in X£ X consists of regular values of the
evaluation map e3 £ e3.
In order to justify the above argument in the equivariant situation; it is convenient
to reduce the problem to the case of tori actions (using maximal torus of G) and use the
de Rham version of equivariant cohomology theory.
620 Alexander B. Givental
For a torusG D (S1)r acting on a manifoldM; the equivariant de Rham complex [3]
consists ofG-invariant differential forms onMwith coefficients inC[u1; : : : ; ur] D H⁄G(pt);
provided with the coboundary operator dG D d C
Pr
sD1 usis where is are the operators
of contraction by the vector fields generating the action. Applying the ordinary Stokes
formula toG-invariant forms andG-invariant chains;we obtain well-defined functionals
H⁄G(M)! C[u] of integration over invariant cycles. The identity (4) follows now from the
obvious G-invariance of the analytic varieties ¡‚; ¡d1;d2 .
A similar argument proves a composition rule that reduces computation of all
equivariant correlators AIh¢ ¢ ¢i to that of h¢ ¢ ¢i.
4 Convex vector bundles
The following construction was designed by M. Kontsevich in order to extend the domain
of applications of WDVV-theory to complete intersections in convex Ka¨hler manifolds.
Let V ! X be a convex bundle; that is; a holomorphic vector bundle spanned
by its holomorphic sections. For stable f: (C; p) ! X (of degree d; genus 0; with n
marked points); the spaces H0(C; f⁄V ) form a holomorphic vector bundle Vn;d over the
moduli space Xn;d. If f is glued from f1 and f2 as in the proof of (4); then H0(C; f⁄V) D
ker(H0(C1; f⁄1V) ' H0(C2; f⁄2V)
e1¡e2¡! e⁄1V D e⁄2V) where ei: H0(Ci; f⁄i V) ! e⁄i V is defined by
evaluation of sections at the marked point ai.
This allows one to construct a solution F to the WDVV-equation; starting with a
convex G-equivariant bundle V and any invertible G-equivariant multiplicative charac-
teristic class E. (The total Chern class would be a good example.)
Redefine
ha; bi :D
Z
X
a ^ b ^ E(V) ;
ht; : : : ; tin;d :D
Z
Xn;d
e⁄1t ^ ¢ ¢ ¢ ^ e⁄nt ^ E(Vn;d);
F(t) D
1X
nD0
1
n!
X
d
qdht; : : : ; tin;d:
Then hrFfi;fl;rF°;–i is totally symmetric in fi;fl; °; –.
This construction admits a limit procedure from the total Chern class to the
(equivariant) Euler class; and the limit of F corresponds to the GW-theory on the sub-
manifold X0 ‰ X defined by an (invariant) holomorphic section s of the bundle V. Namely;
the section s induces a holomorphic section sn;d of Vn;d; and the (equivariant) Euler
class Euler(Vn;d) becomes represented by some cycle [X0n;d] situated in the zero locus
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 621
X0n;d :D s¡1n;d(0) of the induced section. The variety X0n;d consists of stable maps to X0;
the Euler cycle [X0n;d] plays the role of the virtual fundamental cycle in X
0
n;d; and the
correlators
ht; : : : ; tin;d :D
Z
Xn;d
e⁄1t ^ ¢ ¢ ¢ ^ e⁄ntEuler(Vn;d) D
Z
[X0
n;d
]
e⁄1t ^ ¢ ¢ ¢ ^ e⁄nt
are correlators of GW-theory on X0 between the classes t which come from the ambient
space X.
According to [30]; one can consider the GW-theory with these correlators as the
GW-theory on the supermanifold with the structural sheaf to be the sheaf of exterior
forms on the dual bundle V⁄.
Another solution of the WDVV-equation can be obtained from the bundles V 0d;n :D
H1(C; f⁄V⁄): one should put ha; bi :D R
X
a^b^E¡1(V⁄); ht; : : : ; tin;d D
R
Xn;d
e⁄1t^¢ ¢ ¢^e⁄nt^E(V 0n;d)
for d 6D 0 and ht; : : : ; tin;0 D
R
Xn;0
e⁄1t ^ ¢ ¢ ¢ ^ e⁄nt ^ E¡1(V⁄).
In Section 12 we will prove a duality theorem for the two solutions of the WDVV-
equations in the case when X D CPn and V is the sum of positive line bundles. Choosing
the (equivariant) Euler class on the role of E(V⁄); one comes to the GW-theory on the non-
compact total space of the bundle V⁄. Using slight modifications of the above correlators
and the constructions of the next section; one can also define quantum versions of both
the ordinary and compactly supported cohomology algebras of this manifold. We leave
the details of this construction to the reader.
5 Quantum cohomology
One interprets the WDVV-equation as the associativity identity for the quantum cup-
product on H⁄G(X) defined by
hfi ⁄ fl; °i D Ffi;fl;°:
It is a deformation of the ordinary cup-product (with t and q in the role of parameters)
in the category of (skew-) commutative algebras with unity:
hfi ⁄ 1; °i D hfi; °i: (5)
Indeed; the push-forward by the forgetful map …: Xn;d ! Xn¡1;d (with n ‚ 3) sends
1 2 H⁄G(Xn;d) to 0 unless d D 0 and n D 3; in which case Xn;d D X and Xn¡1;d is not defined.
The structure usually referred to in the literature as the quantum cohomology
algebra corresponds to the restriction of the deformation ⁄t;q to t D 0. As it is shown in
[22]; in many cases the function F can be recovered on the basis of the WDVV-equation
622 Alexander B. Givental
from the structural constants Ffi;fl;°jtD0(q) of the quantum cohomology algebra due to the
following symmetry of the potential F. Let u 2 H2G(X) and (u1; : : : ; uk) be its coordinates
with respect to the basis of the lattice (Zk)⁄ D H2(X) D H2G(X)=H2G(pt) (so that ui 2 H⁄G(pt)).
Then
@u Ffi;fl;° D
kX
iD1
uiqi@Ffi;fl;°=@qi 8fi;fl; ° 2 H⁄G(X): (6)
The identity (6) follows from the obvious push-forward formula …⁄u D
P
diui.
The symmetry (6) can be interpreted in such a way that the quantum deformation
of the cup-product restricted to t D 0 is equivalent to the deformation with q D 1 and t
restricted to the second cohomology of X. (In the equivariant setting; it is better; however;
to keep both parameters in place—see Sections 7 and 8.)
In this paper; we will use the term quantum cup-product for the entire (q; t)-
deformation and reserve the name quantum cohomology algebra for the restriction of
the quantum cup-product to t D 0.
I have heard some complaints about such terminology; because it allows many
authors to compute quantum cohomology algebras without even mentioning the defor-
mation in t-directions. There are some indications; however; that (despite the equivalence
(6)) the q-deformation has a somewhat different nature than the t-deformation. The loop
space approach [13] and our computations in Sections 9–11 seem to emphasize this dis-
tinction.
Quantum cohomology algebras of the classical flag manifolds have been com-
puted in [15]; [18] on the basis of several conjectures about properties of Un-equivariant
quantum cohomology (see also [2] where a slightly different formalism was applied).
The answer (in terms of generators and relations2) for complete flag manifolds Un=Tn
is strikingly related to conservation laws of Toda lattices. In [15]; the conjectures called
the product; induction; and restriction properties; describing behavior of equivariant
quantum cohomology under some natural constructions; were motivated by interpreta-
tion of the quantum cohomology in terms of Floer theory on the loop space LX. Although
a construction of the equivariant counterpart of the Floer-Morse theory on LX remains an
open problem; the three conjectured axioms can be justified within GW-theory. This was
2Several weeks after the first version of this paper had been completed; some new results arrived: S. Fomin;
S. Gelfand; and A. Postnikov [12] found structural constants of the quantum cohomology algebra of the flag
manifold with respect to the basis of Schubert polynomials; and B. Kim [20] proved the relation of quantum
cohomology algebras of generalized flag manifolds G=T with the Toda lattice (of the Langlands-dual group G⁄).
Added in proof: I would like to thank B. Konstant; who informed me that D. Peterson developed a loop space
approach and found a uniform description of quantum cohomology algebras for all partial flag manifolds G=P.
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 623
done by B. Kim [19]. The induction and restriction properties follow directly from defini-
tions given in this paper and hold for the entire quantum deformation (not only at t D 0);
while the “product” axiom (that the G1£G2-equivariant quantum cohomology algebra of
X1 £X2 is the tensor product of the Gi-equivariant quantum cohomology algebras of the
factors Xi) has been verified in [19] for convex manifolds.
Behavior of the quantum cup-product at t 6D 0 under the Cartesian product oper-
ation on the target manifolds is much more complicated than the operation of the tensor
product.
We complete this section with a discussion of some remarkable relations between
quantum cohomology algebras of manifolds F(n0; : : : ; nk) of partial flags Cn0 ‰ Cn0Cn1 ‰
¢ ¢ ¢ ‰ Cn0C¢¢¢Cnk D Cn (equivariant with respect to the action of Un on Cn) and the action-
angle coordinates of the Toda lattice—an integrable system with the Hamilton function
p21=2C¢ ¢ ¢Cp2n=2¡exp(t1¡t2)¡¢ ¢ ¢¡exp(tn¡1¡tn) (with respect to the symplectic structure
dp1 ^ dt1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C dpn ^ dtn). The equivariant quantum cohomology algebras of these
manifolds were computed in [18]; [19]. The answer can be formulated as follows.
Consider the continued fraction
P(x)
Q(x)
:D P0(x)C q1
P1(x)C q2
P2(x)C q3
: : :
C qk
Pk(x)
where P0; : : : ; Pk are monic polynomials of some positive degrees (which we denoten0; : : : ;
nk); and q1; : : : ; qk are some nonzero constants. Given P0; : : : ; Pk and q1; : : : ; qk; the contin-
ued fraction uniquely determines the two monic polynomials P;Q of degrees n; n ¡ n0.
Let the coefficient of the polynomial Pi D xniCc(i)1 xni¡1C¢ ¢ ¢Cc(i)ni denote the Chern classes
of the tautological ni-dimensional vector bundle over F(n0; : : : ; nk); and let (q1; : : : ; qk) de-
note the parameters of the quantum deformation in the quantum cohomology algebra of
F(n0; : : : ; nk) (see [18]). Then the relation P D xnCc1xn¡1C¢ ¢ ¢Ccn expresses a basis of rela-
tions between the generators (c(i)j ) of the quantum cohomology algebra of the partial flag
manifold and the Chern classes (c1; : : : ; cn) of the tautological vector bundle over BUn (so
that C[c1; : : : ; cn] plays the role of the coefficient ring of the Un-equivariant cohomology
theory).
Notice that in the “classical” equivariant cohomology algebra; the same relation
holds withP D P0 ¢ ¢ ¢Pk. This indicates that a quantum generalization of the multiplicative
property of the total Chern class should involve continued fractions.
624 Alexander B. Givental
Consider now the reduced rational function Q=P with monic Q. For a generic P it
can be written as the sum of simple fractions
a1
x¡ x1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C
an
x¡ xn ;
X
ai D 1:
Introduce the following n commuting flows with time variables ¿1; : : : ; ¿n:
xi 7! xi; ai 7! aie
xi¿i
a1ex1¿1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C anexn¿n :
These dynamics preserve the hyperplane a1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C an D 1 corresponding to monic poly-
nomials Q. For generic Q the transformation of the sum Q=P of simple fractions to the
continued fraction
P
Q
D x¡ p1 C q1
x¡ p2 C q2
: : :
C qn¡1
x¡ pn
defines n commuting flows on the space with coordinates (p1; : : : ; pn; q1; : : : ; qn¡1). (This
continued fraction corresponds to the complete flag manifold F(1; : : : ; 1).) We put qi D
exp(ti ¡ tiC1). It is easy to check that the dynamics of the Toda system (in the (p; t)-space)
coincides with the diagonal flow with ¿1 D ¢ ¢ ¢ D ¿n D ¿.
I am thankful to N. Reshetikhin who brought to my attention the references [26];
[27]; where these facts about Toda lattices are described.
Despite several recent papers (see for instance [23]); the actual relation of quan-
tum cohomology with Toda dynamics; as well as the interrelations between quantum
cohomology algebras of partial flag manifolds (whose spectra fit nicely as various strata
in the space of polynomials Q); is yet to be understood.
6 Floer theory and D-modules
Structural constants hfi ⁄ fl; °i of the quantum cup-product are derivatives @flFfi;° of the
same function. This allows one to interpret the WDVV-equation as an integrability condi-
tion of some connections rh¯ on the tangent bundle TH of the space H D H⁄(X;C). Namely;
put t DP tfipfi where p1 D 1; p2; : : : ; pN is a basis in H; and define
rh¯ D h¯d¡
X
(pfi⁄)dtfi^ : ›0(TH)! ›1(TH)
where pfi⁄ are operators of quantum multiplication by pfi. Then rh¯ – rh¯ D 0 for each
value of the parameter h¯. Notice that the integrability condition that reads “the system
of differential equations h¯@fiI D pfi ⁄ I has solutions I 2 ›0(TH)” is actually obtained
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 625
as a somewhat combinatorial statement (the WDVV-equation) about coefficients of the
series F.
In [13]; [14] we attempted to improve this unsatisfactory explanation of the inte-
grability property by describing a direct geometrical meaning of the solutions I in terms
of S1-equivariant Floer theory on the loop space LX. Briefly; the universal covering fLX car-
ries the action of the covering transformation lattice …2(X) with generators q1; : : : ; qk and
the S1-action by rotation of loops; which preserves natural symplectic forms !1; : : : ;!k
on LX and thus defines corresponding Hamiltonians H1; : : : ; Hk on fLX (the action func-
tionals). The Duistermaat-Heckman forms!iC h¯Hi (here h¯ is the generator ofH⁄S1 (pt)) are
equivariantly closed; and operators pi of exterior multiplication by these forms have the
following Heisenberg commutation relations with the covering transformations:
piqj ¡ qjpi D h¯qj–i j:
Conjecturally; this provides S1-equivariant Floer cohomology of fLX with a D-module
structure which is equivalent to the above system of differential equations (restricted to
t D 0; q 6D 0) and reduces to the quantum cohomology algebra in the quasi-classical limit
h¯ D 0 (see [13]; [15]).
In this section; we describe solutions to rh¯I D 0 by imitating the S1-equivariant
Floer theory (which is still to be constructed) within the framework of GW-theory. This
construction turns out to be crucial to our proof in Section 11 of the mirror conjecture
for Calabi-Yau projective complete intersections.
One may think of the graph of an algebraic loop CP1nf0;1g ! X of degree d as of
a stable map CP1 ! X£CP1 of bidegree (d; 1). Denote by Ld(X) a moduli space of genus-0
stable maps to X£CP1 of bidegree (d; 1). (We do not specify the number of marked points
in this notation.) Our starting point consists in the interpretation of Ld(X) as a degree-d
approximation to fLX and the application of equivariant GW-theory to the action of S1 on
the second factor CP1 with the fixed points f0;1g.
In the theorem below;we assume X to be convex. It is natural to expect; however;
that the theorem holds true whenever the nonequivariant GW-theory works for X; since
the S1-action is nontrivial only on the factor CP1 which is convex on its own.
Let h ; i be the Poincare´ pairing on H D H⁄(X;C). The equivariant cohomology
algebraH⁄
S1
(X£CP1) is isomorphic toH›CC[p; h¯]=(p(p¡h¯)) with the S1-equivariant pairing
(’;ˆ) D 1
2…i
I h’;ˆidp
p(p¡ h¯) :
Localization in h¯ allows us to introduce coordinates ’ D tp=h¯ C ¿(h¯ ¡ p)=h¯; ¿; t 2 H;
diagonalizing the equivariant pairing:
((¿; t); (¿0; t0)) D ht; t
0i ¡ h¿; ¿0i
h¯
:
626 Alexander B. Givental
The potential F(t; ¿; h¯; q; q0) satisfying the equivariant WDVV-equation for X £ CP1 ex-
pands as
F D F(0) C q0F(1) C q20F(2) ¢ ¢ ¢
according to contributions of stable maps of degree 0; 1; 2; : : : with respect to the second
factor. Denote by F D F(t; q) the potential (1) of the GW-theory for X.
Theorem 6.1. (a) F(0) D (F(t; q)¡ F(¿; q))=h¯.
(b) The matrix ('fifl) :D (@2F(1)=@¿fi@tfl) is a fundamental solution of r§h¯I D 0:
¡h¯ @
@¿°
' D Op°(t)';
h¯
@
@t°
'⁄ D Op°(¿)'⁄;
where Op° D (pflfi)°; ° D 1; : : : ; N; are matrices of quantum multiplication by p°; and '⁄ is
transposed to '.
Proof. Moduli spaces of bidegree-(d; 0) stable maps to X£CP1 coincide with Xn;d£CP1.
This implies (a) and shows that the WDVV-equation for F modulo q0 follows from the
WDVV-equation for F. Part (b) follows now directly from the WDVV-equation for F modulo
q20 and from
h¯
@
@t1
'fifl D 'fifl D ¡h¯ @
@¿1
'fifl
due to (5) and (6). Here @=@t1; @=@¿1 are derivatives in the direction 1 2 H⁄(X) of the identity
components of t and ¿; respectively.
The following corollary is obtained by expressing equivariant correlators'fifl via
localization of equivariant cohomology classes of moduli spaces Ld(X) to fixed points of
the S1 action.
Define the matrix ˆ D (ˆfifl(t; q; h¯)) by
ˆfifl D
1X
nD0
1
n!
X
d
qd
¿
pfl
h¯C c ; t; : : : ; t; pfi
À
nC2;d
(7)
where c :D c(1) is the first Chern class of the line bundle over Xk;d introduced in Section 2
as “the universal tangent line at the first marked point;” and hpfl=(h¯C c); pfii2;0 :D hpfi; pfli.
Corollary 6.2. h¯@ˆ=@t° D Op°(t)ˆ; i.e.; the matrix ˆ is (another) fundamental solution of
rh¯I D 0.
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 627
Proof. A fixed point in Ld(X) is represented by a stable map C0 [ CP1 [ C1 ! X £ CP1
where ’i: Ci! X£ fig are stable maps of degrees d0 C d1 D d connected by a “constant
loop” CP1 ’! fxg£CP1. (Notice that di D 0 corresponds to empty Ci.) Thus; components of
Ld(X)S
1
can be identified with submanifolds in Xd0;k0C1£Xd1;k1C1 defined by the diagonal
constraint e1(’0) D e1(’1); with h¯2(h¯C c(0))(h¯¡ c(1)) to be the equivariant Euler class of
the normal bundle. This gives rise to
h¯2'fifl D
X
";"0
ˆfi"(¿;¡h¯) ·""0ˆ"0fl(t; h¯) (8)
where
P
·""
0
p" › p"0 is the coordinate expression of the diagonal cohomology class of
X ‰ X £ X. Now the differential equations of Theorem 6:1 for ' imply the differential
equation for ˆ.
We give here several reformulations which will be convenient in the computation
of quantum cohomology algebras in Sections 9–11.
Consider the specialization of the connectionrh¯ to the parameter subspace corre-
sponding to the deformation of the quantum cup-product along the second cohomology.
(This is accomplished by first putting t D 0 and then replacing qd by expPditi where
(t1; : : : ; tk) are coordinates on H2(X) with respect to the basis p(1); : : : ; p(k) 2 H2(X). In this
new setting; put
sfi;fl :D
X
d
edt
*
pfl
ept=h¯
h¯C c ; pfi
+
2;d
where pt :DPp(i)ti and dt DPditi.
Corollary 6.3. The matrix (sfi;fl(t)) is a fundamental solution to
rh¯ s D 0: h¯ @
@ti
s D Op(i) s:
Proof. One should combine Corollary 6.2 with iterative applications of the following
symmetries generalizing (5); (6):
hf(c); : : : ; 1inC1;d D
¿
f(0)¡ f(c)
c
; : : :
À
n;d
;
hf(c); : : : ; p(i)inC1;d D dihf(c); : : :in;d C
¿
p(i)
f(0)¡ f(c)
c
; : : :
À
n;d
:
Here f is a function of one variable with values in H⁄(X).
628 Alexander B. Givental
The symmetries are easily verified on the basis of the following geometrical prop-
erties of universal tangent lines:
(i) Consider the push-forward along the map …: XnC1;d! Xn;d (forgetting the last
marked point). It is easy to see that the difference …⁄(c) ¡ c between the Chern class of
the universal tangent line at the first marked point and the pull-back of its counterpart
from Xn;d is represented by the fundamental cycle of the section i: Xn;d! XnC1;d defined
by the first marked point.
(ii) i⁄(c) D 0; i⁄…⁄(c) D c.
In particular; …⁄(1=(h¯C c)) D 1=[h¯(h¯C c)].
Corollary 6.4. Consider the functions
sfl :D
X
d
edt
*
pfl
ept=h¯
h¯C c ; 1
+
2;d
:
Let P(h¯@=@t; exp t; h¯) be a differential operator annihilating simultaneously all the func-
tions sfl. Then the relation P(p(1); : : : ; p(k); q1; : : : ; qk; 0) D 0 holds in the quantum co-
homology algebra of X. (We assume here that P depends only on nonnegative powers
of h¯.)
Proof. The functions sfl form the first row in the fundamental solution matrix S D (sfi;fl).
Application of the differential operator P to the matrix S is equal to the matrix product
(P0 C h¯P1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C h¯MPM)S where P0 is the matrix of the quantum multiplication by the
symbol P(p; exp t; 0). Our hypotheses mean that the first row in this product vanishes.
Since the fundamental solution matrix S is nondegenerate; this implies that the first row
in P0 vanishes; too. In other words; hP(p; q; 0); pfli D 0 for all fl and thus P(p; q; 0) D 0 in
the quantum cohomology algebra.
All results of this section extend literally to the equivariant setting and/or to the
generalization to convex vector bundles described in Section 4. We will apply them in
this extended form in Sections 9–11.
Remarks. (1) The universal formula (7) for solutions of rh¯I D 0 was perhaps discovered
independently by several authors. I first learned this formula from R. Dijkgraaf. It can
also be found in [11] in the axiomatic context of conformal topological field theory. One
can prove it directly from a recursion relation (in the spirit of the WDVV-equation) for
so-called gravitational descendents—correlators involving the first Chern classes of the
universal tangent lines (or; in a slightly different manner; by describing explicitly the
divisor in Xn;d representing c). Our approach provides an interpretation of (7) in terms of
fixed-point localization in equivariant cohomology.
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 629
(2) One can generalize our theorem to bundles over CP1 with the fiber X. This
seems to indicate that a straightforward “open-string” approach to S1-equivariant Floer
theory on fLXwould be more powerful and flexible than the approximation by GW-theory
on X£ CP1 described above.
(3) Although the theorem provides a geometrical interpretation of solutions to
rh¯I D 0; it does not eliminate the combinatorial nature of the integrability condition.
Indeed; the theorem is deduced from an equivariant WDVV-equation which in its turn
can be interpreted as an integrability condition. Of course; one can explain it using the
S1£S1-equivariant WDVV-equation on (X£CP1)£CP1; etc. It would be interesting to find
out whether this process converges.
7 Frobenius structures
In [11]; B. Dubrovin studied geometrical structures defined by solutions of WDVV-equa-
tions on the parameter space; and reduced classification of generic solutions to the clas-
sification of trajectories of some Euler-like nonautonomous Hamiltonian systems on so⁄N.
We show here how this approach to equivariant GW-theory yields analogous Hamiltonian
systems on the affine Lie coalgebras bso⁄N.
The quantum cup-product on H D H⁄G(X) considered as an N-dimensional vec-
tor space over the field of fractions K of the algebra H⁄G(pt) defines a formal Frobenius
structure on H. The structure consists of the following ingredients:
(1) a symmetric K-bilinear inner product h ; i;
(2) a (formal) function F: H ! K whose third directional derivatives ha ⁄ b; ci :D
Fa;b;c provide tangent spaces TtHwith the Frobenius algebra structure (i.e.;
associative commutative multiplication ⁄ satisfying ha ⁄ b; ci D ha; b ⁄ ci);
(3) the constant vector field 1 of unities of the algebras (TtH; ⁄) whose flow pre-
serves the multiplication ⁄ (i.e.; L1(⁄) D 0);
(4) grading: In the nonequivariant case axiomatically studied by B. Dubrovin; it
can be described by the Euler vector field E; such that the tensor fields 1;
⁄; and h ; i are homogeneous (i.e.; are eigenvectors of the Lie derivative
LE) of degrees ¡1; 1; and D; respectively (where D D dimC X in the models
arising from the GW-theory). In the equivariant GW-theory this grading
axiom should be slightly modified; since the grading of the structural ring
H⁄G(pt) is nontrivial; and thus the natural Euler operator LE is C-linear but
not K-linear.3
3One may also think of the H⁄
G
(pt)-module H⁄
G
(X) as of the module of sections of a vector bundle over the
spectrum of H⁄
G
(pt). The fibers of the bundle then carry Frobenius structures satisfying the axioms (1)–(3) while
the Euler vector field is not tangent to the fibers.
630 Alexander B. Givental
The fact that the multiplication ⁄ is defined on tangent vectors to H means that
the algebra (›0(TH); ⁄) can be naturally considered as the algebra K[L] of regular functions
on some subvariety L ‰ T ⁄H in the cotangent bundle. A point t 2 H is called semisimple
if the algebra (TtH; ⁄) is semisimple; that is; if L\ T ⁄t H consists of N linearly independent
points.
Flatness of the connection (defined on TH)
rh¯ D h¯d¡
X
fi
pfi ⁄ dtfi (9)
implies [15] that L is a Lagrangian submanifold in T ⁄H near a semisimple t. Following [11];
introduce local canonical coordinates (u1; : : : ; uN) such that the sections (du1; : : : ; duN) of
T ⁄H are theN branches of L near t; and transform the connections rh¯ to these local coor-
dinates and to a (suitably normalized) basis f1; : : : ; fN of vector field on H diagonalizing
the ⁄-product.
The result of this transformation can be described as follows.
(a) The basis ffig can be normalized in such a way that in the transformed form
rh¯ D h¯d¡ h¯A1^¡D1^ (10)
of the connection rh¯ with D1 D diag(du1; : : : ; duN); and Aij D Vij(u)d(ui ¡ uj)=(ui ¡ uj) for
all i 6D j; we will have additionally Aii D 0 for all i.
(b) The vector field 1 in the canonical coordinates assumes the form
P
k @k where
@k :D @=@uk are the canonical idempotents of the ⁄-product:
@i ⁄ @j D –i j@j: (11)
(c) The (remaining part of the) integrability conditionr2h¯ D 0 reads d(A1) D A1^A1
or
@i`
j
fi D `ifiVi j=(ui ¡ uj); i 6D j; (12)
where (`jfi) is the transition matrix; @=@tfi D
P
i `
i
fifi; it can be reformulated as compati-
bility of the partial differential equation system (12) for (`jfi) completed by
X
k
@k`
j
fi D 0: (13)
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 631
(d) The Frobenius property ha ⁄ b; ci D ha; b ⁄ ci of the ⁄-product shows that the
diagonalizing basis ffig is orthogonal; that its normalization by hfi; fji D –i j obeys Aii D 0
and; additionally; implies antisymmetricity Aij D ¡Aji; or
Vij D ¡Vji: (14)
The presence of the grading axiom (4) of Frobenius structures over K D C allowed
B. Dubrovin to describe antisymmetric matrices V D (Vij) 2 so⁄N satisfying the integrabil-
ity conditions (12) and (13) in quasi-homogeneous canonical coordinates (i.e.; LEui D ui so
that E D Puk@k) as trajectories of N commuting nonautonomous Hamiltonian systems
(see [11]):
@iV D fHi; Vg
where the Poisson-commuting nonautonomous quadratic Hamiltonians Hi on so⁄N are
given by
Hi D 12
X
j 6Di
Vi jVji
ui ¡ uj :
Consider now the following model modification of the grading axiom: K D C((‚));
deg‚ D 1. In quasi-homogeneous canonical coordinates (u1; : : : ; uN; ‚); the Euler vector
field takes on
LE D
X
k
uk@k C ‚@‚: (15)
We introduce the connection operator
V D ‚@‚ ¡ V 2 bso⁄N
and the quadratic Hamiltonians on the Poisson manifold bso⁄N
Hi(V) D
I
Hi(V)
d‚
‚
: (16)
Proposition 7.1. The Hamiltonians H1; : : : ;HN are in involution. The operator V of a
Frobenius manifold overK satisfies the nonautonomous system of Hamiltonian equations
@iV D fHi;Vg; i D 1; : : : ; N: (17)
632 Alexander B. Givental
The columns `fi D (`ifi) of the transition matrix are eigenfunctions of the connection
operator V:
V`fi :D (‚@‚ ¡ V)`fi D
‡n
2
¡ degtfi C 1
·
`fi: (18)
Proof. It can be obtained by a straightforward calculation quite analogous to that in
[11].
In our real life; the model equations (15)–(18) describe the structure of Frobenius
manifolds over each semi-simple orbit of the grading Euler field in the ground param-
eter space. This parameter space is the spectrum of the coefficient algebra H⁄G(pt;C) ›
C[q§11 ; : : : ; q
§1
k ] (its field of fractions can be taken on the role of the ground field K). An
orbit of the Euler vector field in this parameter space is semisimple if the corresponding
C-Frobenius algebras are semisimple.
The equations (15)–(18) over semisimple Euler orbits should be complemented by
the additional symmetries (6).
In the next section we will show how the canonical coordinates of the axiomatic
theory of Frobenius structures emerge from localization formulas in equivariant GW-
theory.
8 Fixed-point localization
We consider here the case of a circle T1 acting by Hamiltonian Killing transformations
on a compact Ka¨hler manifold X with isolated fixed points only. The case of tori actions
with isolated fixed points requires only a slight modification of notation;which we leave
to the reader. Our results are rigorous for convex X (which includes homogeneous Ka¨hler
spaces of compact Lie groups and their maximal tori);while applications to general toric
manifolds (which are typically not convex) are yet to be justified.
It is the Borel localization theorem that reduces computations in torus-equivariant
cohomology to computations near fixed points. Let fpfig; fi D 1; : : : ; N; be the fixed points
of the action. We will denote with the same symbols pfi the equivariant cohomology class
of Xwhich restricts to 1 2 H⁄T (pfi) at pfi and to 0 at all the other fixed points. These classes
are well defined over the field of fractions C(‚) of the coefficient ring H⁄T (pt) D C[‚]; and
form the basis of canonical idempotents in the semisimple algebraH⁄T (X;C(‚)). The equiv-
ariant Poincare´ pairing reduces to hpfi; pfli D –fi;fl=efl where efi 2 C[‚] is the equivariant
Euler class of the normal “bundle” TpfiX! pfi to the fixed point.
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 633
The results described below apply to the setting of Section 4 of a manifold X
provided with a convex vector bundle; in which case efi’s should be modified accordingly.
The same localization theorem reduces computation of GW-invariants to that
near the fixed-point set (orbifold) in the moduli spaces Xn;d. A fixed point in the moduli
space is represented by a stable map to X of a (typically reducible) curve C such that each
component of C is mapped to (the closure of) an orbit of the complexified action TC : X.
Any such orbit is either one of the fixed points pfi or isomorphic to (C¡0) connecting two
distinct fixed points pfi and pfl corresponding to 0 and 1. Respectively; there are two
types of components of C:
(i) Each component of C which carries three or more special points must be
mapped to one of the fixed points pfi.
(ii) All other components are multiple covers z 7! zd of the nonconstant orbits;
and their special points may correspond only to z D 0 or1.
The combinatorial structure of such a stable map can be described by a tree
whose edges correspond to chains of components of type (ii) and should be labeled by
the total degree of this chain as a curve in X; and vertices correspond to the ends of the
chains. The ends may carry zero or one marked point; or correspond to a (tree of) type-(i)
component(s); and should be labeled by the indices of marked points and by the target
point pfi.
The fixed stable maps with different combinatorial structure belong to different
connected components of the fixed-point orbifold in Xn;d.
The results below are based on the observation that a stable map with the first
k ‚ 3 marked points in a given generic configuration (i.e.; with the given generic value
of the contraction map Xn:d ! NM0;k) must have an irreducible component C0 in the un-
derlying curve C which contains this given configuration of k special points (so that the
corresponding first k marked points are located on the branches outgoing these special
points of C0). The cause is hidden in the definition of the contraction map (see [21]; [7]).
We will call the component C0 special.
The observation applied to a fixed stable map of the circle action allows us to
subdivide all fixed-point components inX3Cn;d intoN typespi according to the fixed points
pi where the special component is mapped to. We introduce the superscript notation (¢ ¢ ¢)i
for the contribution (via Borel’s localization formulas) of type-pi components into various
equivariant correlators. For example;
Fififl° D
X
n
1
n!
X
d
qdhpfi; pfl; p°; t; : : : ; tii3Cn;d
where t DPNfiD1 tfipfi is the general class in H⁄T (X;C(‚)); so that Ffifl° DPi Fififl°.
634 Alexander B. Givental
We introduce also the following notation:
† “ififl for contributions to eiFififli of those fixed points which have the third marked
point situated directly on the special component C0 (it is convenient here
to introduce the normalizing factor ei 2 H⁄T (pt); the Euler class of the
normal “bundle” to the fixed point pi in X);
† “ifi :D “ifi1 D
P
fl “
i
fifl;
† Difi for contributions to eiFfiii of those fixed points which have the second and
third marked points situated directly on the special component;
† ¢i for contributions to eiFiii of those fixed points which have the first three
marked points situated directly on the special component;
† ui D tiC contributions to eiFii of all those fixed-point components in X2Cn;d for
which the first two marked points belong to the same vertex of the tree
describing the combinatorial structure.
The correlators ui can be also interpreted as contributions to the genus-1 equiv-
ariant correlatorsX
n
1
n!
X
d
qd(t; : : : ; t)n;d
with given complex structure of the elliptic curve of those T-invariant classes which map
the (only) genus-1 component of the curve C to the fixed point pi.
Theorem 8.1. (a) The functionsu1(t); : : : ; uN(t) are the canonical coordinates of the Frobe-
nius structure on H⁄G(X;C(‚)).
(b) The functionsDifi(t) are eigenvalues of the quantum multiplication by pfi: dui DP
fi D
i
fidtfi.
(c) The transition matrix (“ifi) provides simultaneous diagonalization F
i
fifl° D
“ifiD
i
fl“
i
° of the quantum cup product and obeys the following orthogonality relations:X
i
“ifi“
i
fl D –fifl=efl;
X
fi
“ifi“
j
fi D –i j:
(d) The Euclidean structure on the cotangent bundle of the Frobenius manifold
(defined by the equivariant intersection pairing in H⁄T (X)) in the canonical coordinates ui
takes on hdui; duji D (¢i)2–i jej and additionally
(¢i)¡1 D
X
fi
“ifi; “
i
fi D
Difi
¢i
; “ififl D
DifiD
i
fl
¢i
:
Proof. We first apply the localization formula
A1234h¢ ¢ ¢in;d D
X
i
A1234h¢ ¢ ¢iin;d
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 635
to the four-point equivariant correlators with the fixed cross-ratio z of the four marked
points and only after this specialize the cross-ratio to 0; 1; or 1. This gives rise to the
local WDVV-identities
“ififl“
i
°– is totally symmetric in fi;fl; °; –;
which are independent on the global WDVV-equation. When combined with the global
identities
A1234h1; pfi; pfl; p°in;d D hpfi; pfl; p°in;d;
they yield the orthogonality relation
P
i “
i
fi“
i
fl D –fifl=efl and localization formulas
Ffifl° D
X
i
“ififl“
i
°
for the structural constants of the quantum cup-product.
A similar argument with greater-than-four-point correlators A12345¢¢¢h¢ ¢ ¢ii proves
the diagonalization
hpfi ⁄ pfl; p°i D
X
i
“ifiD
i
fl“
i
°=ei;
hpfi ⁄ pfl ⁄ p°; p–i D
X
i
“ifiD
i
flD
i
°“
i
–=ei
and the identities
“ififl D “ifiDifl; (¢i)¡1 D
X
fi
“ifi:
Finally; the identity dui D
P
fi D
i
fidtfi follows directly from the definition of ui and
implies that u1; : : : ; uN are the canonical coordinates of the Frobenius structure.
9 Projective complete intersections
We are going to describe explicitly solutions of the differential equations arising from
quantum cohomology of projective complete intersections. Let X be such a nonsingular
complete intersection in Y :D CPn given by r equations of the degrees (l1; : : : ; lr). If l1 C
¢ ¢ ¢C lr D nC1; then X is a Calabi-Yau manifold and its quantum cohomology is described
by the mirror conjecture. In this and the next sections; we study; respectively; the cases
l1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C lr < n and l1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C lr D n when the first Chern class of X is still positive.
In the case l1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C lr > n C 1 (which from the point of view of enumerative geometry
can be considered as “less interesting;” for rational curves generically occur only in
finitely many degrees) the “mirror symmetry” problem of hypergeometric interpretation
of quantum cohomology differential equations remains open.
636 Alexander B. Givental
Let Ed be the Euler class of the vector bundle over the moduli space Y2;d of genus-
0 degree-d stable maps `: (C; x0; x1) ! CPn with two marked points; with the fiber
H0(C;`⁄Hl1 ' ¢ ¢ ¢ '`⁄Hlr ) where Hl is the lth tensor power of the hyperplane line bundle
over CPn.
Consider the class
Sd(h¯) :D 1
h¯C c(0)1
Ed 2 H⁄(Y2;d)
where c(0)1 is the first Chern class of the “universal tangent line at the marked point x0.”
Due to the factor Ed; this class represents the push-forward along X2;d! Y2;d of the class
1=(h¯C c(0)1 ) 2 H⁄(X2;d) (by the very construction of X2;d in Section 4).
In the cohomology algebra C[P]=(PnC1) of CPn; consider the class
S(t; h¯) :D ePt=h¯
1X
dD0
edt(e0)⁄(Sd(h¯))
where (e0)⁄ represents the push-forward along the evaluation map (and for d D 0; when
Y2;d is not defined; we take Euler('jH›lj ) on the role of (e0)⁄S0).
Considered as a function of t; S is a curve in H⁄(CPn) whose components are solu-
tions of the differential equation we are concerned about. Indeed; according to Section 6;
a similar sum represents the solutions of the quantum cohomology differential equation
for X; and S is just the push-forward of that sum from H⁄(X) to H⁄(Y). (Strictly speaking;
S carries information only about correlators between those classes which come from the
ambient projective space; also; if X is a surface; rkH2(X) can be greater than 1 and Smixes
information about the curves of different degrees in X when they have the same degree
in Y.)
Theorem 9.1. Suppose that l1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C lr < n. Then
S D ePt=h¯
1X
dD0
edt
Qdl1
mD0(l1P Cmh¯) ¢ ¢ ¢
Qdlr
mD0(lrP Cmh¯)Qd
mD1(P Cmh¯)nC1
:
The formula coincides with those in [13]; [14] (found by analysis of toric com-
pactifications of spaces of maps CP1 ! CPn) for solutions of differential equations in
S1-equivariant cohomology of the loop space.
Corollary 9.2 [13]; [14]. The components s :D hPi; Si; i D 0; : : : ; n¡ r; of S form a basis of
solutions to the linear differential equation
µ
h¯
d
dt
¶nC1¡r
s D et
rY
jD1
lj
lj¡1Y
mD1
h¯
µ
lj
d
dt
Cm
¶
s:
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 637
This implies (combine [14] with [5]) that the solutions have an integral represen-
tation of the formZ
°n¡r‰X0
t
e(u0C¢¢¢Cun)=h¯
du0 ^ ¢ ¢ ¢ ^ dun
dF0 ^ dF1 ^ ¢ ¢ ¢ ^ dFr
where
F0 D u0 ¢ ¢ ¢un;
F1 D u1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C ul1 ;
F2 D ul1C1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C ul1Cl2 ;
¢ ¢ ¢
Fr D ul1C¢¢¢Clr¡1C1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C ul1C¢¢¢Culr
and the “mirror manifolds” X0t are described by the equations
X0t D f(uo; : : : ; un) j F0(u) D et; F1(u) D 1; : : : ; Fr(u) D 1g:
This proves for X the mirror conjecture in the form suggested in [14].
Corollary 9.3. If dimC X 6D 2; the cohomology class p of the hyperplane section satisfies
in the quantum cohomology of X the relation
pnC1¡r D ll11 ¢ ¢ ¢ llrr qpl1C¢¢¢Clr¡r:
When X is a surface; the same relation holds true in the quotient of the quantum
cohomology algebra;which takes into account only degrees of curves in the ambientCPn.
(We leave it to the reader to figure out a precise description of this quotient; quadrics
CP1 £ CP1 in CP3 provide a good example: (p1 C p2)3 D 4q(p1 C p2) mod p21 D q D p22.)
This corollary is consistent with the result of A. Beauville [6] describing quantum
cohomology of complete intersections with
P
lj • n C 1 ¡
P
(lj ¡ 1); and with results of
M. Jinzenji [17] on quantum cohomology of projective hypersurfaces (r D 1) with l1 < n.
Corollary 9.4. The number of degree-d holomorphic maps CP1 ! Xn¡r ‰ CPn that send
0 and 1 to two given cycles and send n C 1 ¡ r given points in CP1 to n C 1 ¡ r given
generic hyperplane sections; is equal to ll11 ¢ ¢ ¢ llrr times the number of degree-(d¡1) maps
that send 0 and1 to the same cycles and l1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C lr ¡ r given points to l1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C lr ¡ r
given hyperplane sections.
This is the enumerative meaning of Corollary 9:3; of course; in this formulation
numerous general position reservations are assumed.
638 Alexander B. Givental
Control examples. (1) lr D 1: The above formulas for quantum cohomology and for so-
lutions of the differential equations in the case of a hyperplane section give rise to the
same formulas with n :D n¡ 1; r :D r¡ 1.
(2) n D 5; r D 1; l D 2: X is the Plucker embedding of the Grassmanian Gr4;2. Its
quantum cohomology algebra is described by the relations c31 D 2c1c2; c22 ¡ c2c21 C q D 0
between the Chern classes of the tautological plane bundle. For the first Chern class
p D ¡c1 of the determinant line bundle; we deduce the relation p5 D 4pq prescribed by
Corollary 9.3.
We will deduce Theorem 9.1 from its equivariant generalization. Consider the
space CnC1 provided with the standard action of the (n C 1)-dimensional torus T . The
equivariant cohomology algebra of CnC1 coincides with the algebra of characteristic
classes H⁄(BTnC1) D C[‚0; : : : ; ‚n]. The equivariant cohomology algebra of the projective
space (CnC1 ¡ 0)=C£ in these notations is identified with C[p; ‚]=((p ¡ ‚0) ¢ ¢ ¢ (p ¡ ‚n)); and
the push-forward H⁄T (CPn)! H⁄T (pt) is given by the residue formula
f(p; ‚) 7! 1
2…i
I
f(p; ‚)dp
(p¡ ‚0) ¢ ¢ ¢ (p¡ ‚n) :
Here ¡p can be considered as the equivariant first Chern class of the Hopf line
bundle provided with the natural lifting of the torus action. We will use `i :D
Q
j 6Di(p ¡
‚j); i D 0; : : : ; n; as a basis in H⁄T (CPn).
Consider the T-equivariant vector bundle 'rjD1H›lj and provide it with the fiber-
wise action of the additional r-dimensional torus T 0. The equivariant Euler class of this
bundle is equal to (l1p¡ ‚01) ¢ ¢ ¢ (lrp¡ ‚0r) where C[‚0] D H⁄(BT 0).
We introduce the equivariant counterpart S0 of the class S in the T£T 0-equivariant
cohomology of CPn. This means that we use the equivariant class p instead of P and
replace the Euler classes Ed and c
(0)
1 by their equivariant partners.
Theorem 9.5. Let l1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C lr < n. Then
S0 D ept=h¯
1X
dD0
edt
Qdl1
0 (l1p¡ ‚01 Cmh¯) ¢ ¢ ¢
Qdlr
0 (lrp¡ ‚0r Cmh¯)Qd
1(p¡ ‚0 Cmh¯) ¢ ¢ ¢
Qd
1(p¡ ‚n Cmh¯)
:
Theorem 9:1 follows from Theorem 9:5 by putting ‚ D 0; ‚0 D 0;which corresponds
to passing from equivariant to nonequivariant cohomology.
The vector function S0 satisfies the differential equation
rY
iD0
µ
h¯
d
dt
¡ ‚i
¶
S0 D et
l1Y
mD1
µ
l1h¯
d
dt
¡ ‚01 Cmh¯
¶
¢ ¢ ¢
lrY
mD1
µ
lrh¯
d
dt
¡ ‚0r Cmh¯
¶
S0:
We intend to prove Theorem 9.5 by means of localization of S0 to the fixed-point
set of the torus T action on the moduli spaces Y2;d. As it is shown in [21]; all correlators
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 639
of the equivariant theory on CPn are computable at least in principle; and in practice
the computation reduces to a recursive procedure which can be understood as a summa-
tion over trees and can be also formulated as a nonlinear fixed-point (or critical-point)
problem. We will see below that in the case of correlators h`i; S0i a certain argument of
a somewhat geometrical character guarantees numerous cancellations between trees; so
that the recursive procedure reduces to a “summation over chains” and respectively to
a linear recurrence equation. The formula of Theorem 9.5 is simply the solution to this
equation.
In the proof of Theorem 9:5 below;we write down all formulas for r D 1 (it serves
the case when X is a hypersurface in CPn of degree l < n). The proof for r > 1 differs only
by longer product formulas.
Let us abbreviate c(0)1 as c; denote by E
0
d the equivariant Euler class of the vec-
tor bundle over Y2;d whose fiber over the point ˆ: (C; x0; x1) ! Y D CPn consists of
holomorphic sections of the bundle ˆ⁄(Hl) vanishing at x0; and introduce the following
equivariant correlator:
Zi :D
1X
dD0
qd
Z
Y2;d
e⁄0(`i)
1
h¯C cE
0
d:
We have
h`i; S0i D e‚it=h¯(l‚i ¡ ‚0)(ZijqDet ):
Proposition 9.6.
Zi D 1C
X
d>0
µ
q
h¯nC1¡l
¶d Z
Y2;d
(¡c)(nC1¡l)d¡1
1C c=h¯ E
0
d e
⁄
0(`i):
Proof. We have just dropped the first several terms in the geometrical series 1=(h¯ C c);
since their degree added with the degrees of other factors in the integral over Y2;d is
still less than the dimension of Y2;d. It is important here that all the equivariant classes
involved; including `i; are defined in the equivariant cohomology over C[‚; ‚0] without
any localization.
The proof of Proposition 9.6 is half of the geometrical argument mentioned above.
The other half comes from the description of the fixed-point set in Y2;d given in [18].
Consider a fixed point of the torus T action on Y2;d. It is represented by a holo-
morphic map of a possibly reducible curve with complicated combinatorial structure
and with two marked points on some components. Each component carrying three or
more special points is mapped to one of the nC 1 fixed points of T on CPn; and the other
640 Alexander B. Givental
components are mapped (with some multiplicity) onto the lines joining the fixed points
and connect the point-mapped components in a treelike manner.
In the Borel localization formula for
R
e⁄0(`i) ¢ ¢ ¢ the fixed point will have zero
contribution unless the marked point x0 is mapped to the ith fixed point in CPn (since `i
has zero localizations at all other fixed points).
Consider a fixed-point curve C whose marked point x0 is indeed mapped to the
ith fixed point in CPn. There are two options:
(i) the marked point x0 is situated on an irreducible component of C mapped
with some degree d0 onto the line joining the ith fixed point with the jth
fixed point in CPn with i 6D j;
(ii) the marked point x0 is situated on a component of C mapped to the ith fixed
point and carrying two or more other special points.
Consider first the option (ii) and the contribution of such a connected compo-
nent of the fixed-point set in Y2;d to the Borel localization formula for
R
c(nC1¡l)d¡1 ¢ ¢ ¢.
The connected component itself is the (product of the) Deligne-Mumford configuration
space of; say; sC 1 special points: the marked point x0; maybe the marked point x1; and;
respectively; s¡1 or s endpoints of other components ofCmapped onto the lines outgoing
the ith fixed point in CPn.
Lemma 9.7. The type-(ii) fixed point component in Y2;d has zero contribution to the Borel
localization formula for
R
Y2;d
c(nC1¡l)d¡1 ¢ ¢ ¢ :
Proof. Restriction of the class c from Y2;d to the type-(ii) fixed-point component coincides
with the first Chern class of the line bundle on the Deligne-Mumford factor NM0;sC1 of the
component defined as the “universal tangent line at the marked point x0” and is thus
nilpotent in the cohomology of the component. Since the number of straight lines in a
curve of degree d does not exceed d; we find that the dimension s¡ 2 of the factor NM0;sC1
is less than d; which in its turn does not exceed (n C 1 ¡ l)d ¡ 1 for d > 0 (because we
assumed that nC 1¡ l ‚ 2).
Consider now the option (i). The irreducible component C0 of the curve C D C0 [C00
carrying the marked point x0 is mapped with the multiplicity d0 • d onto the line joining
the ith fixed point in CPn with the jth one while the remaining part C00 ! CPn of the
map represents a fixed point in Y2;d¡d0 . Moreover; the normal space to the fixed-point
component at the type-(i) point (the equivariant Euler class of the normal bundle occurs
in the denominator of the Borel localization formula) is the sum of (a) such a space N00
for C00 ! CPn; (b) the space N0 of holomorphic vector fields along the map C0 ! CPn
vanishing at the fixed point j factorized by infinitesimal reparametrizations of C0; and (c)
the tensor product L of the tangent lines to C0 and C00 at their intersection point. Since
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 641
the space V of holomorphic sections of Hl restricted to C (and vanishing at x0) admits a
similar decomposition V 0 'V 00;we arrive at the following linear recursion relation for Zi.
Proposition 9.8. Put zi(Q; h¯) :D Zi(h¯(nC1¡l)Q; h¯). Then
zi(Q; h¯) D 1C
X
j 6Di
X
d0>0
Qd
0
Coeff ji (d
0) zj(Q; (‚j ¡ ‚i)=d0)
where
Coeff ji (d
0) D [(‚j ¡ ‚i)=d
0](nC1¡l)d
0¡1
1C (‚i ¡ ‚j)=d0h¯
Euler (V 0)
Euler (N0)
`ijpD‚i :
Proof. Here (‚i ¡ ‚j)=d0 is the localization of c; and the key point is that the equivariant
Chern class of the line bundle L over Y2;d¡d0 is what we would denote h¯C c for the moduli
space Y2;d¡d0 but with h¯ D (‚j ¡ ‚i)=d0. This is how the recursion for the correlators zi
becomes possible. The rest is straightforward.
Remark. Our reduction to the linear recursion relation can be interpreted in the follow-
ing more geometrical way: contributions of all nonisolated fixed points cancel out with
some explicit part of the contribution from isolated fixed points; the latter are represented
by chains of multiple covers of straight lines connecting the two marked points.
Let us write down explicitly the factor Coeff ji (d) from Proposition 9:8 (compare
with [21]). Coeff ji (d) DQld
mD1(l‚i ¡ ‚0 Cm(‚j ¡ ‚i)=d)[(‚j ¡ ‚i)=d](nC1¡l)d¡1
d(1C (‚i ¡ ‚j)=h¯d)
Qn
fiD0
d
mD1 (fi;m)6D( j;d)(‚i ¡ ‚fi Cm(‚j ¡ ‚i)=d)
(here the product in the numerator is Euler(V 0); the denominator—it is essentially
Euler(N0) where; however; the cancellation with `ijpD‚i is taken care of—has been
computed using the exact sequence 0 ! C ! CnC1 › H ! TY ! 0 of vector
bundles over Y D CPn; and the “hard to explain” extra factor d is due to the
orbifold structure of the moduli spaces (the d-multiple map of C0 onto the (i j)-
line in CPn has a discrete symmetry of order d))
D 1
[(‚i ¡ ‚j)=h¯C d]
Qld
mD1(((l‚i ¡ ‚0)d)=(‚j ¡ ‚i)Cm)Qn
fiD0
d
mD1 (fi;m)6D( j;d)(((‚i ¡ ‚fi)d)=(‚j ¡ ‚i)Cm)
:
Now it is easy to check the following proposition.
Proposition 9.9. The correlators zi(Q; 1=!) are power series
P
Ci(d)Qd in Q with coef-
ficients Ci(d) which are reduced rational functions of ! with poles of the order • 1 at
! D d0=(‚j ¡ ‚i) with d0 D 1; : : : ; d. The correlators zi are uniquely determined by these
properties; the recursion relations of Proposition 9:8; and the initial condition Ci(0) D 1.
642 Alexander B. Givental
The proof of Theorem 9.5 is completed by the following.
Proposition 9.10. The series
zi D
1X
dD0
Qd
Qld
mD1((l‚i ¡ ‚0)!Cm)
d!
Q
fi 6Di
Qd
mD1((‚i ¡ ‚fi)!Cm)
satisfies all the conditions of Proposition 9.9.
Proof. The recursion relation is deduced by the decomposition of the rational functions
of ! into the sum of simple fractions (or; equivalently; from the Lagrange interpola-
tion formula for each numerator through its values at the roots of the corresponding
denominator).
10 Complete intersections with l1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C lr D n
Let X ‰ Y D CPn be a nonsingular complete intersection given by equations of degrees
(l1; : : : ; lr) with l1C ¢ ¢ ¢C lr D n. There are only two points where our proof of Theorem 9.1
would fail for such X. One of them is the Lagrange interpolation formula in the proof of
Proposition 9:10. Namely; the rational functions of ! there are not reduced—the degree
dl of the numerator is equal to the degree dn of the corresponding denominator. The other
one is Lemma 9.7. Namely; we have the following lemma instead.
Lemma 10.1. The type-(ii) fixed-point component in Y2;d makes zero contribution via
Borel localization formulas to
R
Y2;d
cd¡1 ¢ ¢ ¢ unless it consists of maps (C0 [ C00; x0; x1)! Y
whereC0 is mapped to a fixed point inCPn and carries both marked points; andC00 is a dis-
joint union of d irreducible components (intersectingC0 at d special points) mapped (each
with multiplicity 1) onto straight lines outgoing the fixed point. All type-(ii) components
make zero contribution to
R
Y2;d
cd ¢ ¢ ¢.
Let us modify the results of Section 9 accordingly. As we will see; the left-hand
side in Theorem 9.5 is now only proportional to the right-hand side; and we will compute
the proportionality coefficient (a series in q) directly.
Proposition 10.2. Put zi(Q; h¯) :D Zi(h¯Q; h¯). Then
zi(Q; h¯) D 1C
X
d>0
Qd Coeff i(d)C
X
j 6Di
X
d0>0
Qd
0
Coeff ji (d
0) zj(Q; (‚j ¡ ‚i)=d0)
where Coeff i(d) is equal to the contribution of type-(ii) fixed-point components toR
Y2;d
(¡c)d¡1E0d e⁄0(`i); and
Coeff ji (d) D
1
[(‚i ¡ ‚j)=h¯C d]
Qr
aD1
Qdla
mD1(((la‚i ¡ ‚0a)d)=(‚j ¡ ‚i)Cm)Qn
fiD0
d
mD1 (fi;m)6D( j;d)(((‚i ¡ ‚fi)d)=(‚j ¡ ‚i)Cm)
:
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 643
Corollary 10.3. The correlators zi(Q; 1=!) are power series
P
d Ci(d)Q
d with coefficients
Ci(d) D Pd(!; ‚; ‚0)=
Y
fi
dY
mD1
((‚i ¡ ‚fi)!Cm)
where Pd D P0d!ndC ¢ ¢ ¢ is a polynomial in! of degree nd. The correlators zi are uniquely
determined by these properties; the recursion relations of Proposition 10.2; and the initial
conditions
X
d
Coeff i(d)Q
d D
X
d
Qd
P0d
d!
Q
fi6Di(‚i ¡ ‚fi)d
:
Proposition 10.4. The series
z0i D
1X
dD0
Qd
Qr
aD1
Qlad
mD1((la‚i ¡ ‚0a)!Cm)
d!
Q
fi6Di
Qd
mD1((‚i ¡ ‚fi)!Cm)
satisfies the requirements of Corollary 10.3 with the initial condition
X
d
Qd
Qr
aD1(la‚i ¡ ‚0a)lad
d!
Q
fi6Di(‚i ¡ ‚fi)d
D exp
(
Q
Q
a(la‚i ¡ ‚0a)laQ
fi6Di(‚i ¡ ‚fi)
)
:
Now let us compute Coeff i(d) using the description of type-(ii) fixed-point com-
ponents given in Lemma 10.1.
Proposition 10.5. Contribution of the type-(ii) fixed-point components toX
d
Qd
Z
Y2;d
(¡c)d¡1E0d `i
is
exp
(
Q
Q
a(la‚i ¡ ‚0a)laQ
fi6Di(‚i ¡ ‚fi)
)
expf¡Q l1! ¢ ¢ ¢ lr!g:
Proof. Each fixed-point component described in Lemma 10.1 is isomorphic to the
Deligne-Mumford configuration space NM0;dC2. Our computation is based on the following
known formula (see; for instance; [21]) for correlators between Chern classes of universal
tangent lines at the marked points:Z
NM0;k
1
(w1 C c(1)1 ) ¢ ¢ ¢ (wk C c(k)1 )
D (1=w1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C 1=wk)
k¡3
w1 ¢ ¢ ¢wk :
Consider the type-(ii) fixed-point component specified by the following combi-
natorial structure of stable maps: d degree-1 irreducible components join the ith fixed
644 Alexander B. Givental
point with the fixed points with indices j1; : : : ; jd. Using the above formula and describ-
ing explicitly the normal bundle to this component in Y2;d and localization of the Euler
class E0d; we arrive at the following expression for the contribution of this component toR
Y2;d
(¡c)d¡1`iE0d:
dY
sD1
Qr
aD1
Qla
mD1(la‚i ¡ ‚0a Cm(‚js ¡ ‚i))
(‚i ¡ ‚js )
Q
fi6D js;i(‚js ¡ ‚fi)
:
Summation over all type-(ii) components in all Y2;d with weights Qd gives rise to
exp
8<:¡QX
j 6Di
Q
a
Qla
mD1(la‚i ¡ ‚0a Cm(p¡ ‚i))Q
fi6D j(p¡ ‚fi)
flflflflflfl
pD‚j
9>=>; :
The exponent can be understood as a sum of residues at p 6D ‚i;1; and is thus opposite
to the sum
l1! ¢ ¢ ¢ lr!¡
Q
a(la‚i ¡ ‚0a)laQ
fi 6Di(‚i ¡ ‚fi)
of residues at1 and ‚i.
Corollary 10.6. zi(Q; 1=!) D z0i(Q;!) exp(¡l1! ¢ ¢ ¢ lr!Q).
Proof. Multiplication by a function of Q does not destroy the recursion relation of
Proposition 10:2 but changes the initial condition.
We have proved the following.
Theorem 10.7. Suppose l1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C lr D n. Then
S0 D e(pt¡l1!¢¢¢lr!et)=h¯
1X
dD0
edt
Qdl1
0 (l1p¡ ‚01 Cmh¯) ¢ ¢ ¢
Qdlr
0 (lrp¡ ‚0r Cmh¯)Qd
1(p¡ ‚0 Cmh¯) ¢ ¢ ¢
Qd
1(p¡ ‚n Cmh¯)
;
S D S0j‚D0;‚0D0 D e(Pt¡l1!¢¢¢lr!et)=h¯
Qr
jD1
Qdlj
mD0(ljP Cmh¯)Qd
mD1(P Cmh¯)nC1
(modPnC1):
Corollary 10.8. Let D D h¯d=dtC l1! ¢ ¢ ¢ lr!et. Then
DnC1¡rS D l1 ¢ ¢ ¢ lretƒrjD1(ljDC h¯) ¢ ¢ ¢ (ljDC (lj ¡ 1)h¯) S:
Corollary 10.9. In the quantum cohomology algebra of X; the class p of hyperplane
sections satisfies the following relation (with the same reservation in the case dimX • 2
as in Corollary 9:3):
(pC l1! ¢ ¢ ¢ lr!q)nC1¡r D ll11 ¢ ¢ ¢ llrr q(pC l1! ¢ ¢ ¢ lr!q)n¡r:
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 645
Control examples.4 (1) X D pt in CP1 (n D 1; r D 1; l D 1). The above relation takes on pC
q D q; orp D 0. SinceP2 D 0;we also find from Theorem 10.7 thatS D P exp(¡et)Pd edt=d! D
P; or h1; Si D 1 as it should be for the solution of the differential equation h¯d=dt s D 0
that arises from quantum cohomology of the point.
(2) X D CP1 embedded as a quadric into CP2 (n D 2; r D 1; l D 2). We get (pC2q)2 D
4q(pC 2q); or p2 D 4q2. Taking into account that p is twice the generator in H2(CP1) and
the line in CP1 has the degree 2 in CP2; we conclude that this is the correct relation in
the quantum cohomology of CP1. This example was the most confusing for the author:
predictions of the loop space analysis [13] appeared totally unreliable because they gave
a wrong answer for the quadric in CP2. As we see now; the loop space approach gives
correct results if l1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C lr < n and requires a “minor” modification (by the factor
exp(¡l1! ¢ ¢ ¢ lr!q=h¯)) in the boundary cases l1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C lr D n; the quadric on the plane
happens to be one of these such cases.
(3) n D 3; r D 1; l D 3. We have (pC 6q)3 D 27q(pC 6q)2; or p3 D 9qp2 C 63q2pC 27 ¢
28q3. In particular; hp ⁄ p; pi D 9qhp; pi C 63q2hp; 1i C 27 ¢ 28q3h1; 1i D 27qC 0C 0; which
indicates that there should exist 27 discrete lines on a generic cubical surface in CP3.
11 Calabi-Yau projective complete intersections
Let Ld denote; as in Section 6; the moduli space of stable maps ˆ: CP1 ! CPn £ CP1 of
bidegree (d; 1) with two marked points mapped to CPn £ f0g and CPn £ f1g; respectively.
Let Ed denote the equivariant Euler class of the vector bundle over Ld with the fiber
H0(CP1; ˆ⁄(V)) where V is the bundle on CPn£CP1 induced from our convex bundle'aHla
by the projection to the first factor.
Consider the equivariant correlator
' D
Z
Y
Euler¡1(V) S0(t; h¯) S0(¿;¡h¯)
D
X
d;d0
edted
0¿
X
i
Q
a(la‚i ¡ ‚0a)Q
j 6Di(‚i ¡ ‚j)
Z
Y2;d
E0d
ept=h¯e⁄0(`i)
h¯C c
Z
Y2;d0
E0d0
e¡p¿=h¯e⁄0(`i)
¡h¯C c :
In the case l1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C lr < n; it is easy to check using the explicit formula for S0
from Theorem 9:5 that
' D 1
2…i
I
ep(t¡¿)=h¯
"X
d
ed¿
Q
a
Qlad
mD0(lap¡ ‚0a ¡mh¯)Qn
jD0
Qd
mD0(p¡ ‚j ¡mh¯)
#
dp:
4I am thankful to A. Collino [9] who informed me that in the hypersurface case the statement of Corollary 10.9
was conjectured independently by several authors on the basis of numerical data.
646 Alexander B. Givental
This is an equivariant version of a formula found in [13] in the context of loop
spaces and toric compactifications of spaces of rational maps. Namely; consider the
projective space L0d of (nC1)-tuples of polynomials in one variable of degree • d each; up
to a scalar factor (notice that L0d has the same dimension d(n C 1) C n as Ld). It inherits
the component-wise action of the torus TnC1 and the action of S1 by the rotation of the
variable (“rotation of loops”). Integration over the equivariant fundamental cycle in L0d is
given by the residue formula
f(p; ‚; h¯) 7! 1
2…i
I
fdpQn
jD0
Qd
mD0(p¡ ‚j ¡mh¯)
:
Consider the equivariant vector bundle over L0d such that substitution of the (nC1)
polynomials into r (invariant) homogeneous equations in CPn of degrees l1; : : : ; lr pro-
duces a section of this bundle. The equivariant Euler class of the bundle is
E0d D
rY
aD1
ladY
mD0
(lap¡ ‚0a ¡mh¯):
The formula for ' indicates that there should exist a close relation between the
spaces Ld and L0d. This relation is described in the following lemma; whose proof will be
given in the end of this section.
Main Lemma. There exists a natural S1 £ TnC1-equivariant map „: Ld! L0d. Denote by
¡p the equivariant first Chern class of the Hopf bundle over L0d induced by „ to Ld. Then
'(t; ¿) D
X
d
ed¿
Z
Ld
ep(t¡¿)=h¯Ed:
Define '0(q; z; h¯) :D 'jtD¿Czh¯;qDe¿ . (By the way; the limit of the series '0 at h¯ D 0
has the topological meaning of what is called in [15] the generating volume function;
and the meaning of this limit procedure in terms of differential equations satisfied by '
is the adiabatic approximation.)
Corollary 11.1. We have
'0(q; z) :D
X
d
qd
Z
Ld
epzEd D 12…i
I
epz
X
d
qd Ed(p; ‚; ‚0; h¯)Qn
jD0
Qd
mD0(p¡ ‚j ¡mh¯)
dp
where Ed D „⁄(Ed) is a polynomial (of degree < (nC 1)d) of all its variables.
Proof. The integralsE(k) D R
Ld
pkEd; k D 0; : : : ;dimL0d;which determine the push-forward
„⁄(Ed); are polynomials in (‚; ‚0; h¯). The matrix
R
L0
d
piCdimL
0
d
¡ j is triangular with all eigenval-
ues equal to 1. This means that there exists a unique polynomial in p; with coefficients
polynomial in (‚; ‚0; h¯); that represents the push-forward with any given polynomials
E(k)(‚; ‚0; h¯).
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 647
The previous argument also proves the following.
Proposition 11.2. Suppose that a series
s D
X
d
qd
Pd(p; ‚; ‚0; h¯)Q
j
Qd
mD0(p¡ ‚j ¡mh¯)
with coefficients Pd;which are polynomials of p of degree • dimLd; has the property that
for every k D 0; 1; 2; : : : the q-series H spkdp has polynomial coefficients in (‚; ‚0; h¯). Then
the coefficients of all Pd are polynomials of (‚; ‚0; h¯); and vice versa.
The coefficient Ed(p; ‚; ‚0; h¯) in the series '0 has the total degree (l1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C lr)dC r
according to the dimension of the vector bundle whose Euler class it represents. Consider
the following operations with the series ':
(i) multiplication by a series of et and / or e¿;
(ii) simultaneous change of variables t 7! tC f(et); ¿ 7! ¿C f(e¿);
(iii) multiplication by exp[C(f(et) ¡ f(e¿))=h¯] (here the factor C should be a linear
function of (‚; ‚0) in order to obey homogeneity).
Proposition 11.3. The property of the series ' to generate polynomial coefficients
Ed(p; ‚; ‚0; h¯) is invariant with respect to the operations (i); (ii); and (iii).
Proof. The polynomiality property of coefficients in'0 is equivalent; due to Proposition
11:2; to the fact that for all k the q-series (@=@z)kjzD0'0 have polynomial coefficients.
Multiplication by a series of q does not change this property;which proves the invariance
with respect to multiplication by functions of e¿.
The roles of t and ¿ can be interchanged by the substitutions p 7! pC h¯d; h¯ 7! ¡h¯
in each summand of '. This proves the invariance with respect to multiplication by
functions of et.
The operation (ii) transforms '0 to
1
2…i
X
d
qdedf(q)
I
exp
(
p
zh¯C f(qezh¯)¡ f(q)
h¯
)
Ed(p)Q
j
Q
m(p¡ ‚j ¡mh¯)
dp:
Since the exponent is in fact divisible by h¯; the derivatives in z at z D 0 still have
polynomial coefficients. This proves the invariance with respect to (ii). The case of the
operation (iii) is analogous.
We are going to use the above polynomiality and invariance properties of the cor-
relator' in order to describe quantum cohomology of Calabi-Yau complete intersections
in CPn (in which case l1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C lr D n C 1). We will use this polynomiality in conjunc-
tion with recursion relations based on the fixed-point analysis of Sections 9 and 10. The
result can be roughly formulated in the following way: the hypergeometric functions of
648 Alexander B. Givental
Theorem 9:5 in the case l1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C lr D n C 1 can be transformed to the correlators S0 by
the operations (i); (ii); and (iii). Notice that in the Calabi-Yau case; all our formulas are
homogeneous with the grading degq D 0;degp D deg h¯ D deg ‚ D deg ‚0 D 1;deg z D ¡1.
In particular; the transformations (i)–(iii) also preserve the degrees of the numerators Ed
in '0. In the “positive” case l1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C lr • n where degq D nC 1¡
P
la > 0; the transfor-
mations (i)–(iii) in fact increase degrees of the numerators Ed and are “not allowed.” The
only exception is the operation (iii) with f(q) D const q in the case l1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C lr D n when
degq D 1. The right value ¡l1! ¢ ¢ ¢ lr! of the constant can be found by counting contribu-
tions of curves of degree 1. In Section 10 we have found this answer by a straightforward
computation involving curves of all degrees.
Consider now the correlator ' (described in the Main Lemma) in the Calabi-Yau
case l1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C lr D nC 1. Localization to S1-fixed points in Ld (as in Section 6) expresses
' via the correlators Zi (defined in Section 9) as follows:
' D
X
i
Q
a(la‚i ¡ ‚0a)Q
j 6Di(‚i ¡ ‚j)
e‚i(t¡¿)=h¯ Zi(et; h¯) Zi(e¿;¡h¯):
Proposition 11.4. (1) The coefficients of the power series Zi(q; h¯) D
P
d q
dCi(d) are ratio-
nal functions
Ci(d) D P
(i)
d
d!h¯d
Q
j 6Di
Qd
mD1(‚i ¡ ‚j Cmh¯)
where P(i)d is a polynomial in h¯ of degree (nC 1)d.
(2) The polynomial coefficients ED(p) in '0 are determined by their values
ED(‚i C dh¯) D
Y
a
(la‚i ¡ ‚0a) P(i)d (h¯)P(i)D¡d(¡h¯)
at p D ‚i C dh¯; i D 0; : : : ; n; d D 0; : : : ; D.
(3) The correlators zi(Q; h¯) :D Zi(Qh¯; h¯) satisfy the recursion relation
zi(Q; h¯) D 1C
X
d>0
Qd
d!
Ri;d C
X
d>0
X
j 6Di
Qd
Coeff ji (d)
‚i ¡ ‚j C dh¯ zj
µ
Q;
(‚j ¡ ‚i)
d
¶
where Ri;d D R(0)i;dh¯d C R(1)i;dh¯d¡1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ is a polynomial of h¯ of degree • d; and
Coeff ji (d) D
Q
a
Qlad
mD1(la‚i ¡ ‚0a Cm(‚j ¡ ‚i)=d)
d!
Q
fi6Di
d
mD1 (fi;m)6D( j;d)(‚i ¡ ‚fi Cm(‚j ¡ ‚i)=d)
:
For any given fRi;dji D 0; : : : ; n; d D 1; 2; : : :g these recursion relations have a unique
solution fzig.
Proof. (3) We have
Zi D 1C
X
d>0
qd
"
d¡1X
kD0
h¯¡k¡1
Z
Y2;d
E0de
⁄
0(`i)(¡c)k
#
C
X
d>0
qdh¯¡d
Z
Y2;d
E0de
⁄
0(`i)
(¡c)d
h¯C c
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 649
where the integrals of the last sum have zero contributions from the type-(ii) fixed-point
components (Lemmas 9.7 and 10.1). Thus these integrals have a recursive expression
identical to those of Sections 9 and 10. The terms of the double sum constitute the initial
condition fRi;dg. The recursion relations have the form of the decomposition of rational
functions of h¯ (coefficients at powers of Q D q=h¯) into the sum of simple fractions in the
case when degrees of numerators exceed degrees of denominators. This proves existence
and uniqueness of solutions to the recursion relations.
(1) follows directly from the form and topological meaning of the recursion rela-
tions.
(2) follows from the definition of ' in terms of Zi.
We introduce now the class P of solutions to the recursion relation of Proposi-
tion 11.4 (3);which gives rise (via 11.4 (2)) to polynomial coefficients Ed in the correspond-
ing '0.
Proposition 11.5. A solution from P is uniquely determined by the first two coefficients
R(0)i;d; R
(1)
i;d; i D 0; : : : ; n; 0 < d <1; of its initial condition (that is; by the first two terms in
the expansion Zi D Z(0)i C Z(1)i =h¯C ¢ ¢ ¢ as power series in 1=h¯.
Proof. Perturbation theory: suppose that two solutions from the class P have the same
initial condition up to the order (d¡ 1) inclusively. Then (2) shows that corresponding Ek
for these solutions coincide for k < d; and the variation –Ed(p) vanishes at p D ‚iC kh¯ for
0 < k < d. This means that the polynomial –Ed is divisible by
Q
j
Qd¡1
mD1(p ¡ ‚j ¡mh¯). On
the other hand; (1) and (2) imply that the variation –Ri;d of the initial condition satisfies
–Ri;d(h¯)
Y
a
(la‚i ¡ ‚0a)
Y
j 6Di
dY
mD1
(‚i ¡ ‚j Cmh¯) D –EdjpD‚iC h¯d
(since Ri;0 D 1); and thus –Ri;d is divisible by h¯d¡1. Since –Ri;d is a degree-d polynomial; it
leaves only the possibility
–Ri;d D –R(0)i;dh¯d C –R(1)i;dh¯d¡1:
Thus if two class-P solutions coincide in orders h¯0; h¯¡1; then –Ri;d D 0; and thus the very
solutions coincide.
Proposition 11.6. The class P is invariant with respect to the following operations:
(a) simultaneous multiplication Zi 7! f(q)Zi by a power series of q with f(0) D 1;
(b) changes Zi(q; h¯) 7! e‚if(q)=h¯Zi(qef(q); h¯) with f(0) D 0;
(c) multiplication Zi 7! exp(Cf(q)=h¯)Zi where C is a linear function of (‚; ‚0) and
f(0) D 0.
650 Alexander B. Givental
Proof. The operations (a); (b); and (c) give rise to the operations of type (i)–(iii) for cor-
responding polynomials Ed. Thus; it suffices to show that the operations (a); (b); and (c)
transform a solution fzig of the recursion relations to another solution.
Recall that the recursion relation of Proposition 11.4 (3) expresses zi as a formal
power series inQwith coefficients (atQD) being rational functions of h¯ decomposed into
simple fractions with the poles h¯ D (‚j ¡ ‚i)=d; d • D; plus the polynomial parts Ri;D(h¯)
of degrees • D.
Consider the recursion coefficientQd Coeff ji (d) responsible for the simple fraction
with the denominator (‚i ¡ ‚j C dh¯). Application of the operations (a); (b); and (c) to the
left- and right-hand sides of the recursion relation causes; respectively; the following
modifications in this coefficient:
Qd 7! f(Qh¯)Qd=f(Q(‚j ¡ ‚i)=d);
Qd 7! Qd exp
‰
‚if(Qh¯)
h¯
C df(Qh¯)¡ ‚jf(Q(‚j ¡ ‚i)=d)
(‚j ¡ ‚i)=d
¾
;
Qd 7! Qd exp
‰
C
f(Qh¯)
h¯
¡ Cf(Q(‚j ¡ ‚i)=d
(‚i ¡ ‚j)=d
¾
:
In the case of the change (b); additionally; the argument Q in zj on the right-hand side of
the recursion relation gets an extra factor exp[f(Qh¯)¡ f(Q(‚j ¡ ‚i)=d)].
All the modifying factors written above actually take on 1 at h¯ D (‚j ¡ ‚i)=d. This
means that the recursion coefficient responsible for the simple fraction with the pole at
h¯ D (‚j ¡ ‚i)=d does not change; and that the operations (a); (b); and (c) modify only the
polynomial initial conditions Ri;D(h¯).
Under our assumptions about f (that f(0) D 1 in (a) and f(0) D 0 in (b) and (c)); the
modifying factors depend on h¯ only in the combinationQh¯. This implies that the degrees
of the new initial conditions Ri;D(h¯) still do not exceed D.
Let us consider now the hypergeometric series
Z⁄i D
1X
dD0
qd
Qr
aD1
Qlad
mD1(la‚i ¡ ‚0a Cmh¯)Qn
fiD0
Qd
mD1(‚i ¡ ‚fi Cmh¯)
where l1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C lr D nC 1.
It is straightforward to see that fZ⁄i g satisfy the recursion relations of Proposi-
tion 11.4 (3) (see the proof of Proposition 9.10); and that the formulas of Proposition 11.4
(2) generate corresponding
'⁄ D 1
2…i
I
ep(t¡¿)=h¯
1X
dD0
ed¿
Qr
aD1
Qlad
mD0(lap¡ ‚0a ¡mh¯)Qn
iD0
Qd
mD0(p¡ ‚i ¡mh¯)
dp
with polynomial numerators. Thus fZ⁄i g is a solution from the class P.
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 651
Computation of the first two terms in the initial condition gives
Z⁄i
(0) D f(q) D
1X
dD0
(l1d)! ¢ ¢ ¢ (lrd)!
(d!)nC1
qd;
Z⁄i
(1) D ‚i
X
a
la[gla (q)¡ g1(q)]C
ˆX
fi
‚fi
!
g1(q)¡
X
a
‚0agla (q)
where
gl D
1X
dD1
qd
Q
a(lad)!
(d!)nC1
ˆ
ldX
mD1
1
m
!
:
Let us compare these initial conditions with those for fZig.
Proposition 11.7. Z(0)i D 1; Z(1)i D 0.
Proof. The first statement follows from the definition of Zi;while the second means thatR
Y2;d
E0de
⁄
0(`i) D 0 for all d > 0. It is due to the fact that the class E0de⁄0(`i) is a pull-back
from Y1;d. (In fact;we have just repeated an argument proving (5) from Section 5; and thus
the proposition can be deduced from general properties of quantum cohomology.)
Combining the last three propositions we arrive at the following conclusion.
Theorem 11.8. The hypergeometric solution fZ⁄i (q; h¯)g coincides with the solution
fZi(Q; h¯)g up to transformations (a); (b); and (c). More precisely; perform the following
operations with fZig:
(1) put
Q D q exp
(X
a
la[gla (q)¡ g1(q)]=f(q)
)
;
(2) multiply Zi(Q(q); h¯) by
exp
(
1
f(q)h¯
"X
a
(la‚i ¡ ‚0a)gla (q)¡
ˆX
fi
(‚i ¡ ‚fi)
!
g1(q)
#)
;
(3) multiply all Zi simultaneously by f(q).
Then the resulting functions coincide with hypergeometric series Z⁄i (q; h¯).
Proof. The three steps correspond to consecutive applications of operations of type (b);
(c); and (a) to fZig; and transform the initial condition of Proposition 11:7 to that for fZ⁄i g.
According to Propositions 11.5 and 11.6 this transforms the whole solution fZig to fZ⁄i g.
Consider the solutions
si D e‚iT=h¯ Zi(eT ; h¯)
to the equivariant quantum cohomology differential equations.
652 Alexander B. Givental
Corollary 11.9. The operations
(1) change T D tCPfi la[gla (et)¡ g1(et)]=f(et);
(2) multiplication by
f(et) exp
("
g1(e
t)
ˆX
fi
‚fi
!
¡
X
a
‚0agla (e
t)
#
=(h¯f(et))
)
transform fsig to the hypergeometric solutions
s⁄i D ept=h¯
X
d
edt
Q
a
Qlad
mD1(lap¡ ‚0a Cmh¯)Q
fi
Qd
mD1(p¡ ‚fi Cmh¯)
jpD‚i
of the differential equation
Y
fi
µ
h¯
d
dt
¡ ‚fi
¶
s⁄ D et
Y
a
laY
mD1
µ
h¯la
d
dt
¡ ‚0a Cmh¯
¶
s⁄:
For ‚0 D 0; ‚0 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C ‚n D 0; the solutions s⁄i have the following integral representation:Z
¡n‰fF0(u)Detg
u
‚0=h¯
0 ¢ ¢ ¢u‚n=h¯n du0 ^ ¢ ¢ ¢ ^ dun
F1(u) ¢ ¢ ¢ Fr(u) dF0
where
F1 D (1¡ u1 ¡ ¢ ¢ ¢ ¡ ul1 );
F2 D (1¡ ul1C1 ¡ ¢ ¢ ¢ ¡ ul1Cl2 );
¢ ¢ ¢
Fr D (1¡ ul1C¢¢¢Clr¡1C1 ¡ ¢ ¢ ¢ ¡ ul1C¢¢¢Clr )
and F0 D u0 ¢ ¢ ¢un.
Corollary 11.10. The hypergeometric class S⁄(t; h¯) 2 H⁄(CPn) D C[P]=(PnC1);
S⁄ D ePt=h¯
X
d
edt
Q
a
Qlad
mD0(laP Cmh¯)Qd
mD1(P Cmh¯)nC1
;
whose nC 1¡ r nonzero components are solutions to the Picard-Fuchs equationµ
d
dt
¶nC1¡r
s⁄ D l1 ¢ ¢ ¢ lret
Y
a
la¡1Y
mD1
µ
la
d
dt
Cm
¶
s⁄
for the integralsZ
°n¡r‰X0
t
du0 ^ ¢ ¢ ¢ ^ dun
dF0 ^ dF1 ^ ¢ ¢ ¢ ^ dFr
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 653
(here X0t D f(u0; : : : ; un)jF0(u) D et; F1(u) D 0; : : : ; Fr(u) D 0g); are obtained from the class S
(describing the quantum cohomology D-module for the Calabi-Yau complete intersection
Xn¡r ‰ CPn);
S D ePT=h¯
X
d
edT (e0)⁄
ˆ
Ed
h¯C c(0)1
!
;
by the change
T D tC
X
a
la[gla (e
t)¡ g1(et)]=f(et)
followed by the multiplication by f(et).
Proof. Corollary 11.9 shows that for ‚0 D 0;P ‚fi D 0; the change and multiplication
transform the corresponding equivariant classes S0 and S0 ⁄ to one another. The class ¡p
in the formula for s⁄i in Corollary 11:9 is the equivariant Chern class of the Hopf line
bundle over CPn. In the limit ‚ D 0; it becomes ¡P while S0 and S0 ⁄ transform to their
nonequivariant counterparts S and S⁄.
Remarks. (1) Notice that the components S⁄0 and S
⁄
1 in
S⁄ D l1 ¢ ¢ ¢ lr[PrS⁄0(t)C PrC1S⁄1(t)C ¢ ¢ ¢ C PnS⁄n(t)]
are exactly f(et) and tf(et)CPa la[gla (et)¡ g1(et)]; respectively. Thus the inverse transfor-
mation from S⁄ to S consists in division by S⁄0 followed by the change T D S⁄1(t)=S⁄0(t) in
complete accordance with the recipe [8]; [5]; [13] based on the mirror conjecture.
(2) According to [4]; the (n¡r)-dimensional manifolds X0t admit a Calabi-Yau com-
pactification to the family NX0t of mirror manifolds of the Calabi-Yau complete intersection
Xn¡r ‰ CPn. The Picard-Fuchs differential equation from Corollary 11:10 describes varia-
tions of complex structures for NX0. This proves the mirror conjecture (described in detail
in [5]) for projective Calabi-Yau complete intersections; and confirms the enumerative
predictions about rational curves and quantum cohomology algebras made there (and in
some other papers) on the basis of the mirror conjecture.
(3) The description [1] of the quantum cohomology algebra of a Calabi-Yau 3-fold
in terms of the numbersnd of rational curves of all degrees d (see; for instance; [13] for the
description of the corresponding class S in these terms) has been rigorously justified in
[24]. Combining these results with Corollary 11.10; we arrive at the theorem formulated
in the introduction.
Proof of the Main Lemma. In our construction of the map „: Ld ! L0d; we will denote
by Ld the moduli space of stable maps C! CPn £ CP1 of bidegree (d; 1) with no marked
points (it also has dimension d(nC 1)Cn). The construction works for any given number
654 Alexander B. Givental
of marked points; but produces a map which is the composition of „ with the forgetful
map. In this form it applies to the submanifold of stable maps with two marked points
confined over 0 and1 inCP1. (This submanifold is what we denoted Ld in the formulation
of the Main Lemma.)
Let ˆ: C ! CPn £ CP1 be a stable genus-0 map of bidegree (d; 1). Then C D
C0 [ C1 ¢ ¢ ¢ [ Cr where C0 is isomorphic to CP1 and ˆjC0 maps C0 onto the graph of a
degree-(d0 • d) map CP1 ! CPn; and for i D 1; : : : ; r the bidegree-(di; 0) map ˆjCi sends
Ci into the slice CPn £ fpig where pi 6D pj and d1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C dr D d¡ d0.
The map „: Ld ! L0d assigns to [ˆ] the (n C 1)-tuple (f0g : f1g : ¢ ¢ ¢ : fng) of
polynomials (D binary forms) onCP1 where g is the polynomial of degree d¡d0 with roots
(p1; : : : ; pr) of multiplicities (d1; : : : ; dr); and the tuple (f0 : ¢ ¢ ¢ : fn) of degree-d0 polynomials
(with no common roots; including1) is the one that describes the map ˆjC0.
In order to prove that the map „ is regular5 let us give it a more invariant de-
scription. The construction below can be generalized to any positive line bundle instead
of OCPn (1).
Denote by OLd the moduli space of bidegree-(d; 1) stable maps with an extra marked
point; and pull back to OLd the line bundle
H :D Hom(…⁄1OCPn (1); …⁄2OCP1 (d))
by the evaluation map e: OLd! CPn£CP1 (where…i are projections to the factors). Consider
the push-forward sheaf H0 :D R0…⁄e⁄(H) of the locally free sheaf e⁄H along the forgetful
map …: OLd! Ld. To a small neighborhoodU ‰ Ld; it assigns the OU-moduleH0(…¡1(U); e⁄H)
of sections of e⁄H.
Claim. (1) H0 is a rank-1 locally free sheaf on Ld.
(2) The fiber at [ˆ] of the corresponding line bundle can be identified with
H0(C0; (ˆjC0)⁄(H)› O(¡[p1])›d1 ¢ ¢ ¢ › O(¡[pr])›dr ):
(3) The kernel of the natural map
h: H0(C;ˆ⁄…⁄1(OCPn (1)))! H0(C;ˆ⁄…⁄2(OCP1 (d))) D H0(CP1;O(d))
defined by a nonzero vector in this fiber consists of the sections vanishing identically
on C0.
Proof. Using this; we pick nC 1 independent sections of OCPn (1) (that is; homogeneous
coordinates on CPn); define corresponding sections of e⁄…⁄1OCPn (1); and apply the map h.
5I am thankful to M. Kontsevich; who communicated to me another; more elementary proof of this statement.
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 655
By this we obtain a degree-1 map from the total space of the line bundle H0 to the linear
space CnC1 › H0(CP1;O(d)). Since the homogeneous coordinates on CPn nowhere vanish
simultaneously; we obtain a natural map
Ld! L0d D Proj(CnC1 ›H0(CP1;O(d)))
which sends [ˆ] to (f0g : ¢ ¢ ¢ : fng); and we conclude that „ is regular.
The remaining statements of the Main Lemma are proved by looking at localiza-
tions of the equivariant class p at the S1£TnC1 fixed points in L0d and Ld. (In this paragraph;
we use the notation Ld for the same space as in the formulation of the Main Lemma.) The
fixed points in L0d are represented by the vector-monomials (0 : ¢ ¢ ¢ : 0 : xd
0
: 0 : ¢ ¢ ¢ : 0)
where p localizes to ‚i C d0h¯. A fixed point in Ld is represented by ˆ with ˆ(C0) D (0 :
¢ ¢ ¢ : 0 : 1 : 0 : ¢ ¢ ¢ : 0); r D 2; p0 D 0; p1 D 1 and the maps ˆjCk: Ck ! CPn; k D 1; 2;
representing TnC1 fixed points; respectively; in Y2;d0 and Y2;d¡d0 such that their (say) second
marked points are mapped to the point ˆ(C0). This implies that the class „⁄(p) localizes
to ‚i C d0h¯ at such a fixed point; and thus the pull-back of p to the fixed-point set
f[ˆ] 2 Y2;d0 £ Y2;d¡d0 j(e2 £ e2)([ˆ]) 2 ¢ ‰ Y £ Yg
of the S1-action on Ld coincides with the pull-back through the common marked point
of the TnC1-equivariant class p C d0h¯ on the diagonal ¢ D CPn. Now localizations ofR
Ld
ep(t¡¿)Ed to the fixed points of S1-action identify the form of the correlator ' given in
the Main Lemma with the definition of ' as the convolution of S0(t; h¯) and S0(¿;¡h¯).
In order to justify the claim we need to compute the space of global sections of
the sheaf e⁄(H) over the formal neighborhood of the fiber …¡1([ˆ]) of the forgetful map
…: OLd ! Ld. The fiber itself is isomorphic to the treelike genus-0 curve C. Let (xj; yj); j D
1; : : : ; N ‚ r be some local parameters on irreducible components of C near the singular
points such that "j D xjyj are local coordinates on the orbifold Ld near [ˆ]. (One should
add some local coordinates "0 on the stratum "1 D ¢ ¢ ¢ D "N D 0 of stable maps C! CPn
in order to construct a complete local coordinate system on Ld.) Such a description of
local coordinates on Ld follows from the very construction of the moduli spaces of stable
maps to convex manifolds; we refer the reader to [21]; [7] for details.
A line bundle over the neighborhood of C ‰ OLd can be specified by the set
uj(x
§1
j ; "); vj(y
§1
j ; "); j D 1; : : : ; N;
of nonvanishing functions describing transition maps between trivializations of the bun-
dle inside and outside the neighborhoods (with local coordinates (xj;yj;"1; : : : ; O"j; : : : ;"N;"0))
of the double points.
Let us consider first the following model case. Suppose that C consists of r C 1
irreducible components (C0; C1; : : : ; Cr) such that each Cj with j > 0 intersects C0 at some
656 Alexander B. Givental
point pj. Let xj be the local parameter on C0 near pj; and let the line bundle (of the degree
¡dj • 0 on Cj) be specified by vj D y¡djj .
In the neighborhood of pj; a section of such a bundle is given by a function
s(xj; yj; O"j) satisfying
s D y¡djj sj(y¡1j ; ")
where the function sj represents the section in the trivialization over the neighborhood
of Cj ¡ pj. Here O"j means that "j is excluded from the set of coordinates " (remember that
"j D xjyj). This implies that sj D "djj fj(y¡1j "j; ") where fj is some regular function. Thus
this section in the neighborhood of p 2 C0 is given by a function s(xj; ") D xdjj fj(xj; ") with
zero of order dj at xj D 0; and the restriction of this section to the neighborhood of Cj is
determined by s.
In other words; the C[["]]-module of global sections in the formal neighborhood
of C identifies with the module of global sections on C0 for the line bundle given by the
loops x
¡dj
j uj instead of uj. (This corresponds to the subtraction of the divisor
P
dj[pj].)
The more general situation; where vj is the product of y
¡dj
j with an invertible
function wj(yj; xj; O"j); preserves the above conclusion with w¡1s D xdjj fj(xj; ") instead of s.
Obviously; the above computation bears dependence on additional parameters.
Now we apply our model computation to the neighborhood of a general treelike
curve C inductively by decomposing the tree into simpler ones; starting from the root
component C0. We conclude that the C[["]]-module of sections of the bundle e⁄(H) is iden-
tified with the module of sections of some line bundle over the product of C0 with the
polydisk with coordinates ("1; : : : ; "r; : : : ; "N; "0); and that this line bundle is e⁄(H) for C0
(given by the loops uj in our current notations) twisted by the loops x
¡dj
j in the punctured
neighborhoods of the points (p1; : : : ; pr); where (d1; : : : ; dr) are the degrees of the maps
ˆjCj: Cj! CPn (in the notation of the claim so that d1 C ¢ ¢ ¢ C dr D d¡ d0).
This implies that theC[["]]-module H0 of global sections can be identified with the
module of those global sections of the degree-(d¡ d0) locally free sheaf (ˆjC0)⁄(H)›C[["]]
which have zeroes of order dj at pj for j D 1; : : : ; r. In particular;
(1) H0 is a free C[["]]-module of rank 1;
(2) H0›C[["]] (C[["]]=(")) is the 1-dimensional spaceH0j[ˆ] described in the claim; and
(3) nonzero vectors inH0j[ˆ] represent sections of ˆ⁄(H) over C nonzero on C0 (and
thus their product with a nonzero-on-C0 section of ˆ⁄…⁄1(OCPn (1)) cannot
vanish identically on C0).
Factorization by the discrete group Aut(ˆ) preserves (1)–(3) with C[["]] replaced by
C[["]]Aut(ˆ).
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 657
12 Quantum Serre duality
Results of Sections 9–11 on quantum cohomology algebras of projective complete inter-
sections can be understood as a study of the recursion relations which arise from local-
ization to fixed points of tori actions. In this section we apply the same technique to the
more general quantum cup-product structures defined by solutions of WDVV-equations.
Comparing the solutions which correspond (see Section 4) to a convex vector bundle over
CPn and its dual;we will arrive at a quantum analogue of the Serre duality theorem. The
canonical coordinates of semisimple Frobenius manifolds that we discussed in Section
8 will play here a key role.
We begin with a known property of quantum correlators for X D pt. Consider the
series
W(x; y) D 1
xC y C
1X
kD1
1
k!
¿
1
xC c ; f(c); : : : ; f(c);
1
yC c
À
kC2
where f(c) D f0C f1cC f2c2C¢ ¢ ¢ is a given function of the first Chern class of the universal
tangent line on the Deligne-Mumford spaces XkC2 :D NM0;kC2; and h ¢ ¢ ¢ ikC2 are defined by
integration over these spaces.
Lemma 12.1. We have
W(x; y) D e
U=xCU=y
xC y ;
where U depends on f and does not depend on x and y.
Proof. This fact is well known in the axiomatic theory [11] of Frobenius structures and
their ¿-functions. Consider the correlators
V(x) :D lim
y!1yW(x; y); U :D limx!1 x(V(x)¡ 1):
(They correspond to replacing 1=(y C c) and/or 1=(xC c) by 1 in the definition of W.) The
symmetries from the proof of Corollary 6.3 show that for the vector field F D @=@f0 ¡P
fkC1@=@fk;
LFU D 1; LFV D V=x; LFW D
µ
1
x
C 1
y
¶
W
(the so-called string equations). The degree argument shows that for f0 D 0 we have
U D 0; V D 1;W D 1=(x C y). Thus V(x) D exp(U=x); W(x; y) D (exp(U=x C U=y))=(x C y).
Notice that these identities are compatible with the WDVV-type equation LFW(x; y)LFU D
LFV(x)LFV(y).
This lemma can be deduced also from the explicit formula for correlators be-
tween universal tangent lines over Deligne-Mumford spaces; which we exploited in the
658 Alexander B. Givental
proof of Proposition 10:5. As we see from the above proof; some convergence-providing
assumptions about f are necessary in this lemma.
Consider now the following modification of the recursion relations of Sections 9–
11:
W
j
i (x; y) D
–i j
xC y C
X
k 6Di
X
d>0
qded(Ui¡Uk)=(‚i¡‚k)
Cki (d)
(xdC ‚i ¡ ‚k) W
j
k((‚k ¡ ‚i)=d; y):
Given U0; : : : ; Un and the coefficients C
j
i (d); the recursion relation has a unique matrix
solution (Wji ) in formal power series of q.
Consider the torus-equivariant GW-theory on Y D CPn provided with the r-
dimensional convex vector bundle V D 'Hlj . Introduce the correlator
Zij :D
1X
dD0
qd
1X
kD0
1
k!
Z
YkC2;d
`i
xC c(0) e
⁄
1(t) ¢ ¢ ¢ e⁄k(t)
`j
yC c(kC1) EulerkC2;d
where EulerkC2;d is the equivariant Euler class of the vector bundleH0(C; e⁄kC2V ) over YkC2;d;
and
R
Y
`i Euler(V)`j=(xCy) takes on the role of the ill-defined summand with d D 0; n D 2.
We introduce another correlator; Z⁄i j; replacing EkC2;d by the equivariant Euler
class E⁄kC2;d of the vector bundle H
1(C; e⁄kC2V
⁄) for d > 0 and by Euler¡1(V⁄) for d D 0. In
both versions t DPnfiD0 tfi`fi=Qfl 6Dfi(‚fi ¡ ‚fl) denotes the general equivariant cohomology
class of Y.
Proposition 12.2. (1) We have
Zij D
rY
aD1
(la‚i ¡ ‚0a) eui=xW ji euj=y
Y
fi6D j
(‚j ¡ ‚fi)
where u0; : : : ; un are the homogeneous canonical coordinates at t (ufi D ufi(t; q; ‚; ‚0)) of
the Frobenius structure; and (Wji ) is the solution to the recursion relation with Ufi D ufi
and
C
j
i (d) D
Qr
aD1
Qlad
mD1(la‚i ¡ ‚0a Cm(‚j ¡ ‚i)=d)Qn
fiD0
Qd
mD1 (fi;m)6D( j;d)(‚i ¡ ‚fi Cm(‚j ¡ ‚i)=d)
:
(2) We have
Z⁄i j D eu
⁄
i
=xW
j
i e
u⁄
j
=y
Y
fi6D j
(‚j ¡ ‚fi) =
rY
aD1
(‚0a ¡ la‚j)
where u⁄0; : : : ; u
⁄
n are the homogeneous canonical coordinates at t
⁄ of the Frobenius struc-
ture; and (Wji ) is the solution to the recursion relation with Ufi D u⁄fi and
C
j
i (d) D
Qr
aD1
Qlad
mD1(¡la‚i C ‚0a ¡m(‚j ¡ ‚i)=d)Qn
fiD0
Qd
mD1 (fi;m)6D( j;d)(‚i ¡ ‚fi Cm(‚j ¡ ‚i)=d)
:
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 659
(3) In each case put
V
j
i (x;U) D limy!1yW
j
i D –i j C OV ji (U)=xC o(1=x):
Then
tfi D ufi C
nX
jD0
OV jfi(u); t⁄fi D u⁄fi C
nX
iD0
OVfii (u⁄):
Proof. The recursion for Zij and Z⁄i j is based on the same idea as in Sections 9–11.
We use Borel’s localization formula in order to reduce computation of the correlators
to summation over all fixed-point components in YkC2;d. The components are labeled by
trees “walking” in the 1-skeleton of the n-simplex (the momentum polyhedron of the
torus action on CPn). Each tree contains the chain of edges connecting the vertices i and
j where the first and the last marked points are mapped to. We cut off the first edge
(connecting the vertex i with; say; the vertex fi). The rest of the chain contributes to
the Borel localization formula by Zfij((‚fi ¡ ‚i)=d; y); while the coefficient Cji (d) takes into
account the contribution of the edge [i; fi] of degree d.
The subtlety hidden in this argument is due to the possibility that the first marked
point can belong to a component of the curve which is mapped to the vertex i and carries k
more special points giving birth to k branches of the tree (not containing the last marked
point) and/or l extra marked points (carrying the cohomology class t). Cutting off the first
edge; we should take care of the weight obtained by integration over the factor NMkClC2 of
the fixed-point set and by summation over all possibilities for the k branches.
However; it is easy to see that this sum effectively reduces to the exponential se-
ries of Lemma 12:1 (with f(c) unknown so far) and thus is equal to exp(Ui=xCUid=(‚i¡‚fi)).
Moreover; comparing the description of the correlator Ui from the proof of Lemma 12:1
with the definition of “local” equivariant correlators ui given in Section 8 and applying
Theorem 8.1 (a); we conclude that Ui D ui is the canonical coordinate of the Frobenius
structure. In particular; correlators Ui are well defined as formal q-series.
In order to prove the relation between flat and canonical coordinates described
in the part (3) of the proposition; consider the correlators
Z(1)i D
d
d(1=x)
flflflfl
1=xD0
X
j
lim
y!1
yZijQ
fi6D j(‚j ¡ ‚fi)
D
X
k;d
qdh`i; t; : : : ; t; 1ikC2;d=k! D tih`i; 1i:
The recursion relation for Zij shows that Z
(1)
i D (Ui C
P
j
OV ji )h`i; 1i.
660 Alexander B. Givental
Similarly;
d
d(1=y)
flflflfl
1=yD0
X
i
lim
x!1
xZ⁄i jQ
fi6Di(‚i ¡ ‚fi)
D t⁄j h1; `ji D (Uj C
X
i
OV ji )h1; `ji:
Remark. According to Section 6; the matrix limy!1 yZij(h¯; y) and its counterpart “with
⁄” are essentially the fundamental solutions of the linear differential systems defined
by the corresponding Frobenius structures on the equivariant cohomology space of CPn
provided with the convex vector bundle V (see Section 4). Proposition 12:2 identifies
the fundamental solution expressed in terms of canonical coordinates with the solu-
tion of a linear recursion relation; and additionally describes the nonlinear transfor-
mation from canonical to flat coordinates. These equations are exactly identical to the
critical-point equations obtained by M. Kontsevich [21]. In particular; the linear recur-
sion relations can be also interpreted as critical-point equations for a quadratic com-
binatorial “Lagrangian” with the “kinetic energy” (its terms should correspond to the
edges of the momentum simplex) determined by the coefficients (Cji (d))
¡1 and the “poten-
tial energy” (whose terms should correspond to the vertices) determined by the factors
exp(Uidfi=(‚i¡‚fi)CUidfl=(‚i¡‚fl)). The important problem of finding the general solution
to the linear recursion relation remains open; as well as the role of these relations and
of the quadratic combinatorial Lagrangian in the theory of isomonodromy deformations
[11] accompanying the concept of canonical coordinates—unclear.
Corollary 12.3 (Quantum Serre duality). At the points t and t⁄ with the same canon-
ical coordinates U D (u0; : : : ; un) D (u⁄0; : : : ; u⁄n); the correlators (Zij) and (Z⁄i j) satisfy the
following relation:
Z⁄i j(U; x; y; q) D
(¡1)rZi j(U; x; y; (¡1)
P
laq)Qr
aD1(la‚i ¡ ‚0a)
Qr
aD1(la‚j ¡ ‚0a)
:
Remarks. This fact (which is proved by comparison of the coefficients Cji (d) of the two
recursion relations) can be explained in the following way: for the curve C which is a
chain of CP1’s with two marked points p0 and p1 on the first and the last component; the
Serre duality theorem provides a nondegenerate duality between H0(C;V › O[¡p0]) and
H1(C;V⁄ › O[p1]); since the canonical class KC [p0]C [p1] on such a curve C is trivial.
The quantum Serre duality theorem shows that the Frobenius structures on
H⁄T (CPn) corresponding to V and V⁄ are equivalent; but the equivalence involves some
transformation of the flat coordinates. The same equivalence statement holds in the
limit ‚ D 0; ‚0 6D 0. It is natural to conjecture that such an equivalence of two Frobenius
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 661
structures corresponding to V and V⁄ should be true for vector bundles over arbitrary Y.
One of the two equivalent Frobenius structures coincides with the Frobenius structure
of the supermanifold (in the terminology of [30]) of dimension (njr) (here the fiber of the
convex bundle V over CPn is considered odd); and in the limit ‚0 D 0 degenerates to the
GW-theory on the codimension-r complete intersections X defined by sections of V. The
second one corresponds to an (nC r)-dimensional noncompact manifold—the total space
of the bundle V⁄. It would be interesting to study the relation between the two structures
in greater detail.
Corollary 12.4. The translations
(a): tfi 7! tfi C ¿;
(b): tfi 7! tfi C ‚fi¿
on the Frobenius manifolds cause; respectively; the translations QUfi D Ufi C ¿ and QUfi D
Ufi C ‚fi¿ of the canonical coordinates and the following transformations of the matrix
(Zij):
(a) Zij( QU; x; y; q) D e¿=xC¿=yZi j(U; x; y; q);
(b) Zij( QU; x; y; q) D e‚i¿=xC‚j¿=yZi j(U; x; y; qe¿).
The same transformation formulas hold for the matrix (Z⁄i j).
Proof. The translation (a) corresponds to the vector field
P
@=@tfi D
P
@=@ufi repre-
senting the unity of the quantum cup-product. The translation (b) corresponds to the
symmetry generated by the vector field q@=@q¡P ‚fi@=@tfi. This justifies the effect of the
translations on the canonical coordinates. The rest follows now directly from the form
of the recursion relation.
Remarks. This corollary explains the origin of the invariance property with respect to
the change of coordinates stated in Propositions 11.3 and 11.6: it is a consequence of the
symmetries (5) and (6) from Section 5.
The proof of the mirror conjecture given in Sections 9–11 could be more straight-
forward and conceptual if we had at our disposal a well-developed theory of Frobenius
structures; their flat and canonical coordinates; for the models of Landau-Ginzburg type
(see [14]);more general than K. Saito’s theory [29] of isolated critical points of holomorphic
functions.
Acknowledgments
The present research was partially supported by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and by National
Science Foundation grant DMS-9321915.
662 Alexander B. Givental
References
[1] P. Aspinwal and D. Morrison; Topological field theory and rational curves; Comm. Math. Phys.
151 (1993); 245–262.
[2] A. Astashkevich and V. Sadov; Quantum cohomology of partial flag manifolds Fn1 ;:::;nk ; Comm.
Math. Phys. 170 (1995); 503–528.
[3] M. Atiyah and R. Bott; The moment map and equivariant cohomology; Topology 23 (1984);
1–28.
[4] V. V. Batyrev; Dual polyhedra and mirror symmetry for Calabi-Yau hypersurfaces in toric
varieties; J. Alg. Geom. 3 (1994); 493–535.
[5] V. V. Batyrev and D. van Straten;Generalized hypergeometric functions and rational curves on
Calabi-Yau complete intersections in toric varieties; Comm. Math. Phys. 168 (1995); 493–533.
[6] A. Beauville;Quantum cohomology of complete intersections;Mathematical Physics;Analysis;
Geometry 2 (1995); 384–398.
[7] K. Behrend and Yu. Manin; Stacks of stable maps and Gromov-Witten invariants; Duke Math.
J. 85 (1996); 1–60.
[8] P. Candelas; X. C. de la Ossa; P. S. Green; and L. Parkes; A pair of Calabi-Yau manifolds as an
exactly soluble superconformal theory; Nucl. Phys. B 359 (1991); 21–74.
[9] A. Collino; Some computations on the quantum cohomology product of a Fano hypersurface;
informal draft.
[10] R. Dijkgraaf; E. Verlinde; and H. Verlinde; “Notes on topological string theory and 2D quan-
tum gravity” in String Theory and Quantum Gravity; ed. by M. Green et al.; World-Scientific;
Singapore; 1991; 91–156.
[11] B. Dubrovin; “The geometry of 2D topological field theories” in Integrable Systems and Quan-
tum Groups; Lecture Notes in Math. 1620; Springer-Verlag; Berlin; 1996; 120–348.
[12] S. Fomin; S. Gelfand; and A. Postnikov; Quantum Schubert polynomials; preprint; 1996.
[13] A. Givental; Homological geometry I: Projective hypersurfaces. Selecta Math. (N.S.) 1 (1995);
325–345.
[14] ; “Homological geometry and mirror symmetry” in Proceedings of the International
Congress of Mathematicians; 1994; Zu¨rich; Birkha¨user; Basel; 1995; 472–480.
[15] A. Givental and B. Kim; Quantum cohomology of flag manifolds and Toda lattices; Comm.
Math. Phys. 168 (1994); 609–641.
[16] M. Gromov; Pseudo-holomorphic curves in symplectic manifolds; Invent. Math. 82 (1985); 307–
347.
[17] M. Jinzenji; On quantum cohomology rings for hypersurfaces in CPN¡1; preprint; hep-
th/9511206.
[18] B. Kim; Quantum cohomology of partial flag manifolds and a residue formula for their in-
tersection pairings; IMRN (Internat. Math. Res. Notices) 1995; 1–16.
[19] ; Equivariant quantum cohomology; to appear in IMRN (Internat. Math. Res. Notices).
[20] ; Quantum cohomology of flag manifolds G=B and quantum Toda lattices; preprint;
alg-geom/9607001; 1996.
[21] M. Kontsevich; “Enumeration of rational curves via toric actions” in The Moduli Space of
Equivariant Gromov-Witten Invariants 663
Curves; ed. by R. Dijkgraaf; C. Faber; and G. van der Geer; Progr. Math. 129; Birkha¨user; Boston;
1995; 335–368.
[22] M. Kontsevich and Yu. Manin;Gromov-Witten classes; quantum cohomology and enumerative
geometry; Comm. Math. Phys. 164 (1994); 525–562.
[23] B. Kostant; Flag manifold quantum cohomology; the Toda lattice; and the representation with
highest weight ‰; Selecta Math. (N.S.) 2 (1996); 43–91.
[24] Yu. Manin; “Generating functions in algebraic geometry and summation over trees” in The
Moduli Space of curves; ed. by R. Dijkgraaf; C. Faber; and G. van der Geer; Progr. Math. 129;
Birkha¨user; Boston; 1995; 401–417.
[25] D. McDuff and D. Salamon; J-Holomorphic Curves and Quantum Cohomology; Univ. Lecture
Ser. 6; Amer. Math. Soc.; Providence; 1994.
[26] Ju. Moser; “Finitely many mass points on the line under the influence of an exponential
potential—an integrable system” in Dynamical Systems; Theory and Applications; Lecture
Notes in Phys. 38; Springer-Verlag; Berlin; 1975; 97–101.
[27] A. M. Perelomov; Integrable Systems of Classical Mechanics and Lie Algebras;Vol. I;Birkha¨user;
Basel; 1990.
[28] Y. Ruan and G. Tian;A mathematical theory of quantum cohomology;Math. Res. Lett. 1 (1994);
269–278.
[29] K. Saito; On periods of primitive integrals; I; preprint 412; Res. Inst. Math. Sci.; 1982.
[30] A. Schwarz; Sigma-models having supermanifolds as target spaces; preprint; Inst. Hautes
E´tudes Sci.; 1995.
Department of Mathematics; University of California; Berkeley; California 94720-3840; USA
